DAVID AND SYLVIA STEINERYIZKOR BOOK COLLECTIONSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARYNO. 18603Skala-Podil's'ka Memorial BookSKALA ONTHE RIVER ZBRUCZIsTHE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY-NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSc ^ /ON THE RIVERZBPJUCZA HISTORY OF THE FORMERSKALA JEWISH COMMUNITYCopyright © 2009 by Skala Research Group and Skala Benevolent Society. Original Copyright ©1978 by the Skala Benevolent Society.All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any formor by any means without written permission of the authorSKALA BENEVOLENT SOCIETYMEMORIAL BOOK COMMITTEENEW YORK-TEL AVIV 1978Book Cover & Interior Design by Scribe Freelance | www.scribefreelance.comISBN: 978-1-61658-557-0Printed in the United States of AmericaEDITORIAL BOARD FOR FIRST EDITION:MAX MERMELSTEIN (WEIDENFELD) ChairmanCHAIM BRETTLERGEDALIA LACHMANMUNIO FIDERERMAX PLITTBENJAMIN RESSLERARYE SCHWARTZBACH1v JV-j ^$Mnn*iu'#"• yrr“* &g»s? • - y<$r ,—■>- ^ Jamfdtt* ^ ' . o S0rHj*^"U.. /r^r* a» C** rvlaJfon*** „>‘*, frito’i'ri'A • * .. N^-"^x **• - ‘/- ■-. ’•.»,«*• 1 ~ -«X\•y^—-p^>>.~ •■"•JUM-^.'o*^' < V'*""'x —vf>/l.lCI>»•<'*•■-'• ;j. \±. *»&'■* x^ *£\ * . VfftyrtfM'jit/Jlfu'ii \A * °l* -' V o'JffTik.'lufpie4,,triyflltS!it -/V.« (irrn**^.:-V-55/HA* • '//,•/«« gycW' " ] > /* z-ywi" iy^jr 4lJ {» ,%*»»"»«• &r£i*>■ *‘Ofrp*oWftu*'*”f4 ■/$&e*r,‘mt/ • '-jz-tez ■»agg!^af8»ittff <_ -T '"!Uv*^3r yT - .-■ V#- '.*«*««»*?c5\ kc ssJs.~-f?s#Sfirnt7Npp ruav uw tnamo nnn naoMap of the State ofTarnopol in which Skala is locatedFig. 2Foreword to the English EditionThe Skala Yizkor book, Sefer Skala, was published in 1978 byHolocaust survivors from Skala who were living at the time in NewYork and Tel Aviv. They were members of the Skala Benevolent Society(SBS). The Skala Benevolent Society (SBS), the landsmanscbafin wasfounded by American immigrants from Skala. It originally was designedto address the needs of American immigrants from Skala, later to provideloans to Skala, and then to preserve the bonds of the families whose rootswere from Skala. More details on SBS are contained in the chapter byJacob Herzog in this book.The book’s aim was to perpetuate the memory of the Jewishcommunity of Skala that tragically had been destroyed by the Nazis andtheir collaborators. While a few chapters of the book previously havebeen translated, most of the book’s chapters were only available only intheir original Yiddish or Hebrew. Members of the Skala Research Group(SRG) decided to have the book translated because we felt it wasimperative that we and future generations have access to the book’scontent in a language that we could understand.The Skala Benevolent Society (SBS) has been an inspiration to all ofus in this endeavor. In particular, we have had the pleasure of workingclosely with Max Mermelstein, current President of SBS and editor of theoriginal Yizkor book. He has been a fountain of information andresources and has provided guidance, editorial review, and assistance forthis translation and other SRG projects over the years. We are deeplygrateful for his encouragement and friendship.The Skala Research Group (SRG) was organized in 1999 by DeniseAzbill, whose initial leadership is much appreciated. It is an informalassociation of people who are interested in their families’ history inForeword to the English EditionSkala. SRG is supported by JewishGen, a website that provides resourcesfor Jewish genealogical research. SRG is a member of Gesher Galicia andthe Suchostaw Regional Research Group, which are also supported byJewishGen. At the time of publication of this translation, SRG has 85members, all of whom have relatives who once lived in Skala or nearbyvillages such as Lanovitse and Berezhanka. While our focus is on familyhistory and genealogy, we naturally have great interest in the Jewishhistory of Skala, including the depredations of the Holocaust.Many people contributed to this book. Among the translators fromYiddish and Hebrew were Professor Leonard Wolf, Jerrold Landau,David Farer, Paul Blank, Lancy Spalter, Sheldon Clare, and MaxMermelstein. The use of several translators partly explains the differentspellings for the same person. However, even in the original edition ofthis book, there were spelling differences either in English and/orYiddish. Editors included Max Mermelstein, Beverly Bord, TobaHausner, Diane Tyler, and Tony Hausner. Photo editing was done byEva Zang Tkatch, with contributions from Yoshi Jaeggi and HeleneKenvin. Sharon Theimer and Deanne Giarraputo typed a number ofsections. We are greatly indebted to them all for their wonderful work.We appreciate all the support of Pamela Weisberger, President ofGesher Galicia, the organization that provided a vehicle for handlingdonations to this project. We thank YIVO Institute for Jewish Research,which made available copies of photos previously donated to its archiveby Max Mermelstein. We also are grateful to the many individuals fromSBS and SRG who contributed funds, without which the translation andpublication of this book would not have been possible.This translation of the Yizkor book will provide the reader withvaluable insight into the once vibrant Jewish community of Skala.Another excellent source of information about the town and its history isthe Skala website at www.shtetlinks.jewishgen.org/SkalaPodol. Thearticles on this wonderful website have been researched, written or edited,and designed by our Web Leader Helene Kenvin. The website ismaintained by our Webmaster Max Heffler, who has done a marvelousjob. We are also greatly indebted to Susana Leistner Bloch who did anviiiSkala on the River Zbruczoutstanding job with the original web site for Skala. The Skala websitecontains articles about the town’s Jews: their history, their emigration toAmerica and Israel, and their valiant struggle during the Holocaust.There are photographs of our relatives from Skala, of the town as it lookstoday, and much more.We invite you to come and learn about the vanished Jewishcommunity of Skala. For further information, please contact me atthausner@gmail. com.Tony HausnerShtetl Leader of the Skala Research GroupIXForeword to the First EditionThe idea of perpetuating the memory of Skala’s Jewish community andtelling future generations about its rich past and tragic demise wasdiscussed as far back as the 1950s, when the few dozen survivors of Skalamade it to their next rest stop, whether in Israel or in America. However,it was not until November 19, I960, at the annual Memorial Meeting inNew York for the “Martyrs of Skala,” that a decision was formally takento prepare and publish a Skala Yizkor Book. At about the same time, theIsrael Society of Former Residents of Skala decided to do the same thing.An America-Israel Book Committee was formed and a call went out to allof our home-town survivors to participate in the project by givingtestimony, evidence, memoirs, pictures and documents as well as thenecessary financial means to attain our goal.Long and hard were the birth pains of this book on Skala.To begin with we had thought that the most difficult aspect ofpublishing the Skala book would be financial. Soon, however, we realizedthat the biggest difficulty was the lack of historical materials and otherdocumentary sources. It became clear to us that the most importantsources for the history of Jewish life in Skala lay in our memories, in thememories of the small handful of Skala’s Jewish survivors in America andin Israel.This awareness, that we, the survivors, are the only and the last carriersof the 600-year history of the destroyed Skala Jewish communitystrengthened our resolve that the spiritual inheritance of Jewish Skala, hermores and ways of life, her communal, cultural and charitableinstitutions, her personalities and characters, her folklore and humor andthe awesome pain and sorrow of her destruction, must be noted andperpetuated.Skala on the River ZbruczAfter many years of ceaseless efforts, struggles with apathy, differencesof opinion as well as disappointments, the Skala Book became a reality,thanks to the devotion, persistence and the stubborn resolve of a fewindividuals.The content of the Skala Book is not as rich as we had hoped andwanted it to be; this is so not only because of the already mentioned lackof historical sources, but principally because of the cruel fate of theHolocaust years which tore away from us practically all of Skala’s leadersand public personalities who surely knew more about Skala and wereprobably more gifted writers than we, the survivors.To the credit of those who participated in the Skala Book, we mustnote that not one of us is a professional writer and that each contributionis, to the best of our ability, true and authentic testimony to the lively,creative Jewish Skala of the past as well as to the final pain and suffering.In preparing this Skala Book, we kept in mind that our children aswell as other interested readers do not read Yiddish, our mother tongue,and therefore almost one half of the important historical articles in thebook as well as the picture captions are printed in both English andHebrew. This, we hope, will help our children and grandchildren to drawcloser to the memory of our birthplace, the town of Skala, and to thespiritual inheritance of the Jewish way of life in Eastern Galicia-a way oflife which perished in the flames of the Holocaust.Max Mermelstein (Weidenfeld)Chairman, Editorial CommitteexiTable of ContentsLIST OF FIGURES 4I. CHAPTERS IN HISTORY OF SKALA 9The History of Skala | Gedalia Lachman 11The Town on the River Zbrucz | Benzion Fiderer 36II. THE HOLOCAUST 60The Destruction of the Community | Gedalia Lachman 61Document: Crimes Perpetrated by the German-Facist 90Occupiers and Their CollaboratorsList of Martyrs: Skala Residents Who Perished Duringthe Holocaust Years (1941-1944)“These Martyrs I Remember and My Soul Melts in 148Sorrow” | Chaim BrettlerSurviving in the Forest | Max Mermelstein (Weidenfeld) 172Chapters From a Diary | Sophie Zimmerman 193The Yanovska Death Camp in Lvov | Abraham Brandes-Tracy 207Humor from the Dark Days | Chaim Brettler 214How We Saved the Torah Scrolls | Esther Yagendorf 218List of Survivors 222A Night in a Soviet Jail | Esther Banner-Gelbart 231Our Remnants After Liberation | Chaim Brettler 234The Survivors (A Poem) | Chaim Grade 243Table of ContentsAt the Trials of the Nazi Murderers in 244Germany | Chaim BrettlerIII. MEMOIRS AND LIFE STORIES 253In Memoriam Chaim (Munio) Fiderer | Gedalia Lachman 254Vignettes From a Notebook of 257Memories | Chaim (Munio) FidererIn Memoriam Dora Sandberg | Gedalia Lachman 269Skala-My Shtetl Skala | Dora Sandberg 272My Father Motie Weidberg-the Last 286Leader of the Skala Community | Bruria SchwartzbachReflections on the Personality of Israel-Leib 291Freifelder of Blessed Memory z”l | Jacob HerzogChaim Roiz-Brenman z”l-the Celebrated 293Teacher | Esther Gelbart BannerRabbis and Other Members of the Clergy 297in Skala | Benjamin ResslerThe Verdict of the Rabbi Shlomo of 301Blessed Memory | Yitzhak EvenThe Nucleus of “Hechalutz” in Skala | Moshe Beitan 304Theater in Skala and the Establishment 308of the Jewish Library | Jacob HerzogFolklore and Humor in the Life of 311Skala Youth | Gedalia LachmanThe Rock of Shlomo Lemberg | Esther-Banner Gelbart 3172Skala on the River ZbruczAt the Mill | Fradl Stock 320The Archbishop | Fradl Stock 326At the Post Office in Skala | Chone Gottesfeld 334Skala Characters of Yesteryear | Chaim Brettler 340The Land Owner Itzikl Evankover Becomes 357a Money Minter | Louis MenchelThe Public School and My Fathers’ 359“Shtrymel” | Jacob WiesenthalThree Funny Characters of the Distant Past | Benzion Fiderer 362A Gas Lamp and an Oil Well | Jacob Sofer 365The Great Torah “Oyfruf’ in Skala | Yitzhak AlfasyA Folk Song | Benjamin-Wolf Ehrenkrantz 371The Skala Benevolent Society in New York | Jacob HerzogLight in the Darkness: Righteous GentilesWho Saved Skala Jews | Max Mermelstein (Weidenfeld)Skala TodayPhoto credits3List of Figures1 Skalamap i/4072 Map of the State ofTarnopol vi3 Ruins of Turkish castle (historic landmark). 94 A view from the Turkish fortress across the river Zbrucz 125 Feivish-Lieber Stock, Jewish landowner in Podfilipie 156 The “Nachsteller,” the oldest town porter 17The Drimmer brothers: Captain Shlomo Drimmer, deputy Chief 18Rabbi in the Polish Army during the 1930’s, and Rabbi YehudaDrimmer, the last Rabbi of Skala8 Polish Army Parade in the center of town (1930s) 229A The Beth-Am Jewish community center in Skala. 249B Beth Am - The former Jewish Community Building in the 1990s. 2410 Jewish community leaders, 2611 Zionist Youth Groups in Skala (1931) 27“Hashomer Hatzair” “Gordonia”12 “Hechalutz” “Hanoar Hatzioni” 2813A “Farewell” to Munio Fiderer and his wife as they leave (on aliyah) 29for Palestine (1933)13B Members of "“Braterstwo,” a workers organization founded in 29Skala in 1927-28.14 Graduates of the night-school course in Hebrew, with the teacher 30Shraga Ochsorn (1932)Skala on the River Zbrucz15 Religious section of Book Fair exhibition in Skala Community 32Center (1933)16 Benzion Fiderer 3617 Wolf Itzik Freifelder 4518 Celebrating Balfour Declaration Day, in 1920 5619 Committee for “Free Loan Society” 5820 Memorial tablet to the martyrs of Skala (and environs) dedicated 60in 1976 at the cemetery in Holon, Israel21 Gedalia Lachman 6122 Memorial certificate acknowledging the “adoption” of Skala by the 89Berl Katznelson High School in Kfar Saba, Israel, 196823 Violin 9724 Chaim Brettler 14825 Max Mermelstein (Weidenfeld) 17226 Three who survived the holocaust in the forest near Skala. Seen 184from left to right in this 1946 photo are: the author (MaxMermelstein) and his cousins Malcia and Nechemia Stock27 Sophie Zimmerman 19328 Esther Yagendorf 21829 Former residents of Skala in Israel at the unveiling of the memorial 221tablet for the martyrs of Skala on Mt. Zion, Jerusalem30 Esther Gelbart (nee Banner) 2315List of Figures31 Articles in a Hamburg (West Germany) newspaper on the trial of 251the Nazi murderer Engel (1970)32 Part 2 25233 Motie, the oldest water carrier in Skala with his horse and water 253barrel, (o & c - 1927)34 Chaim (Munio) Fiderer 25435 Four classes of students at the Skala Hebrew, Safa Brura, between 2601920-1930 with teachers Chaim Roiz and Avraham Lederman36 The “Port-Arthur” synagogue in Skala 26237 Dora Sandberg 26938 Two town notables: Herschel Auerbach and Zalman Hausner 27339 Classes at the Tarbuth School in Skala during the 1930’s with 279teachers Ginsberg and Koller, and the principal, Shraga Ochsborn40 Kindergarten of the Tarbuth School in Skala (1936) 28041 A poem in Polish by Dora Zandberg in her original script 28542 Bruria Schwartzbach 28643 Chaim Roiz 29444 Youth of Skala welcomes the noted educator Chaim Roiz during 295his visit to Skala in 1935 on his way from Palestine where heattended a Zionist Congress45 Funeral procession of Rabbi Noote Drimmer, scion of famous 298rabbinic family that served the Community since 1848. He was thefather of Shlomo and Yehuda Drimmer, the last Rabbis of Skala.6Skala on the River Zbrucz46 Moishe Beitan 30447 Training farm (for the future pioneers of Israel) in Iwanie Puste in 3061920. In the group are Skala youth, including the author (MoisheBeitan)48 Members of Hanoar Hatzioni, dancing the Hora at the entrance 307to the Goluchowski gardens49 The Roman Catholic Church - dominant landmark in Skala 31350 On the promenade “Oib’n Toier” by the park of Count 314Goluchowski51 Fradl Stock 32052 Chone Gottesfeld 33453 Three senior citizens waiting for mail at the Skala Post office 338(1930).54 Jacob Wiesenthal 35955 Jacob Herzog 37656 Stetka Atamaniuk, who with her husband Antoshko and son 384Petrus, saved 12 Skajajews.57 Stetka Atamaniuk in front of her Skala home 38558 Paraska and Fedorko Babyichuk. 38859 Ahafia and Petro Martiuk, the saviors of Gedalyahu Lachman 38960 The Skawinski family who saved the Hescheles family 39061 Maria Kapacila, mother4n-law and full partner in the rescue of the 391Hescheles family7List of Figures62 Sidor Sokolowski, the savior of Fanya Gottesfeld-Heller and her family 39363 Muncia Uhrinska, the incredible savior of two Jewish girls 39564 Olena Kovalyshyn (nee martiuk) who helped save Michael Edlestein 39665 Plaque in Ukrainian and English at the entrance to the restored 399Skala Cemetery66 Among the surviving tombstones in the Skala cemetery is that of 400Rabbi Noote Drimmer of blessed memory, who served the JewishCommunity between 1918 and 1930. Lie was the grandson of thelate Rabbi Shlomo Drimmer, world-renowned Talmudic scholarand author, who started the 110 year- old Rabbinic dynasty inSkala in 1832, which came to a tragic end in 1942.67 Some of the surviving tombstones in the restored Skala Cemetery. 40068 Surviving tombstone of the late Aron Meshulam Feuerstein, 401prominent Communal leader and keeper of its civil records, whopassed away in 1932.69 Partial view of Skala cemetery after its restoration and fencing in 1997 40170 River Zbrucz, next to Skala, frequently served as border 402throughout history, such as between Galicia and Russia prior toWorld War I71 Deserted side street in Skala, where Jews once lived 40372 Recently built hotel and spa 40373 Spa formerly a mikveh 40474 Memorial to the Victims of Borschov Ghetto 40575 Memorial to the Victims of Borschov Ghetto 4058I. CHAPTERS IN THE HISTORY OF SKALAFlG. 3: Ruins of the Turkish fortress—historic landmark in SkalaThe History of SkalaGedalia Lachman1. The Jewish Community from ItsInception Until 1914The town of Skala lies in western Podolia on the right (western)bank of the river Zbrucz. This river flows in an almost straightnorth-south line, winding through a picturesque valley, narrowingand widening in turn, and empties into the larger river Dniesterabout 35 kilometers south of Skala. At the mouth of the river liesthe town of Okup, birthplace of the Baal-Shem- Tov.Skala and its environs typify the Podolian (SoutheasternGalician) landscape, known for its beauty, lush colors, and fertilesoil. It is an area of hills and valleys, dense forests and broad fields; aland rich in water, with a temperate climate. Summer iscomparatively hot and rainy, while in the winter heavy snows areoften accompanied by bitter cold. Particularly delightful, however,is the Podolia region in the other two seasons of the year: in thebloom of the warm, fragrant spring, and in the flaming red andgold treetops of the fall.In this beautiful landscape is set Skala, with its characteristicsmall-town center and the rural suburbs that surround it on thenorth, west, and south. The town is built on a high hill whoseslopes descend steeply eastward into the Zbrucz river valley, andwestward into the narrow gulch-almost a canyon-made by anameless stream called simply “Potik.” The southern projection ofthe hill is a protruding, sharp rock, protected by the river valleyand by the depression of the stream. From this rock rise the ruins ofthe ancient fortress, with its past so significant in Polish history.The History of SkalaBeyond the fortress and the stream lies Old Skala (Stara Skala), cutthrough by a dirt road leading north to Husiatyn and northwest toCzortkow, while west of the stream is the rural suburb ofZapotocze. Only from the south and southwest are there nonatural barriers in approaching the town, and in those directionsare roads leading to Borszczow, Mielnica and Zaleszczyki on thebanks of the Dniester.Skala exemplified a “mixed” settlement characteristic of Galicia-a Jewish town surrounded by suburbs, populated mostly byUkrainian peasants with a sprinkling of Polish families amongthem. A border-town, Skala was always vulnerable to attacks byvarious invaders, and was destroyed more than once in their wake,passing from one power to another.The history of Skala begins in the thirteenth century. ARuthenian-Ukrainian duke built the fortress on that side of the hillbest protected by its steep slopes. However, by the end of the samecentury it was destroyed by the Tar-tars. The Polish King Kazimirthe Great conquered Podolia in 1331 and presented Skala to DukeKozibrodski. This duke rebuilt and restored the fortress, and it isthought that even then a small number of Jews had settled in thevicinity of the fortress, supplyingits needs. In 1395, Witold, Grand-duke of Lithuania, led a cam¬paign against the Polish dukeKozibrodski, conquered several for¬tified settlements including Skala,and settled therein some of hisown subjects. Upon Witold’sdeath in 1430, the Poles retrievedthe Skala fortress, and until 1772the entire region was part of thePolish kingdom.Skala was open to endless con¬quest and destruction by Tartars ^IG‘ 4: A view from theand Wallachians (Romanians), as Turkish fortressacross the river Zbrucz12Skala on the River Zbruczwitnessed by various written decrees of privilege addressed fromtime to time by the Polish rulers to the residents of Skala, freeingthem from certain levies of the royal treasury “because this border-region suffers heavily from enemy attacks.” These privilege grantsare preserved in the archives of the Polish kingdom from the years1510, 1518, and 1539.The 1570 census, taken during the reign of King ZygmuntAugust, shows that Skala was a county-town (Starostwo), had 232houses, 10 of them Jewish, for which the Jews paid one zloty (gold-piece) rent, whereas the Christians paid only ten groschen. In 1615the Tartars again devastated Skala, burned it and led itsinhabitants-men, women, and children-captive to the slavemarkets of Crimea. In 1621 Duke Lubomirski established hismilitary camp on the ruins of the fortress, and prepared to attackthe Turks and Wallachians from there. A mission from the enemyarrived in camp, ostensibly to talk peace but actually to spy. Themission was detained until the return of the supreme commander,Hetman Chodkiewicz, who had set out from the Skala fortress,leading his army to victory over the mighty Turkish army nearChocim on the Dniester River, 35 kilometers south of Skala. Thetown was rebuilt and enjoyed relative peace for about twenty years.During the reign of King Jan Casimir, the town was conqueredseveral times by the Tartars, Wallachians, Turks, and the Cossacksof Bohdan Chmielnicki, and was again totally destroyed, itsinhabitants either slaughtered or taken captive. Though the Skalafortress was damaged, it was restored again and again. From thecensus taken in 1665, we can conclude that there were then only 15families living in the town, and, though reinforced by walls andturrets, the fortress stood empty. The last census of the Polish reign,taken in 1765, shows that in the town of Skala dwelled only Jews,employed as innkeepers, tenant-farmers, small traders, and peddlers.The ruined fortress was rebuilt as a palace for the country-squireAdam Tarlo, but burned down when struck by lightning a few yearslater, and was never again restored. Its fortified walls stand on theirfoundation to this day.13The History of SkalaIn 1772, the year of the first partition of Poland, Skala passed,along with the entire region, to Austrian control. In 1809,Napoleon Bonaparte turned over the area of Tarnopol, includingSkala, to Tsar Alexander I of Russia, but after the Congress ofVienna the district reverted to Austria.In the nineteenth century, Skala was the most opulent possessionamong the many estates of the Counts Goluchowski, a family ofPolish nobles (Szlachta) of great influence in Galicia as well as inthe court of the Austrian monarch.Between the two world wars, Skala was a Polish frontier town. InSeptember, 1939, Skala, together with eastern Galicia, was annexedby the Soviet Union to the Ukrainian Soviet Republic. From theend of June 1941 until the end of March 1944, it was occupied byNazi Germany.It is safe to assume that a Jewish settlement existed in Skala asearly as the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, as we have knowledgeof Jews living then in neighboring localities. First mention is madeof Jews in Skala in the 1560 census, according to which ten Jewishfamilies resided in the city. The Jewish settlement grew in theperiod following, and in the census of 1765 they numbered 362souls. This latter source states that in the town lived only Jews,employed as tenants and petty merchants. Despite the twists of fatethat befell the town, and particularly its Jewish community, theJewish settlement developed continuously, both in number and inprosperity, from the eighteenth century until World War I. Severalfactors contributed to this, among them the fact that Skala was afrontier town with both a customs-house and the potential forlarge-scale smuggling which contributed to the development of legalas well as illegal commerce. Moreover, the Jews of Skala benefitedfrom the benevolent attitudes of the Counts Goluchowski,landholders of Skala, among them Agenor Senior (1812-1875),governor-general of Galicia and minister of the interior of Austria.(His brother, the philosopher Joseph Goluchowski, was a closefriend of the great Polish poet, Adam Mickiewicz, and becamefamous for his plan to solve the Jewish problem by establishing a14Skala on the River ZbruczJewish state in the Caucasus.) Agenor Goluchowski, Junior (1849-1921), son of the senior Agenor, was a diplomat-statesman, and forseveral years held the post of foreign minister of Austria-Hungary.His son was the last count who lived in the ancestral palace of Skalaand attended to the affairs of the enormous estate. These Polishnoblemen conducted extensive commercial transactions with theJews of Skala.The economic and professional structure of the Jewish populacewas quite diverse, ranging from porter and peasant to wealthy land-owner, from market-peddler to well-to-do exporter with businessabroad. In the nineteenth century, two wealthy Jews acquiredfarming estates in the vicinity of Skala: Yehoshua Drimmer, in thevillage of Bosyri, and Eliezer Seidman, in Krzywcze. Of importanceto the economy of the Jews of Skala were several oil presses for theproduction of lubricants, which were also exported abroad. Rawmaterials for the manufactureof these products were impor¬ted from Russia. A breweryowned by the Counts Go¬luchowski was leased to twoJews; its product too was soldabroad. Likewise, a large flourmill of the Counts’ was leasedto Jews. Jews also owneddistilleries for whiskey andliqueurs, which were marketedthroughout the region. TwoJews imported coral necklacesfrom Italy, destined finally tobe smuggled into Russia forsale there. The export of eggs to Western Europe was alsocontrolled by Jews, and continued so, in sizable proportions, untilWorld War II. In the beginning of this century, export of beans,peas, chickpeas and flax began to develop in Skala. These productswere bought mostly in Russia and transported to Germany,FlG. 5: Feivish-Lieber Stock, Jewishland owner in Podfilipie15The History of SkalaSwitzerland, Italy, France, England, Spain, and even to the UnitedStates, Cuba, and Puerto Rico.There were, as well, large exporters of wheat, rye, oats, andbarley, providing, of course, steady employment for hundreds offamilies in the community: buyers of grain from peasants, carters,drivers, watchmen, porters, clerks, and ... smugglers. Money¬changers did excellent business with these smugglers. Certainproducts were duty-free, and were thus transported openly over theborder at the Zbrucz River. Great quantities of cattle feed werebought in Russia and sold to farmers and farm tenants in AustrianGalicia. Poultry dealers bought geese in Russia, whose flesh, fat andlivers were much in demand among the population. Various otherproducts were bought and sold, wholesale and retail, by theexperienced merchants of Skala. Large shops for fabrics, woolens,clothing, leather for shoes and boots, notions, groceries, and storesfor hardware, tools, metals, and farm implements simple andsophisticated, displayed their wares to the entire area. One hardwaredealer was the agent of several manufacturing companies in Vienna,Prague, and Brno. Again, much of this merchandise was smuggledinto Russia, where anything that carne from the West would begobbled up. A few well-to-do Jews dealt in building materials andlumber for construction and carpentry. Many of the “Polish roads”and railways were in need of large quantities of stone and gravel, aspaved roads were unknown at the time. This material was takenfrom local stone-quarries, and the merchants of Skala shipped it toTarnopol, Stanislawow, and Zloczow.Most dealers in fabrics, clothes, leather goods, shoes, and bootsdrew the bulk of their income from fairs in the neighboring towns.They would split their week in two, spending three days at the fairs,and two tending their stores at home.Craftsmen held an important place in town: tailors, several ofthem famous throughout the district, shoemakers with finereputations, tinsmiths, glaziers, carpenters, and locksmiths, someexpert and famous bakers, and even blacksmiths, a craft which16Skala on the River Zbruczrequires great physical stamina and was ordinarily the province ofUkrainians alone.A fascinating chapter in the history of economic activities ofJewish Skala was written by the smugglers, whom the Jews called“peckel-machers.” This dangerous but profitable operation evolvedin Skala over generations, and though few actually engaged in it,the smugglers gained notoriety, even in distant towns, by the fearthey instilled in both the Russian frontier guards and the Austriangendarmes. The border seethed with life by night. In the winter,when the river was frozen, smuggling was more difficult than insummer. To name all the kinds of goods that were smuggled wouldbe quite a task-anything that required payment of duty and was inwide demand became an item for smuggling. This meant profits formerchants who ordered the goods from distant places, as well as forthe storekeepers connected with the smugglers and the money¬changers and money-lenders. Corals, snuff, cigarette paper,whiskey, liqueurs, fabrics, skins, and furs-this is but a small sampleof the types of smuggled goods.Smuggling included the dangerof running into the borderguards, of violent clashes, andof being apprehended andsentenced to long prison terms.Bands of smugglers competed,even fought with each other, forcustomers and sources ofsupply; the competition led toacts of revenge, even to murder.Many years before World WarI, one such case was known inSkala. The story circulated forquite a while among Jews andGentiles alike, and was widely reported in the press all over Galicia.The smugglers were also involved in carrying people across theborder, from Russia to Galicia. A surge of such refugees flooded theFlG. 6: The “Nachsteller,the oldest town porter17The History of Skalaborder in 1905, at the time of the Russo-Japanese war, when youngJews began to flee conscription into the armies of the hated Tsar.These refugees were assisted by their brethren in Skala, and whilemost emigrated to the United States, some Joined the second“Aliyah” to the land of Israel and others remained permanently inSkala.Nearly all the Jews of Skala devoutly adhered to their religioustradition; few were secular “free-thinkers.” Hasidism was deeplyrooted in their hearts; in this very corner of Galicia, the Baal-Shem-Tov himself was born and lived. Here Reb Israel of Rosanoy crossedthe border in his escape from Russia in the mid-nineteenth century.He founded the Sadogura dynasty, and his following in Skala wasquite large. The rebbe of Wizhnitz,however, also had a large community offollowers, and frequent disputesbetween the two groups led to opendisplays of animosity. Of course, Skalatherefore had separate sets of religiousfunction-aries: two rabbis, two slaught¬erers, etc.Of the town’s famous rabbis, men¬tion should be made of Rabbi ShlomoDrimmer, a well-known religious autho¬rity of the early nineteenth century andauthor of the treatise BetbSblomo; hisson, Rabbi Abraham Drimmer, authorof the Beerab Sbel Miryam; and hisgrandson, Rabbi Nuta Drimmer, whowrote glosses on his father’s work. Theson of this last, Rabbi Shlomo Drimmer,studied law at the University of Krakow,and attained the position of deputyChief Rabbi of the Polish Army with therank of captain. In September, 1939, hewas detained by the Soviet army and died in prison. Rabbi Nuta’sFlG. 7: The Drimmerbrothers: Captain ShlomoDrimmer, deputy ChiefRabbi in the Polish Armyduring the 1930’s, andRabbi Yehuda Drimmer,the last Rabbi of Skala18Skala on the River Zbruczyounger son, Rabbi Yehuda Drimmer, inherited his father’srabbinical position in Skala, and during the Nazi occupation wasappointed to the “Judenrat.” In September 1942, he was deportedto the Janowska camp in Lwow where he met his death.Skala had an abundance of synagogues. The old “shul” datingfrom the sixteenth century was burned in 1911; the new structurebegun on its ruins was never completed. This was a massivebuilding of hewn stone and arched windows, which never reachedcompletion and stood desolate for decades. In one corner, a smallsynagogue was set up where simple folk prayed. On the HighHolidays-on Rosh Hashanah before the shofar was blown and onYom Kippur before the “Neilah” prayer, the town’s two rabbis, onea Czortkower Hasid and the other a Wizhnitzer, would come, eachin his turn, accompanied by the elders of the community, to the old“shul,” where they would preach to the worshippers and call out theblasts of the shofar.There were about ten other prayer and study houses and smallsynagogues: the Czortkower, Wizhnitzer, Otynyer, “Itzik’s Kleisel”and “Port Arthur”-a synagogue built during the Russo-JapaneseWar that looked a little like a fortress. Skala also had somemisnagdim (opponents of Hasidism) but their influence wasnegligible; and the secular Jews in general tried not to publiclyoffend the sensibility of the religious.As for education, all the children obviously went to “heder” or tothe community “Talmud-Torah.” Gifted boys studied in¬dependently in the house of study or under the tutelage of thetown’s rabbis, all outstanding teachers. Children of the affluent andof “enlightened” secular Jews studied in gymnasiums, mostly atCzernowitz in Bukowina. The townspeople held these students ingreat esteem, as did the students themselves. A Hebrew “Tarbuth”school, founded in Skala in 1906, attracted a large student bodythanks to its talented teachers, Siwak and Tennenblatt. Social andcultural activities included lectures, celebrations and parties, as wellas amateur theater performances which delighted the audiences ofthe day. Old-timers among Skala’s former residents may still19The History of Skalaremember the successful presentation of the drama “God, Man andthe Devil.”Skala’s Jews took interest in political movements, and in this areaas well, there was little agreement. The community was primarilydivided into Zionists and Socialists, and the differences in outlookwere evident not only in heated debates but also in quarrels andanimosities. On the other hand the Jewish community was on goodterms with the Gentile population, and little anti-Semitic sentimentwas felt. Jews were in the majority until the late nineteenth century,and made up just under half the population before World War I.Skala’s Jews were represented on the town council in proportion totheir numbers, and the office of deputy-mayor was for many yearsreserved for a Jew. In this post, Woolf Itzik Freifelder becameespecially famous, and was admired even among his Gentilecolleagues. Even as one against many, his view would be adopted bythe council and the Ukrainian members would concur by saying:“Let it be as Mr. Walko says,” and there was no need for a voteto be taken.2. The First World WarAt the outbreak of World War /, panic seized the Jews of Skala, whofeared the onslaught of the Cossacks as the river Zbrucz was theonly natural barrier between them. A few affluent Jews managed toescape to the West, despite the prohibition and surveillance of theAustrian police. The front moved back and forth, and in lateAugust 1914, Skala fell to the Russians, however not to militaryforces but to civilian authority. Tolerable relations were establishedwith the Russian officials, but in the summer of 1915 an edict ofexpulsion was issued upon all Jews living in the border area. Skala’sJews were exiled to Czortkow and were forced to march there underthe guard of Cossacks who did not hold back their lashes. InCzortkow they were herded into the courtyard of the grand Rabbi,and the next day were transported to the town of Kopyczynce. Afew days later they were permitted to return to Skala, but only a20Skala on the River Zbruczweek passed and they were ordered again to vacate their houses forgood and to relocate at least eight kilometers from the border.Possessions were hidden with Christian neighbors, houses wereshut, and the wanderers scattered in every direction, to nearbytowns and villages, where they remained in miserable, impoverishedconditions. To make matters worse, a cholera epidemic broke out,and hundreds fell victim. A year later, when the Jews of Skala wereallowed back to their homes, they found utter destruction. TheRussian soldiers had removed windows and doors, floors andceilings, anything that would serve as fuel or as reinforcement forthe trenches and strongholds. The Ukrainian townspeople finishedoff the looting, and practically nothing was ever returned. Thereturning refugees, attempting to rebuild their lives, made sometemporary repairs on their homes. New sources of income soonopened up: Jews from Russia, in need of all manufactured goods,were willing to buy, with gold and silver, any merchandise theycould obtain. The Jews of Skala bought up whatever they could,from near and far, and sold to their Russian brethren. Certainitems, such as candles, cigarette paper, blades for straw-cutting andcheap ornaments were especially in demand. Likewise, lively tradewent on in the other direction: from Russia came supplies of flour,sugar, salt, tobacco, and matches, to the Galician populace and tothe forces at the front. Among Skala’s Jews were a few contract-suppliers, some of whom really “hit it rich” and were known as warprofiteers. Toward the end of the war, the central Powers occupiedlarge portions of the Ukraine, as far as Odessa on the Black Sea andas a result commerce flourished even more.It goes without saying that at such unstable times one cannotexpect too much in the way of cultural activity, especially as most ofthe educated youth had been conscripted into the Austrian army orhad managed to settle in the Austrian capital of Vienna.3. Between the Two World WarsAt the end of World War /, with the fall of the Hapsburg Monarch,21The History of SkalaGalicia underwent two years of uneasy transition, and was finallyannexed to the new Polish Republic. At first, a “UkrainianDemocratic Republic” was set up, which was not very friendlytoward Jews. In addition, penetrating Petlura gangs from across theborder terrorized the Jews of Skala, though their assaults were lesssevere than those in the Eastern Ukraine. It should be noted that onone occasion, Jewish youths in Skala fought with the Petlura gangsand forced them to retreat.The West Ukrainian authorities did not interfere with theeconomic foundations and livelihood of the Jews. Trade in fuel oil,brought from the wells of Drohobycz and Boryslaw, began toflourish. Jews had to take on Ukrainian partners, for only underUkrainian names could licenses be obtained to purchase the fueland to transport it to Skala by rail. Russian Jews would transfer thepetroleum in barrels to the Eastern Ukraine. The Jews of Skalaaccumulated considerable sums of money, but when the Ukrainiangovernment fell, this currency became worthless and the new-foundwealth was lost.FlG. 8: Polish Army parade in the center of town (1930s)22Skala on the River ZbruczIn 1920, the entire area was occupied by the Red army. A“Revcorn” (Revolutionary Committee) was set up in Skala, and theBolsheviks severely harmed Jewish business and livelihoods. Theirrule lasted but seven weeks, and when the Poles defeated theSoviets, the Zbrucz became the new border between Poland theSoviet Union. In the early months of the Polish rule, the Jewssuffered at the hand of the Polish forces of General Josef Haller.Rampaging soldiers harassed, molested and injured Jews cuttingtheir beards and sidelocks. Many of Skala’s Jews were among thewounded. Eventually, however, the civilian administration gainedcontrol and life returned to normal.During this period, most of the Jewish community had tostruggle to survive, and searched for ways, however uncertain, toeke out a meager living. To be sure, a class of well-to-do, evenwealthy, Jews did develop, but the numbers of poor were quiteendless. In between was the “petit bourgeoisie” class: merchantswho sold fabrics, footwear, tools, construction materials andsundries to the Christian populace. From the latter, Jews boughtagricultural products: grain, beans, fodder, and eggs, large amountsof which were, in turn, exported to Western Europe and overseas.On Wednesdays the weekly fair took place, attracting thousands ofpeasants from surrounding villages. Skala’s merchants, for theirpart, would bring their wares to the fairs held in other towns:fabrics, clothing, leather, boots and shoes, sheepskins, and fur hats.In the little town of Ulaszkowce (Lashkewitz), a large annual fairwas held, publicized all over East Galicia, and there Skala’smerchants held prominent places. (There was even a Jewish folksaying: “As noisy as the Lashkewitz fair!”) There was noconspicuous change after the war in the activities of the Jewishartisans of Skala. Wagoners and carriage-drivers provided a vitalservice to the townspeople, transporting passengers to the railroaddepot, to the cities of Borszczow and Czortkow, and to nearbytowns. The Jewish huckstresses of the market added variety to thepeculiarly Jewish panorama of the “shtetl”; their customers werealmost exclusively peasant women. There were also Jewish farmers,23The History of Skalathough few in number, and two of them were quite wealthylandowners.The free professions were scarcely represented: two doctors, threedental technicians, a few teachers and “magisters,” graduates of lawschools who remained unemployed because Skala had nocourthouse, who attempted to further their studies or to find workin Borszczow. Religious life and services were quite adequatelyattended to: two rabbis (for the two opposing Hassidic sects,Czortkower and Wizhnitzer); rabbinical arbiters, ritual slaughterers,supervisors and sextons. Then there were “melamdim,” traditionalFIGS. 9A: “BethAm”theformer Jewish communitycenter building in the 1990s.FIGS. 9B: The Beth-Am Jewish community center in Skala. Until 1939 the“Beth Am”housed the Hebrew Tarbut School, the Community Library &all Zionist youth organizations. Its main hall (2ndJloor) and balcony (3rdfloor) were used for public meetings, lectures, exhibits,weddings, Purim balls, Hanukah parties and stage shows of Hebrew schoolchildren and the Yiddish amateur theate24Skala on the River ZbruczHebrew teachers for various grades, Talmud instructors, some ofthem fine scholars and outstanding pedagogues of exceptionalabilities, all of whom, however, lived on meager incomes. Tocomplete the picture, there were the clerks, who served as secretariesand bookkeepers in the export companies, in business, incommunal offices, in the free loan society, in the flour mill, and soforth.The Beth-Am Jewish community center in Skala. Until 1939 the“Beth Am” housed the Hebrew Tarbut School, the CommunityLibrary & all Zionist youth organizations. Its main hall (2nd floor)and balcony (3rd floor) were used for public meetings, lectures,exhibits, weddings, Purim balls, Hanukah parties and stage shows ofHebrew school children and the Yiddish amateur theater.For about a decade, a Jew served as chief city clerk, an occur¬rence rare in Poland between the two world wars. Finally, notincluded in the above list, is a large number of Jews whose preciseoccupations cannot be described, the so-called “Luft menschen” -counselors, mediators, petition-writers to government offices,matchmakers, etc. At the bottom of this socioeconomic ladder werethe poor, day- or hour-laborers, servants, water-drawers, and, ofcourse, beggars. The business of smuggling, fully described earlier,continued a few years after World War I, and provided significantincome and profits for quite a number of merchants, middlemen,money-changers, packers, carters and smugglers. As the yearspassed, however, the Soviet Union sealed the border hermeticallyshut, while the Poles, themselves, began to impose severepunishments on offenders, denying them access to the borderregion, even after serving their prison sentences.Quite a large percentage of Jewish families having no means ofsupport would certainly have approached starvation if not for thetwo types of assistance offered them: first, the interest-free loansfrom the funds of the “Gemilut Hasadim” (Free loan society)established by local businessmen, most of whom were Zionists. Thisloan society was founded through the generous contributions offormer residents who had emigrated to the United States, Skala’s25The History of Skala“landsmanschaftn,” and through contributions from foundations inother countries. Second, parcels of clothing and money were sent tofamilies by their relatives abroad. The anti-Jewish policies of thePolish government and the manifestations of anti-Semitism by thepopulace, starting during the infamous Grabski-period andcontinuing up to the crisis of the Thirties, brought, as they didelsewhere, economic decline to Jewish Skala. As a result, bank¬ruptcies among Jewish merchants, particularly in the fabric andclothing trades, became frequent. The situation continued toworsen late in the Thirties, so that when the Soviets invaded andoccupied Skala for almost two years, the already shaky economicstructure of Jewish Skala collapsed entirely.FlG. 10: Jewish community leaders, standing from left to right: TodresZimmerman, Eliezer Fish, Fischel Garfinkel, Nissan Ollinger, AbrahamBilgorei, Shlomo Rosenbaum, Motel Hausner, Motie Gottesfeld, MosheWiesenthal. Second Row: Motie Weidberg, Ben-Zion Fiderer, AbrahamLederman, Chaim Roiz (Brenman), Israel-Lieb Freifelder, Moshe Feuerstein,Moshe Weidberg. Bottom Row: Feivel Gottesfeld, Yulik Frenkel, MendelKelman26Skala on the River ZbruczZionist Youth Groups in Skala (1931)FlG. 11: “Hashomer Hatzair”an egalitarian Zionistyouth group on an outing—late 1920’s.FlG. 11: The all-girls branch of Gordonia” — a Zionist youthorganization in 1929photo.27The History of SkalaFig. 12: “Hechalutz” a labor Zionist youth groupin early 1930’s photo.Fig. 12: “Hanoar Hatzioni” — a General Zionist youth groupAs for educational institutions in Jewish Skala, the childrenreceived their primary education at the “Pulaski” public school, theonly one in town. After studying there for seven years, they turnedto a life of work helping their parents, and only a few wouldcontinue their studies in secondary schools out of town. In 1933, aprivate high school with a two-year course was founded, wherechildren of Jews, Poles, and Ukrainians prepared for the graduating28Skala on the River Zbruczexams in Borszczow or Czortkow, but this school was closed at theoutbreak of the war. However, in addition to attending morningFig. 13A: “Farewell” to Munio Fiderer and his wife as theyleave (on aliyah) for Palestine (1933)classes in the Polish school, children of traditional families studiedas well in “heder,” while those of the more “enlightened” classstudied at the Hebrew “Tarbut” school, which housed bothkindergarten and secondary classes. This school enjoyed a finereputation, and was cared for and by community and ZionistFlG. 13B: Members of ““Braterstwo, ” (Brotherhood), a workersorganization founded in Skala in 1927-28. It was a left-leaning Jewishtrade Union group in 1927-28first anniversary photo. Accused by Polishauthorities ofpro-Communist activities, the group was later banned.29The History of Skalaleaders who assured it a sufficient budget. It was blessed with goodteachers-Roiz, Lederman, Ochshorn, Tepper and others. ChaimRoiz, an excellent educator, was admired by hundreds of studentsand held in great esteem by the entire community. Thekindergarten and Hebrew teachers organized cultural events, literaryevenings, theater performances-all conducted in pure Hebrew. Nowonder, therefore, that Hebrew was spoken well in Skala’s streetsand homes. The school was housed in a fine, three-story buildingcalled “Bet Am” (people’s house) which was erected in 1921, on aside-street populated by simple folk. One who gave of his energyand time more than any other person to the establishment of theTarbut School was Moshe Weidberg, who later perished in theholocaust. Besides the classrooms, this building housed in itsbasement a meeting place for the Hashomer Hatzair Youth; alibrary and reading room on the first floor, and a large publicauditorium on the second floor. Just before its destruction, the “BetAm” library contained 5,000 books: about 2,000 in Yiddish, 2,000in Polish, 800 in Hebrew and 300 in German. The founder of thelibrary was Moshe Wiesental (Moshe Brachas, now in the UnitedStates), who organized and managed it the first few years of itsexistence. In the effort of enlarging and expanding the library, hewas joined by Shlomo Schwarzbach and Feivel Gottesfeld, whoFlG. 14: Graduates of the night-school course in Hebrew,with the teacher Shraga Ochsorn (1932)30Skala on the River Zbruczoffered dedicated assistance. They were subsequently joined byAbraham Bilgorei, who actually managed the library until it wasclosed and its books confiscated by Soviet authorities in 1939. Animpressive exhibit of selected books in every language was held in1933, a festive event for all who attended.Group activities were held by voluntary, apolitical organizations,by political parties and youth movements. Complex humanrelationships caused divisions into opposing groups, though notnecessarily due to political, religious or class differences. One fiercefeud, between Yaeger, the executive secretary of the municipalcouncil, and Moshe Feuerstein, a member of the municipal counciland for a time the chairman of the Jewish Community Council,was widely publicized. Each side marshaled many supporters andeven the heads of the Polish community became involved in thecontroversy. Such disputes were never known for the polite mannerin which they were conducted, and, at times, bitter animositiesraged.Due to the initiative and dedication shown by the leaders of thelocal Zionist movement, a free loan society and a people’s bankwere set up, the principal capital for which was obtained from theJoint Distribution Committee in the United States. (Of theseleaders, Israel Freifelder and Mode Weidberg perished in theholocaust, and Ben-Zion Fiederer emigrated to Israel before the warand died there after a long life.) These institutions broughtimmense benefits, often actual rescue, to hundreds in distress. Inlike-fashion, assistance was offered to the sick by the “YadCharutzirn” society in the form of modest financial support and inattendance at bedside. For many years, the head of this society wasShemayah Fachman, and after his death in 1930, he was replacedby Chaim Meiselman, who later perished in the holocaust.The outstanding figure in the “Chevra Kadishah” (Society forthe burial of the dead) was Shlomo-Peretz, the one-eyed sexton ofthe Czortkower house of prayer. He was unique and colorful,endowed with a phenomenal memory. He remembered the dates of31The History of Skalahundreds of memorial days and knew the location and history of allthe tombstones on the ancient, four-hundred-year-old cemetery.Politically, the community of Skala was divided, primarily intoZionists and anti-Zionists. The religious Zionists demonstratedtheir presence only during elections to the Zionist Congresses byvoting for the “Mizrachi” list. They had neither a local organizationnor a youth movement. The “secular” Zionists, however, couldboast of their adult chapters and, more significantly, of the activitiesof their youth groups: Hashomer Hatzair, Gordonia, Buslia,Hanoar Hatzioni and Betar. Relations among members of thevarious youth groups were generally friendly, though occasionallyheated debates erupted on the “promenade” about events in theZionist movement and in Palestine, particularly during the shekel-campaign and elections to the Zionist Congresses. Relations becamestrained after the split in the Zionist movement and the secession ofthe Revisionists, who had quite an active chapter in Skala.Youth groups vied to earn honors in their efforts on behalf of theJewish National Fund and to obtain “certificates” (Britishemigration permits to enter Palestine) for members who completedtheir “hachshara”-extensive agricultural training. The “aliyah” ofeach “chalutz” (pioneer) became a festive event for the whole town.Members of all Zionist groups would accompany him to the depotin a stirring, farewell procession. Scores of “chalutzim” emigrated tothe Land of Israel betweenthe two world wars,including members of themiddle class. At the start ofthe third “aliyah,” Russianemigrants, among themMordechai Fingerman andYitzhak Buchalter (Bahat)passed through Skala,stirring up some Zionistfervor among the resi- FIG. 15: Religious section of Book Fairdents and receiving some exhibition in Skala Community Center* ‘ (1933)32Skala on the River Zbruczassistance for their journey. Some of Skala’s Zionists emigrated tothe land of Israel with the fourth “aliyah” particularly in theThirties. Together with the survivors of the holocaust, who reachedthe land of Israel after the war, over 80 people from Skala live nowin Israel.A sizable number of the working-class and poor residents ofJewish Skala belonged to an anti-Zionist organization known as“Braterstwo” (Brother-hood). The Polish police suspected membersof this organization of Communist leanings; there were actuallycases of arrests and trials, and some suspects escaped across theborder to the Soviet Union.In the early 1920’s an amateur theater troupe was founded inSkala, which remained active until the beginning of World War II,displaying talents which earned the praise of visiting critics. Evensome of the local Polish and Ukrainian “intelligentsia” used toattend the performances of this Jewish amateur theater. Thedirector, Sholem Muhlmut, himself a talented actor, was joined byLieba Adelman, Motel Hausner, Welvel Wasserman and MosheBilgorei, all of whom perished in the Nazi Holocaust, as well asBerish Weidberg, who died in New York several years ago, and AryeSchwartzbach, Esther Weidberg, Moshe Wiesenthal and LeibSchwartzbach who now reside in Israel and in the United States.4. Skala Under Soviet RuleAt dawn on September 17, 1939, the Red Army crossed the Zbrucz,and Skala, along with all of East Galicia, remained under Soviet ruleuntil the end of June 1941. Actually, all the Jews of Skala welcomedthe Red Army, with sighs of relief and even genuine excitement, sogreat was their fear of Nazi occupation which had alreadyapproached Lvov (Lemberg). A few weeks later things had changed:merchants had lost all sources of income, their stores emptied andclosed. Practically all the breadwinners became state employees,working in all sectors of the economy, including hard physical laborin agriculture, stone quarries, and at road and rail construction.33The History of SkalaSome families who became completely destitute left in search ofmeans of survival for other cities, especially Lvov (Lemberg). Theywere followed by Zionist activists who feared communistpersecution. On December 25, 1939, without any warning, 17Jewish families, most of them not really affluent, were served edictsof “nationalization.” Denied time to pack any possessions orclothing, they were driven from their homes and all their propertywas confiscated. Yet, not a single Pole or Ukrainian was similarlytreated, though some of them were more well-to do than those“nationalized” Jewish families. A few Jews were arrested, true toSoviet custom, in the dead of night, and, with no trial whatsoever,disappeared without a trace. In April 1940, the families of theseprisoners were themselves arrested, while the relatives of the“nationalized” families were sent off to Siberia. One event, asstrange as it was tragic, will always be remembered by Skala’sresidents: late in 1939, a Jew by the name of Motel Fisch wasarrested by the Soviet police and disappeared for a long while.Though his wife and child were picked up and deported to Siberia,the man himself was freed a few months later when even theBolsheviks were convinced of his innocence. Fisch began to see tothe release of his wife and son, but his efforts, which he kept upuntil June 1941, were in vain. The war began, he perished in theholocaust, and his wife and son returned from Siberia andemigrated to Israel.Sad is the summary of the 21 months of Soviet rule in Skala.The Jews were impoverished, their property gone and theirsparse livelihood shaky. All of the original Jewish cultural in¬stitutions and their achievements came to naught. Zionist activistswere persecuted, and many, though not in actual danger of theirlives, lived in constant fear. This, then, was the situation beforeJewish life in Skala went up in flames with the Nazi onslaught onthe Soviet Union, June 22, 1941.34Skala on the River ZbruczBibliography1. Balinski-Lipinski: Polska Starozytna, Tom III, “Skala,” Str.642-643.2. Slownik Geograficzny: Skala nad Zbruczem, Str. 171-173.3. Encyklopedia Powszechna, Tom XXII, Warszawa, 1866.4. Materialy do kwestji Zydowskiej w Galicji, opracowa+Stanislaw Gruinski, Lwow, 1910.5. Bohdan Wasiutynski: Ludnosc Zydowska w Polsce w WiekachXIX i XX, Warszawa, 1930.35TheTown on the River ZbruczBenzion Fiderer/:>k •gFlG. 16: Benzion FidererThe town ofSkala in southeastern Galicia (currently the WesternUkraine) is located on the banks of the River Zbrucz, whichuntil the First World War was the border between two empires:Austria-Hungary and Czarist Russia. At the outbreak of the SecondWorld War and the Holocaust, approximately 2,000 Jews lived inSkala, and an equal number of Ukrainians and Poles.The Founding of Skala - its First Jewish SettlementSkala (a rock or cliff in translation) indeed stands upon a cliff,surrounded by valleys and plains, forests and flatlands dotted withvillages, estates and farms, large and small, owned by nobility andpeasants.According to historical sources, it may be assumed that Skala wasfounded as a high fortress by a Ukrainian-Ruthenian noblemansometime in the 13th century. However, in that same century, theTatars destroyed that fortress.Several decades later, the Polish king, Kazimierz the Great,occupied the entire district of Podolia and rebuilt the Skala fortressSkala on the River Zbruczon the heights. It is conjectured that by then the first Jews hadsettled in Skala, evidently immigrants from the northwest, namelythe Silesian and German provinces.For many years there was constant warfare throughout Podolia,Skala included. There were raids by the Tatars, Lithuanians,Wallachians (Romanians), Turks and the Cossacks of themurderous Bohdan Chmielnicki. A peaceful decade was rarely seen.Flow did those first Jews who settled in Skala occupy themselves?They were keepers of village inns, small-scale shopkeepers andtradesmen, buying and selling goods to and from Turkey and theUkrainian provinces.In the era of the old Polish kingdom, the Jews received, for thepayment of large sums of money and head-taxes, certain “privileges”that let them support themselves and maintain their communal lifemore or less undisturbed. Actually, it was less rather than morebecause the situation and the “moods” changed with the regimechanges. The Polish-Catholic clergy frequently preached hatred ofthe Jews that led to frequent attacks by the incited mobs. It goeswithout saying that at various times the Jewish community of Skalaalso suffered from such horrible events. Despite everything the Jewsin Poland, including Podolia and Skala on the River Zbrucz,increased and prospered.A great political and economic change took place in 1772, whenthe Polish kingdom was divided among Russia, Prussia and Austria.Galicia (with Podolia) fell under Austrian control. In 1809,Napoleon Bonaparte turned the region of Podolia, including Skala,over to Russia. Flowever, at the time of the Congress of Vienna in1812, after Napoleon’s defeat, those regions were returned toAustria.In the first decades of Austria’s control over Galicia, the Jews hadto endure various limitations and vexations and suffered heavytaxation, particularly during the days of the “pious” Empress MariaTheresa.The lot of the Jews in Galicia and all of Austria changedconsiderably for the better after 1848, after the revolutionary37The Town on the River Zbrucztumults and tempests, when Jews were granted the rights ofcitizenship. This was followed by improvements in a variety ofrealms: economic, political, and social, especially in their communallife, which became autonomous.Skala Under Austria\Jnder the rule of the Austro-Hungarian monarchy, during the1860s, particularly after the Austro-Prussian war, a period ofrelative peace and prosperity followed to the degree that over timeSkala had several very wealthy people and even some estate owners.We mention them first because it shows how the Austro-Hungarianconstitution led to noticeable changes for the better, also withregard to Jews. Over the course of many generations Jews wereforbidden to own properties such as landed estates, fields, andforests. Suddenly there was such a change: Jews were permitted tobe land owners, just like the Christian aristocrats. Yehoshua (Shike)Drimmer was one such property holder. He was a great scholar anda Kossower Hassid (later a Vizhnitser HassidJ. His brother, the verylearned great scholar, Rabbi Shlomo Drimmer, was the city’s rabbi.Shike was a sort of private banker. He had a great deal of cash onhand, which he used to lend with interest to landowners andmerchants. In addition, he was an important merchant of dry goodsand the owner of the Bosyri estate, not far from Skala.The second one was Elazar Seidman, a Czortkower Hassid, whoalso had a great deal of money, a huge dry-goods business and theKrzywcze estate, not far from Skala. His heir was his son-in-lawShmarye Melzer, also a fervent Czortkower Hassid. After sometime, Shmarye Melzer entered city politics, and in 1900 became thehead of the Skala Jewish Community Council.Merchants and ShopkeepersSkala was a mercantile and an industrial city. The Skala Jews werelively and imbued with an enterprising spirit. There were ether-oil38Skala on the River Zbruczenterprises in Skala that produced oil from anise and caraway. Theoil and the seeds were exported abroad, where they were convertedinto distilled spirits, perfumes and toilet soap. The anise and thecaraway were imported from Bessarabia and brought to Skala ongentile-owned horse-drawn wagons because in those days there wereno other means of transportation. The oil enterprises were ownedby Shmarye Melzer and his son Moshe-Dudi, in partnership withHerschel Auerbach, and his brother-in-law Azriel Goldschein;Yisroel Brimer; Nute Drimmer, later the Rabbi of Skala; HerschelAshkenazi; Velvel Buchsbaum in partnership with his sons Mosheand Itzi Buchsbaum; and Yitzchak Schwarzbach, who laterimmigrated to America.The residue of the boiled anise from the oil enterprises was usedto fatten up cattle and their milk was sold in the city by retailers.Count Goluchowski of Skala built a beer brewery in Skala whichwas leased by the brothers-in-law Aharon Brimer and DavidWeidberg. Some years later, when the brewery burned down, theyabandoned that business.The Count’s larger water mill was leased by Mendel Kahn andWolf Itzik Freifelder (the only Jewish deputy-mayor of Skala beforethe First World War). After them, the mill was run by HirschKarmin. The Count also had a small mill that was leased by MosheStock.Skala had many bead sellers, among them Yona Velvel Schrenzeland his son Shaikele Schrenzel. Both were great Talmudic scholarsand fervent Czortkower Hassidim. Yona Velvel used to travel toItaly to buy beads, wearing his black “kapote” (long overcoat) andhis velvet hat. The beads were then smuggled into Russia.Avrahamche Scheinberg, with his brother-in-law, Moshe ItcheBuchsbaum had a spirit refinery and distributed liquors throughoutthe district. The egg exporting business was also developed in Skala.The first egg exporter was Kalman Bilgoraj, followed by BerishFefifer of Husyatyn.At the beginning of the 20th century the export of legumes, cornand grain developed in Skala. The grain and legumes came39The Town on the River Zbruczprimarily from Russia, where string-beans, peas, clover and seedswere plentiful. These were exported to many European countries,such as Germany, Italy, Switzerland, France, England and Spain.The Skala exporters were the only ones in Eastern Galicia whoseforeign trade of these goods reached America, Cuba and PuertoRico. The chief exporters were Yisroel Seidman and his partnersYosef Weintraub, his son-in-law Eliezer Scheinberg and EphraimKlinger; and Sholem Hermele in partnership with Benzion Fiderer.All of these manufacturers, producers, importers and exporters wereHasidic Jews with long black kapotes (see above) and velvet hats,and satin caftans, fur-bats and velvet cloaks without buttons for theSabbath. Velvel Wasserman and his brother Chaim also conductedconsiderable business in grains, but only domestically.Important fabric and dry-good stores were also found in Skala,such as the large store of Elazar Seidman. After Elazar’s death, thisstore was taken over by his son-in-law Shmarye Melzer. Moshe LeibDrimmer’s large store was passed on after his death to his two sons-in-law, Chaim Yisroel Ehrenberg and Sanye Libergal. Other storeswere both wholesale and retail, and storekeepers from the entirearea used to come and buy wedding clothes from Ehrenberg andLibergal, Leib Lunenfeld, Zalman Hausner and Moshe Weidberg.After the First World War, when textiles were scarce in Russia,several new fabric and dry-good merchants appeared in Skala:Baruch Tabak, Meir Zissye Tabak, Todres Zimmerman, MendelFeuerstein, Chaim Feuerstein, Dudi Schrenzel, Nachman Brettler,Shlomo Weidenfeld, the brothers Mottye and Moshe Weidberg,Yaakov Yusem, Fishel Garfunkel, Leib Schtachel, FeibishWiesenthal, Meshil Kohn, Avraham Gelbstein, Chaitsia Yoczes,Herschel Edelstein. Boruch Olinger, and Shlomo Lemberg.Hardware StoresOzer Marmarosb ran a large retail and wholesale hardware business.He had connections in Vienna, Prague and Brno (Brunn) forpurchasing various delicate and expensive hardware that were to be40Skala on the River Zbruczsmuggled into Russia. The smugglers used to buy the goods fromhim on credit, and he profited well thereby. He was a remarkablywealthy man. Early every Friday, he used to go to the post office topay his bills. If a poor shopkeeper came to him on a Fridayafternoon to borrow a few crowns that he lacked to pay his bills, hewould lend him the money. However, Ozer reproached theshopkeeper: “How can a man be so feckless as to go to the postoffice when it is already time to kindle the Sabbath candles?” Incontrast, he took care of his business by eight o’clock in themorning. He immigrated to the hand of Israel in his old age.Menachem Schiff also had a large hardware and tin business. Hewould order iron and tin by the wagonload and sell it wholesale andretail throughout the entire region. He was a son-in-law of RabbiAvraham Drimmer of blessed memory. In addition to these, therewere other hardware merchants: Herschel Weintraub and his son-in-law Mendel Brandes, Eliyahu Doliner, Binyomin Rubel andMoshe Doliner.Zayde Schwarzbach had a large lumber business. He alsoconducted large-scale business with stone and gravel which he soldto the government and to the administration of the railway system.He conducted his business in partnership with his son-in-lawBenzion Fiderer. They delivered goods as far as Stanislawow andZloczow. Moshe Wasserman in partnership with his son Eliezer alsohad a lumber business. So did Yaakov Wasserman. After the FirstWorld War they became wealthy from that business.A considerable number of Skala Jews did business with Russia,purchasing grain and other products. However, since thesemerchants did not have enough money for their business, everySunday they used to borrow Russian rubles from a money changerwho bought and sold rubles. They conducted business in Russiaduring the week and on Fridays brought their wares to the customshouse, paid what they had to, sold the merchandise, and returnedto the money changer the rubles they had borrowed on Sunday.Some of the merchants also brought back bran from Russia, whichwas tax-free, and sold it to the estate owners or their managers who41The Town on the River Zbruczused it to fatten the cattle. Some of the merchants also broughtback geese from Russia and sell them locally.Local grain merchants were Itzikl Gertler, Berl Bitterman, ItziGelbard, Zalman Herscher (Reines), Nathan Herscher, Dovid EliWeidenfeld, Boruch Frisch (son of Yona Avraham), Moshe EfraimMenczel, Yaakov Ber Trasawutski, Zayde Weingast and his sonMatis, Yona Schor, Mechel Jagendorf, Fishel Gemeinerman, andothers. They bought grain from the peasants who brought it fromthe neighboring villages to Skala. A small number of them went tothe villages to buy the grain there.Fishel Gemeinerman was a very smart Russian Jew. He used todo business with a Polish priest, who was a bitter anti-Semite whocould not bear to look at a Jew. Nevertheless, since the priest didnot want to sell his grain to the Kulko Rolnicze (a Polishcooperative) because they did not want to pay him, so he sold hisgrain to Fishel Gemeinerman.The merchants of ready-made clothing in Skala were OvadyaSchwarzbach, with his two sons, Hershele and Yankele; AvrahamJagendorf and his son Simcha and later his son-in-taw Yitzchak(Mitzi) Fuss; Shmuel Feib Weissman and later his son-in-lawShmuel Hesheles; Hershel Auerbach with his son Yankel and son-in-law Yisrael Applebaum; Berish Flott, Meir Schatner, and YosefBlutstein (Reichel’s). The ready-made clothing was sold mainly atmarket fairs and in the neighboring villages: Mondays inBorszczow; Tuesdays in Mielnica or Probuzna; Wednesdays inOzeriany, in addition to the local fair in Skala; Thursdays inKorolowka. Michel Gottesfeld (nicknamed Tkacz), with his brotherShmuel Gottesfeld (father of the famous American- Yiddish writerand dramatist Chone Gottesfeld) were cloth dealers who sold theirgoods at fairs.Feather businesses were owned by Yosef Jaget, Moshe DovidSchwartzbach with his sons Mordechai and Yelvel, Dovid Somerwith his son Alter, Shimon Sternschein and his son Natan.Binyomin Gottesman, Dovid Fisch, Itzik Feib Walach, ZecharyaWiesenthal and his son-in-law Abish Stern, and Moshe Weinfeld.42Skala on the River ZbruczBefore the First World War, haberdasheries (notions) wereowned by the brothers Avraham and Feivish Frenkel and thebrothers Mendel and Chaim Fueurstein. After the war they wereowned by Zisye Feinsilber in partnership with his brother-in-lawMottel Goldschein, Chaim Rappaport. Yisrael Leib Freifelder, LeibGottlieb and others.Before the First World War, groceries were owned by SenderTabak, Shulem Libergal, and Yosef Weidman. After the war theywere owned by Yerachmiel Kassirer, Shlomo Weinraub (Alter’s),and Mendel Schnitzer, Yisrael Peker, Meir Kreitner, ChaimJagendorf, Shaul Bosyk, Miriam Bayle Kassirer, Chaim Leibowicz,Yitzchak Mann, Uziel Stock, Max Sternberg, Menachem Prescheland others.Inns, taverns, and confectionaries: As far as I recall, the followingpeople were proprietors of inns (guesthouses) in Skala: Tauba MirelSchwartzbach, Malia Weisinger, Dvora Leibowicz, and ReiziaFiderer. Taverns were owned by Moshe Jagendorf, Yisrael Kassirer,Sanie Kelman, the Goldhirsch brothers, and others.Confectionaries were owned by Itsye Sandberg, Nachum Elkes,Mendel Kelman and Avraham Sandberg (now in Argentina). ItsyeSandberg’s confectionary also served as a type of youth club. Youngpeople gathered there to eat ice cream, tarts, whipped cream cakes,and other treats. While there, they would carry on heateddiscussions on political and cultural topics and problems facingIsrael. Jews used to buy seltzer bottles from these confectionaries inhonor of the Sabbath, to be enjoyed after the “kugel ”TradesmenTailors: Moshe Meiselman (son of Yisroel Zelig’s) was the bestwomen’s tailor, not only in Skala but in the entire region. Otherwomen’s tailors were: Daniel Schissler (immigrated to Argentinawith his family), Shlomo Schindler, Esther Schatner and SossyeHerscher.Yaakov Yossye Weinraub was an exceptional tailor. Other tailors43The Town on the River Zbruczwere Yosef Schneider (son of Chaim Ber), Shmuel Schneider (sonof Chasia) with his son-in-law Yaakov Zeichner, AvrahamWeinraub, Shayke Kleinman, Moshe Weinraub, Zayda andAvraham Schitzer, Yitzchak Kressel (the porter’s son-in-law), YankelRoffe, Mottel Weinraub, Mendel Bosyk, Avraham Fleischman,Mordechai Leib Kirshner (nicknamed chocolate), MosheGottesfeld, Chaim Schwartzbach, Shmuel Schwartzbach andMendel Schneider.Shoemakers-. Avraham Schitzer, Todres Schitzer, ReuvenSchuster, Avraham Bosyk, Mordechai Bosyk, Yehoshua HerschBosyk.Tinsmiths: Yosef Herzog, Itzik Sandberg (from Iwankowa), YoelEpstein, Shalom Epstein and Reuven Sandberg.Carpenters-. Avraham Rabinowicz, Nachman Reles, Yosef Ratses(son of Moshe Yonah), Itzik Weitman and Yeshaya Blutstein.Locksmiths: Mordechai Kremnitzer, Avraham Kisilevsky (EliyahuKircshner’s son-in-law) and Yaakov Schwarzbach (son of Shalom).Glaziers: Shimshon Gottesfeld, Azriel Gottesfeld, ShimonSchneider, Feivel Gottesfeld and Perl.Bakers: Moshe Mosner and his son Leibish, Yiddel Brener, ItziklHechtenthal (from Berezhanke) and his son Velvel, Eh Herscher,Hersch Schwarzbach (son of Yisroel Shimon), Chaim Lindman andZayde Silberbush.Musicians: Yitzchak Yaakov Kleinman and his son Yonah andtheir band.The Hassidic Deputy-MayorThe population of Skala was diverse. As noted, there were some2,000 Jews and about the same number of Eikrainians and Poles.The three nationalities lived in peace for a long time, as it was inthe interest of the regime in Vienna that they do so to theadvantage of the internal politics and the economy of the land. Thissituation existed until the First World War.44Skala on the River ZbruczAs long as Austria ruled in thearea Jews did not experience anyovert anti-Semitism and lived inamity with the Christian popula¬tion.All three nationalities wererepresented in the municipaladministration. There was alwaysa Ukrainian mayor and a Jewishdeputy-mayor, Wolf Itzik Freif-elder, who was a fervent Vizh-nitzer Hassid, intelligent and avery shrewd politician. He wasinvolved in all city politics andwas highly respected by thedistrict officials.Hassidim, Rabbis, and Their “Quarreling” TsaddikimUp to the First World War, Skala was a Hassidic town. There wereVizhnitzer, Czortkower, Husiatyner, Otynier, Horodenker, andKopyczynitzer Hassidim. The Czortkower and Vizhnitzer had theirown rabbi and “shochet” (ritual slaughterer). The Vizhnitzer sidewas stronger and had Rabbi Avraham Drimmer of blessed memoryas their rabbi. He was the son of the great Talmudic scholar RabbiShlomo Drimmer, who was the rabbi of Skala for over 40 years.He was the author of the “Beit Shlomo, ” three volumes of questionsand responses well known in the rabbinic world. After the death ofRabbi Shlomo Drimmer, the Vizhnitzer Hassidim appointed hisson Rabbi Avraham, who was also a great scholar and studied dayand night. At the end of the 19 th century, the CzortkowerHassidim, who were still weak at that time, decided that theywanted at least a rabbinical judge, so they installed Rabbi YehudaBinyamin Laufer from Berezhany to serve in that role. That was thebeginning of a real quarrel, with each side believing it was right.FlG. 17: Wolf Itzik Freifelder,deputy-mayor of Skala prior toWorld War I45The Town on the River ZbruczThere were also sbocbtim (ritual slaughterers) from each side.One party would not use the meat slaughtered by the other nor anyof the other’s implements. Both sides became deadly enemies ofeach other, leading even to denunciations and blows.The dispute between the two sides lasted for a very long time. Itwas not only by maintaining separate rabbis and sbocbtim, but alsoby separate Hassidic prayer halls and of course, separate synagoguesextons.Prayer (Study Halls), Chevra Kadisha (Burial Society)and the Sextons (Beadles)Skala Jews worshipped in a variety of synagogues and prayerquorums, each one according to his own Hassidic inclination orsocial status. There were two Czortkower and one Strysoversynagogues. Both Czortkower synagogues were destroyed duringthe First World War and only one was rebuilt. After the war,worshippers from the old Czortkower synagogue created their own“minyan” (prayer quorum) in the home of Shmaryahu Melzer, thewell-known wealthy community leader and Czortkower Hassid.The Vizhnitzer synagogue, also damaged during the First WorldWar, was never rebuilt. Its congregants established a Vizhnitser“minyan ” in Rabbi Drimmer’s house. There were also some whoworshipped in the Otynier synagogue. In the mid-thirties anotherVizhnitzer “minyan”was established in the home ofVelvel Stock.In addition, Jews would also worship in the city’s Beis Midrash,in “Itzik’s Kleizl,” and in the “Port Arthur” Synagogue.The city’s large synagogue, which dated back to the 16thcentury, burned down in 1911. A new building was begun on itsruins but never completed. Massive stone walls had been erectedwith tall semi-circular windows, but the building remainedunfinished. Inside, between the thick walls, “a small synagogue” wasestablished in which ordinary Jews worshipped.Where there were houses of worship, there also had to be“shamashim ” or beadles. Here is the list: Chanina, who in his old46Skala on the River Zbruczage was a trusted supervisor in the building-stone business of ZaydeSchwarzbach, Avraham Eli the sbamasb of the great synagogue,Aharon the sbamasb of the “Beis Midrash,” Berl the sbamasb of theStrysover “Kloiz,” Leizer the sbamasb and his son Shlomo Peretz ofthe Czortkower “Kloiz,” Yossel the sbamasb of the Vizhnitzersynagogue, and Uri the sbamasb of the Otynier synagogue. In Skala,the “sbamasbim” also served as waiters at all Jewish celebrations.Chanina used to work hard at weddings; he first chopped the fishand then served them. After the festive meal, he used to ask forsome sour cream to eat to demonstrate that he had not tasted any ofthe meat served.The sbamasbim also served in the “Chevra Kadisha”-the BurialSociety. When they once asked the sbamasb Avraham Eli thedifference between a wedding and a funeral, he would answer:“One drinks whiskey at both, but at a wedding one gets to eathoney-cake and at a funeral one is given cheese to eat.”The sbamasb Avraham Eli also liked to offer a “rubdown”, for a“sixpence,” he used a birch broomlet, in the bathhouse on Fridays.The most respected of all the sbamasbim was Shlomo Peretz. Hewas blind in one eye and had eczema on both hands. He was ascholarly person with a sharp mind and a solid memory. Heremembered the yabrzeits (anniversaries of death) of all of the Jewsin town and the locations of their graves. He was also the waiter atall celebrations and the chief of all the undertakers.Smugglers, Wagon Drivers and Porters11 goes without saying that Skala, as a border town, had a number ofsmugglers or “Peklmacbers, ” as they were known. These were daringrisk-takers, strong and tough Jews, apparently not afraid of danger.Of course, they were an insignificant minority among the toilingJews. The “Peklmacbers” used to smuggle all sorts of goods from theAustrian side of the border into Russia and vice versa. Thesmuggling was profitable because the border taxes were not paid onthe merchandise that was smuggled back and forth. Sometimes a47The Town on the River Zbruczquarrel would break out among the “Peklmacbers” because ofcompetition or other issues, leading to bloody blows, court trials orprison. Most of the “Peklmackers” had ties with the guards on bothsides of the border by means of bribery. Sometimes, if they did notsucceed in bribing the border guards, they ended up battling withthem.The “Peklmacbers” also used to smuggle from Czarist Russia intoAustria groups of Jews fleeing from there to the West, especially toAmerica. Among them were also young Jews fleeing to avoid servicein the Czar’s army.As mentioned, the “Peklmachers” were tough. If a quarrel brokeout among them, there was no stopping it. Sometimes it led tomurder and the sentencing of the killer to long years in prison,which deeply disturbed the community and had strongreverberations throughout the region.Skala also had a number of drivers of both horse-drawn wagonsand fiacres (small hackney coaches) that shuttled passengers to andfrom the train station and also to nearby towns and villages.The porters and wagon drivers were colorful folk. The portersgenerally worked in various grain warehouses and wholesalewarehouses and carried heavy loads on their shoulders. They werespecialists in their trade. They also worked at the railroad stationunloading grain that had been brought from Russia.One of them was named Avraham Binimei (a nickname derivedfrom the Ukrainian oath “Biybma, I swear by the Almighty”). Heused to go about in wide trousers. When asked why he needed suchwide trousers, he would reply, “Wide trousers are healthy for thelegs and healthy for the trousers.” Other porters were ShalomTreger Bosyk, Moshe Lewenkron (the Nadan), Shikele Treger(Gerber), Ben Zion Schusterman (nicknamed “Godyekhes”), YosselGottesfeld (son of Shmaye), Yossel Schneider, the chimneysweeper,Beryl Kronstein (nicknamed Kedarlaomer), Berl Malamut (son ofMishka Leye), Ahron Herscher, son of Basye, Max Kleinman andothers.48Skala on the River ZbruczThe Policeman with a Beard and “Peyos” (side locks)For a long while before the First World War, a Jewish municipalguard “ruled” in Skala. His name was Moshe Yonah. He was apious man with a long beard and side locks. Every Saturdaymorning he went to the (mikva) ritual bath where he loosened hisbeard and side locks, for during the week he wore his beard coveredup and his side locks pinned with hairpins. On Saturdays he wore along black kapote to prayers in the synagogue. During the week, hewas dressed in an old worn uniform of a gendarme and also an oldgendarme’s cap. Usually he carried a stick. If a real gendarme had tomake a house search, Moshe Yonah accompanied him. Whensomeone had to be arrested, he also went along with the gendarme.When someone had to be summoned by the munici-pality, he didit. He also used to distribute summons issued by the districtadministration.For his official functions, Moshe Yonah used to wear a swordthat had only the handle. He used to carry the summons in theupper pocket of his gendarme’s coat and he knew how to frightenthe naive Skala Jews of those days.Moshe Yonah knew every Jew in town and made good use of hisknowledge. When he came across some Jew who was not especiallysmart, he would tap the pocket in which he carried the summonsesand the Jew would understand that Moshe Yonah was carrying apiece of paper that spelled trouble. He would then go to MosheYonah and ask what it was that he had for him. Moshe Yonahwould reply, “Avram, have you pulled off some monkey business?”The frightened man would thrust a crown into Moshe Yonah’shand, certain that he would take care of the matter immediately,though in fact the man had done nothing wrong. That is how inthose days, the simple Jews were frightened, lest they might havecommitted some misdemeanor.If my memory does not betray me, there was in those days inSkala another Jewish municipal guard named Yiddele Kapuste. Hehad a short beard and a long, cracked sword. The fringes of his49The Town on the River Zbrucztzitzit (ritual fringe) hung out of his faded gendarme’s coat with itstarnished brass buttons. The last Jewish municipal guard in Skalawas Elihayu Meiselman, son of Zissel. He functioned until theoutbreak of the Second World War in 1939.Since we are dealing with those types, we cannot omit anotherSkala “character” namely the “well-known” Yeshayahu Moshe. Thiswas a half-witted, half-insane fellow who showed up at allceremonies: weddings, circumcisions and funerals. YeshayahuMoshe, a broad-shouldered, squat man with a tangled beard, washomeless and lived wherever he could: in the bathhouse, theanteroom of the synagogue and sometimes, especially in summer, inthe cemetery, in the room where the deceased were washed.Generally, he was a silent man, but if he opened his mouth, hecould be abrasive. He collected alms, food in his own pot and onthe eve of Fridays or holidays, bits of gefilte fish and “chala” fromhousewives who gave him his “portion” out of pity and also out offear. Yeshayahu Moshe also knew everyone in town, all the news,town gossip and every “apparent” secret. Sometimes he would hum;sometimes he would sing and smile.The First World War:The Russian Occupation and ExpulsionWhen the First World War broke out from the time of mobilizationin August 1914 until the Russian occupation of Skala, the fear wasintense. People were very afraid of the Russian Cossacks and therewas reason to be afraid, because the Cossacks were indeedmurderers. Every Jew wanted to flee. There was panic. The Austrianauthorities and the police did not let them flee. With greatdifficulty a small number of Skala Jews got out, but most remainedin Skala. Later, when the Austrian army crossed over to Russia andwent as far as Dinovitz, they suffered a defeat there and withdrewafter a short while. Then the Russians occupied Skala without firinga shot. As luck would have it, Skala did not see any Cossacksbecause the Russian army did not move through Skala but through50Skala on the River ZbruczHusyatin. Several weeks passed before Russian administrativeofficials came to Skala. Little by little people got used to the Russiansoldiers and Russian officials. That was how they lived until thesummer of 1915. Then the Jews of Skala were expelled along withJews from all other border towns. It was rumored that all the Jewswill be expelled into Russia. However, first they went on foot toCzortkow, with Russian Cossacks following on horseback, drivingthem along and ensuring that, Heaven forbid, no Jew would escape.In Czortkow, all the Skala Jews were driven into the courtyard ofthe Czortkower Rebbe to lodge there for the night. Early the nextmorning they were driven to Kopyczyrice. A few days later, an ordercame to Kopyczyrice that the Jews were to be allowed to returnhome. Eight days later there was another command that the Jewsmust leave Skala. Eventually, they were permitted to live where theywished but no closer than eight kilometers from the border. Not asingle Jew was left in Skala. They dispersed wherever they could,leaving their possessions hidden with the Christian inhabitants ofSkala. For a year, they suffered and struggled, living in nearbytowns and villages. All suffered great tribulations, including acholera epidemic in which many people died, among them severalhundred Skala Jews.After about a year, an order was issued permitting the Jews toreturn to Skala. Upon return they found that many Jewish homeswere destroyed. The Russian soldiers simply took the houses apart,removing the doors, windows and floors and other flammablematerial for heating. The tin roofs were taken to be used in thetrenches. Naturally, everyone undertook to repair the brokenhouses as much as possible, to make them habitable. Some of thetin roofs were retrieved from Ukrainian peasants with the help ofthe police. Thus have the Skala Jews returned to their former homesin the nearby village of Ivankow.Russian Rule and Jewish Livelihood51The Town on the River ZbruczAs indicated above, Skala was not occupied by the Russian militarybut by administrative civil servants. There were a few Russianpolicemen, an “Uriadnik” (chief) and a representative of the districtoffice in Borszczow. The representative was named Fidler, who wasnot a bad man. When a Jew befriended him, he used to do favorsfor the Jew.At the beginning of the war it was difficult to earn a living.However, as time passed, people adjusted to the constraints.Whoever had a store could profitably sell his merchandise. RussianJews came across and paid gold and silver for every rag until thegoods were all gone. So people traveled from Skala to other townsand bought whatever goods were available. They profited from thegoods without even looking at them since the buyer took the goodselsewhere and sold them again at a profit. There were cases whereworthless goods were bought and a profit of 25-30 percent wasrealized. In one case someone bought boxes of candles and the lastbuyer, who actually opened the boxes, discovered that the candleshad no wicks.There was a lot of business at the time with cigarette papers. InAustria, there was no shortage of cigarette paper and it was of goodquality; but there was also cigarette paper of poor quality that noone in Austria would look at. It was lying around there for years onstore shelves and got moldy. In Russia, there was always a scarcity ofcigarette paper. When the border was opened, cigarette paper wasin great demand and after the merchandise changed hands, witheach person taking a percentage of the profits, those poor qualitygoods were discarded in Russia.There were similar cases involving other goods. For example,small files for sharpening straw-cutters were in great demand inRussia and were not available anywhere, so shoemaker’s files andlarge files were bought, but discarded in the end. To make a livingJews traded in everything. Russian goods were taken to the fronts.Flour, sugar, salt, matches, tobacco, and other goods from Russiawere brought back to Galicia. Later, when the front moved andGalicia was freed from Russian occupation, various war goods were52Skala on the River Zbruczimported from Austria, such as paper suspenders, paper purses,paper ribbons, various broach pins, beads and similar items thatwere sold to Russia, part of which was occupied by Austria as far asOdessa. The goods were transported to Odessa and to Uman. Jewscame from Kiev, Berditchev and many other cities and towns tobuy up the goods to earn a percentage of profits. There wereRussian Jews who came and said, “I have a thousand rubles. Preparefor me a package of merchandise worth a thousand rubles.” All thishappened at the end of the war when the Jews had returned toSkala.Regimes Change: Ukrainians, Bolsheviks, PolesWith the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire, a Ukrainian(West Ukrainian) nationalistic, supposedly democratic state wasestablished in East Galicia. This happened at the end of the FirstWorld War in 1918.Jews suffered a great deal in that Ukraine. Since the Jews neededto earn a living and there was a scarcity of kerosene in Russia andGalicia, they began to trade in kerosene. They formed partnershipswith local Ukrainians because, to get the kerosene, it had to bebrought from Boryslaw or Peczenizyn. Since one could not travelwithout a permit from the Ukrainian government, the Ukrainiansobtained travel permits in their name in order to bring kerosene.Such permits were obtained from the Ukrainian Ministry inStanislawow and the kerosene was brought in by the tankful.It is difficult to describe how the kerosene was brought to Skalaby train. All the train stations en route were in great disarray. Everystation official had his own authority. Freight trains did not run atall, only passenger trains, and even those did not have a regularschedule. When you had to attach a tanker to a passenger train, youhad to pay the stationmaster, who ordered the tanker to be attachedto the passenger train and then he permitted it to pass. Well, theengine driver also had to make a living. He argued that the load wastoo heavy for his engine to haul, and he too had to be paid. Then,53The Town on the River Zbruczat each station they had to make sure no one was detaching thetanker and leaving it at the station, for such things did indeedhappen. Then you had to travel to search for the tanker, pay thestationmaster and the engine driver again, to make sure the tankercontinued to its destination.At that time, the train station in Skala was not yet functional, sothe tankers were brought as far as Terezin (a station before Skala).Russian Jews came to Terezin with horse-drawn wagons and barrelsand took the kerosene to Russia. The business was very profitable.When the kerosene trade ended, the merchants had so much moneythey did not know what to do with it. Eventually, the money lostits value and only a small part of it was saved.After a brief military skirmish between the newly establishedPolish state and the West Ukrainian “Republic,” Polish troopsoccupied the entire area and Ukraine ceased to exist.The entry of Polish troops into Galicia brought with it a wave ofsuffering and sorrow for the Jews: persecutions, attacks, a pogromin Lemberg and in other places. Jews were rounded up and forcedto do hard labor. Jewish beards and “peyos” were cut. Jews werethrown from moving trains and subjected to other violence. Allthese violent acts were perpetuated by “Hallertczyks,” soldiers fromthe district of Poznan under the command of the Polish GeneralHaller.Eventually, after protests, interventions from abroad andinvestigatory commissions, the situation improved to some degree.In the summer of 1920, during the offensive of Leon Trotskyand Tuchachevsky against Poland and Galicia, Skala experienced aBolshevik occupation. The occupiers were a ragged, undisciplinedbunch that caused the people a lot of pain and suffering, butfortunately they remained in Skala for only seven weeks. TheBolsheviks conducted so-called confiscations, which meant theytook away anything that pleased them or came within their reach.The “Revolutionary” fighters for a new social order first of all tookaway from the people by any means without excuse or pity.54Skala on the River ZbruczOnce again, Galicia, including Skala, became part of the Polishstate. Deeply-rooted Polish anti-Semitism raged again, overtly andcovertly. However, Jews made every effort to adapt. In Skala, someJews tried to do business, becoming small shopkeepers andengaging in trade. Some became involved in local manufacturing ofhides, linens, pelts, boots and traveled with this merchandise to sellit at fairs in nearby cities, including the famous annual fair atLashkowce.Due to the heavy taxes the Polish regime imposed on Jews, therepressions, and all sorts of exclusionary anti-Semitic laws, thepolitical and economic situation of the Jews deteriorated from dayto day. In Skala, for example (just as in other cities) the number ofpoor continued to grow steadily relative to the few wealthier Jewsand many struggled to make ends meet.Jewish students had little hope for a better future in Poland,given the anti-Semitic exclusion policies in the Polish universities.They looked for ways to immigrate to North and South Americaand also to the Land of Israel.In spite of everything, there was a very rich and vibrant culturaland social life in Skala and elsewhere in Galicia with political partiesand secular and Hassidic groups. Jews refused to despair andmaintained their station in life and their self-respect to the extentpossible.The Beginning of Zionism in Skala(A Grandfather Arrests a Grandson. ..)Until the beginning of the 20th century, Zionism had practically nopresence in Skala, a pious Hassidic city. Then, all of a sudden, thefirst Zionist orator appeared in Skala. A grandson of Wolf ItsikFreifelder (the deputy-mayor of Skala), Yisroel Leib Freifelder, whowas by then a self-conscious Zionist, involved himself with thenewly arrived orator and tried to help him.There was excitement among the pious townsfolk. Some tried toimpede the speaker and break up the meeting. What did the55The Town on the River ZbruczHassidim and the opponents of the Zionists do? Since the oratordid not have a permit from the district government to speak at apublic meeting, Wolf Itsik Freifelder sent the municipal guard,Moshe Yonah Ratses, to arrest his grandson Yisroel Leib and placehim in the municipal jail where he was kept overnight and thenfreed in the morning.Gradually, a Zionist Society was established that developed intoa thriving and dynamic organization, despite the strong oppositionof Hassidic circles.Around 1908-09 a Hebrew school was established in Skala, firstwith local teachers, then two teachers from out of town: one namedTennenblat and the second, Siwak. The opponents of the schoolcried foul, claiming that the children were being led off the“righteous path.” Nonetheless, the school grew and prospered.FlG. 18: Skala Jews celebrating in 1920 the anniversary of the BalfourDeclaration favoring the establishment of a Jewish National Home in Palestine.During the First World War, Zionist activity was weakened;Skala was occupied by the Russians until August 1917. After thewar, Zionist activity slowly resumed, and the Zionists decided to56Skala on the River Zbrucztake over leadership of the community. This was, at the time, theaim of all Zionists in Galicia and a difficult struggle ensued with theHassidim, who had full control over the communities of Galiciaand ruled them with a high hand.Thanks primarily to four people at the head of the Zionistorganization in Skala—Yisroel Leib Freifelder, Moshe Feuerstein,Motie Weidberg, and Ben Zion Fiderer-a Zionist communitycouncil was elected on the first vote.With the help of the American Joint Distribution Committee,the Zionist organization in Skala built a large, impressiveCommunity Center call “Beth Am.” The most active person in theconstruction of Beth Am was Moshe Weidberg of blessed memory.That Community Center housed meeting rooms for the HebrewTarbut School, the library, and a large hall for public lectures,celebrations and the Zionist Youth Clubs.Community Institutions and ActivistsAt about that time, a Free Loan Society and a people’s bank wereestablished in Skala. The founders and leaders of the twoinstitutions were the four above-mentioned activists: Yisroel LeibFreifelder, Moshe Feuerstein, Motie Weidberg, and Ben ZionFiderer.At the outset, the Free Loan Society was funded with moneycollected in Skala. Later, the “Skala Relief Committee” in NewYork helped. The Free Loan Society provided interest-free loans forbusiness people with limited resources.The bank was established with the help of the American “Joint,”which at the beginning provided little money. After a year, when anoutside comptroller checked the books and saw the bank was beingrun properly, they began to send more money, until it became animportant financial institution in town and many Skala Jewsbenefited from it. Jews could get loans up to 600 zlotys per person,a considerable amount at that time. Naturally, everyone had toprovide two guarantors to safeguard the money. The interest paid57The Town on the River Zbruczby lenders was minimal, just enough to cover the expenses for officerent, the bookkeeper’s salary, etc. The bank functioned until theSecond World War. Every year the accounts were audited andbookkeepers always found everything in order.FlG. 19: The office and administration of the “Gemilat ChassadimFund” (Free Loan Society-early 30’s) Seated left to right: Eliezer Fisch,administrator; Ben-Zion Fiderer and Israel-Leib Freifelder. Standingin the middle: Motie Weidherg. Other two men not identified.At the beginning, some people in town thought it was a privatebank established by its founders. Velvel Wasserman tried toestablish a competitive bank and approached the “Joint” requestingfunding for his enterprise. The “Joint” people did not understandwhat was going on, as they knew a bank had already beenestablished in Skala. They secretly sent someone to Skala toinvestigate. Wasserman and his partners (I don’t remember whothey were) were turned down, and that was the end of thecompetition.58Skala on the River ZbruczThere was in Skala an old, run-down bathhouse. Most of itsbathtubs were wooden, though a few were made of tin. If someonewanted a bath it was made in the steam room, and Mykola (thegentile bath attendant) was the only employee. He would carry theheated water from the water boiler and pour it into the tub. Peopleundressed in a cold room and left their clothing on a bench. Sometied up their clothes with twine; the smart ones brought a bag withthem to hold their clothes. Some hung their shirts on rafters in thesteam room so they could scald in the heat. Until the First WorldWar, the bathhouse attendant was Hirsch-Wolf, a fine andrespectable man. The entrance fee on Fridays was six groshen(cents) and a rub-down with a birch-broom was 10 groshen (cents).After the First World War, the entire structure was rebuilt and amodern public bath erected with the help of the “Joint” andcontributions by local Jews. The new modern bathhouse includedcabinets and porcelain tubs, first- and second-class steam rooms,drawers for clothing, sofas to rest on, and a tile mikva (ritual bath).Some Jews complained that the rebuilt bathhouse had no rafters tohang a dirty shirt on.In general, that is how Skala on the River Zbrucz in easternGalicia looked before the great conflagration of the Holocaust. Itwas a colorful, creative Jewish community. During the peacefulyears under the Austrian monarchy, before the First World War, itwas a prosperous community that enjoyed freedom and equal rightsaccording to the constitution.Under Polish rule after the collapse of the Austrian Empire, therewas a noticeable decline, including the spread of bitter anti-Semitism. Nevertheless, the Jews of Skala continued to exist eventhough many faced serious economic, political and social problems.This is how it was, until the outbreak of the Second World War,when the Nazi occupiers and their Ukrainian collaborators, maytheir names be blotted out, destroyed the community and cut offthe lives of the Jews. May the memory of our holy martyrs besanctified forever.59II. THE HOLOCAUSTFlG. 20: Memorial tablet to the martyrs ofSkala (and environs)dedicated in 1976at the cemetery in Holon, IsraelThe Destruction of SkalaGedalia LachmanFlG. 21: Gedalia LachmanTwo dates are indelibly inscribed in the history of Polish Jewry:On September 1, 1939 the Germans invaded Western Poland;on June 22, 1941 the Nazis invaded Eastern Poland, after 21months of Soviet rule in that part of the country.The conquest of Skala on July 8, 1941 by the Hungarian Armywas preceded by two weeks of fear, anxiety mingled with groundlesshopes and expectations of miracles that would never occur. Amidtearful scenes of parting, dozens of young men were drafted into theSoviet Army. Their families sensed that they would never see theirsons again. Officials of the local Soviet Administration left thetown. They were joined by those local residents who had servedunder them in official capacities or who had supported the regimeand now feared the vengeance of the Germans and the Ukrainians.In the absence of any official authorities, underworld elements cameout in the open and looted warehouses, the brewery, and otherabandoned property. In their wake came the supposedly decentThe Destruction of SkalaUkrainian peasants, who carried off anything that fell into theirhands. Fearful, the Jews withdrew unto themselves and hid in theirhouses. In place of the Reisoviet (Regional Soviet Council); a localcouncil of Ukrainian notables was established and its memberslooked forward to the arrival of the German “liberators” in order toreceive their official appointments.Skala was first occupied by Hungarian troops, who were thenallies of the Germans. Immediately after the Hungarians arrived,trouble began. They hated the Ukrainians but utilized their servicesin order to round up the Jews for forced labor. An order was issuedwhereby all able-bodied Jews had to report daily for the dispositionof various tasks, primarily the reconstruction of the bridge over theriver Zbrucz, which had been destroyed by the retreating SovietArmy. On July 25, the Hungarians ordered 15 Jews, led by RabbiYehuda Drimmer, to appear before them. The names of the 15 hadprobably been supplied by the Ukrainians who knew the town’sJewish leaders quite well. The Hungarians demanded that the Jewsdeliver 50 kg. of leather for shoe soles, 10 kg, of boot leather, 10pairs of boots, 10 kg, of coffee, 10 kg, of pepper, and otherprovisions, all within two hours. Hostages were taken, and Jewishrepresentatives were informed that the lives of the hostages wouldbe forfeited if the demands were not met. The hostages wereordered to dig their own graves. Quickly the Jews proved that theywould be responsible for one another. They voluntarily gatheredand delivered the requested ransom.During the last week of July, the Jews of Skala witnessed aterrible tragedy. After the dissolution of Czechoslovakia the Trans-Carpathian region of Ruthenia had been ceded to Hungary.According to the Trianon Agreement the Jews from this area wereno longer considered Hungarian citizens. Thousands of Jews, youngand old alike, were expelled from their towns and villages. Theywere herded by the Hungarian soldiers over the former Polish-Soviet border, across the river Zbrucz. On the way Ukrainianpeasants and policemen abused them, stole the rest of theirpossessions, and drove them mercilessly in the direction of62Skala on the River ZbruczKamenetz Podolsk-in the Soviet Ukraine, a distance of 20 to 30kilometers from Skala. The Jews of Skala mobilized to aid theirbrothers in distress. They collected food and clothing, and bribedthe soldiers to give the exiles a brief respite from the march whilethey remained in Skala. During this rest period hot food wasprovided, urgently needed aid was given to the injured, and cartswere rented from peasants to facilitate the transport of the exiles totheir destination. Uziel Stock, a powerful Jew in both body andspirit, offered significant help to these exiled Jews. He was one oftwo or three Jews who possessed a horse and wagon which he usedto collect and bring food to the refugees. He ferried the elderly andthe ailing across the border and defended the Hungarian Jews fromthe assaults of Ukrainian hoods. The expulsions continued, and formany days refugees poured through Skala.In the midst of this suffering, shocking incidents began to takeplace in Skala itself. A young boy from Budapest begged theHungarian soldiers to treat the Jews with more compassion. As apunishment for his audacity, he was tied upside down to a tree inthe town square for two hours. From time to time he fainted, butthe soldiers only poured water over him and continued to abusehim. Another victim was an aged rabbi who had used the fewmoments of rest for prayer. When the order to resume the marchwas given, the Rabbi did not move immediately. He was recitingthe Sbemoneh Esrei prayer. The Hungarians beat him brutally. Onlythe imploring of his daughter and the offer of a bribe secured hislife.The fate of the exiles was sealed when the Germans relieved theHungarians of their authority over the entire region. The Germansordered approximately 3,000 Hungarian Jews held in Orynin togather in a field under the pretext that they would be returned totheir homes. Most of them were murdered by volleys of machineguns. Only a few escaped this slaughter. Three young survivorsreached Skala and told of this massacre perpetrated by a unit of theinfamous Einsatzgruppe. For a time the three stayed in Skala. Whenthe danger intensified with the approaching Holocaust, the Judenrat63The Destruction of Skalaobtained forged documents for these three which enabled them toreturn to Hungary. They hoped to go to an area familiar to themwhich was not under the direct control of the Nazis. In fact, allthree survived. Today, two are in Israel: Zvi Zelkowitz is a memberof Moshav Nordiya and Ya’acov Katz lives in Acre. The thirdsurvivor lives in New York.IIThe hostility of the Hungarian regime in Skala was mild comparedto the one which followed it. Even the Hungarians, among whomwere sensitive and civilized people, had hinted that we would longfor them after their departure. At the end of July, the GermanArmy and civilian administrators arrived. The Zollgrenzscbutz-tbeborder and customs police-was stationed in Skala, although theSoviet-Polish border had been moved far to the east as a result ofsuccessful German military conquests. The soldiers of this unitpatrolled the old border, the town, and the nearby rural areas. Theheadquarters of the civilian administration were located in the greatestate of the Count Goluchowski, who had already fled during theSoviet occupation. The Germans established a Liegenscbaftsver-waltung (Land Estates Administration) in the Count’s castle. Itemployed Ukrainian peasants and imposed forced labor upon theJews, whom the Judenrat had to deliver on a daily basis. Like theofficers of the Zollgrenzscbuiz the German civil administrators alsodemanded whatever goods and supplies came to mind. TheZollgrenzscbutz included several officers who “distinguished” them¬selves by terrorizing the Jews of Skala. The senior German officerwas Major Braun. He was rarely seen in the streets and maintainedvery little contact with the Judenrat. Most of the time he occupiedhimself with playing his violin. Eyebrows rose when he invitedMendel Bosyk, the talented violinist from our community, toaccompany him. Braun’s attitude toward the suffering of the town’sJews may be described as ambivalent. He personally did not utilizehis authority to our detriment, but he also did not prevent the64Skala on the River Zbruczofficers under his command from abusing and persecuting the Jews.Braun’s deputy was Captain Hera, and it was he who terrorizedthe Judenrat and the Jews. This cruel and ruthless officer served aslocal commander and governed all aspects of our daily lives. Herahad, however, no authority over our deaths. That was the domainof the Gestapo, commanded by the Judenreferent (officer in chargeof Jews), Kelner. Hera excelled primarily as a looter andblackmailer. He possessed neither conscience nor feeling. Duringfrequent outbursts of anger, he would beat his victims cruelly,occasionally using the butt of his pistol. Other officers of theZollgrenzscbutz infamous for their abominable behavior were ArthurEngel, Wilhelm Feiffer, and Grauer. Engel frequently engaged inopenly looting Jewish property and, usually accompanied by Feiffer,was a “permanent guest” in Jewish homes. While Engel regularlyused dogs and a whip, or his fists, Feiffer was a rather light-heartedsoul who never actually touched anyone. He was just a petty thiefwho desired everything he saw. All these thieves diligently remittedthe properties they stole to their families in Germany. The Jewswho worked in the back yard of the Zollgrenzscbutz in their horsestables, cowshed and chicken houses, and as domestics in theirapartments-often prepared the boxes for packing and shipping.They knew that Hera lived in Chemnitz, Saxony; Engel was awelder in Juterbog; Wagner was a resident of Troppau; and Grauerwas a pharmacist from Baden. Grauer was a violent and dangerousgiant of a man who, for some unknown reason, was in the habit ofattacking tall, sturdy Jews. Once he attacked Motel Goldstein forno apparent reason. The enlisted men followed the example of theseofficers. Those who were not evil were simply not interested in ourfate. Only a few treated “their Jews” who worked on the farm of theZoll-grenzschutz in a humane manner.Even before the Germans were entrenched in Skala the firstvictim fell-ironically, not at the hands of the Germans. Oneevening a hand grenade was thrown into the house of DavidHersher, who was my neighbor in Stara-Skala. His wife Rosa, neeWeintraub, was killed. The murderers were Julian Struczinski, a65The Destruction of Skalayoung Ukrainian who lived next door, and Milko Skoroda, ablacksmith who lived across the street.IllImmediately upon the entry of the Germans into town, the Judenrat1was established. The local commander received from the Ukrainiansa list of all those Jews who were known as leaders in thecommunity. These people were invited to the commander’sheadquarters. Abraham Bilgoraj (the only surviving member of theSkala Judenrat) described this fateful meeting. The commanderwelcomed the Jews with wild shouts, ordered them to stand by thedoor, and informed them that no mercy could be expected from theGermans and as long as they were useful to the German people theywould live; otherwise, they would die. Bilgoraj was appointedsecretary of the Jewish Council” that was ordered to convene withintwo hours. The group of local leaders met at the house of the young1 Original Editor’s note: At a special symposium of Yad Vashem held in Jerusalem in spring1977, Professor Raul Hilberg defined the character and the functions of the Judenrat asfollows:“Jewish Councils established under German authority were agencies literally chargedwith responsibility for carrying out the German will. In German eyes, the councils were aninstrument to be used in the implementation of a policy in the course of which Jews’ life wasfirst constricted and then extinguished. The councils moved Jews into Jewish houses andJewish districts, registered the inhabitants, supplied forced Jewish labor for Germanenterprises and projects, expended resources and money for ghetto walls, confiscated Jewishproperty for German use, and provided statistics required by German offices. There wasnothing subtle or unconscious in these overt acts, which often were demanded of the council inperemptory fashion, and which were to be performed promptly and with exactitude.The councils, however, were not only tools of the German administration. They assumed thatthey had to care for the Jewish population, especially its most immediate needs for food,space, education, or health. In fact, the Jewish leaders under the Nazis were not personalitiesnewly arrived at the field of action; frequently, they were the prewar chairmen ofcommunities, or deputies and stand-ins for those who had fled from or “deserted” their posts.In many cases, the councils strove to do what they could in nightmarish situation ofuncertainties, violence, and acute shortage. Their principal problem, however, was the basiccontradiction between Jewish hopes and German commands. Ultimately, any benefitsprovided by the councils for the community were short-lived whereas those measures-howeverinnocuous-that had to be taken in compliance with German directives were integral steps in a’’destruction process that spelled out eventual doom for the entire community.66Skala on the River ZbruczRabbi Yehuda Drimmer, and from their ranks seven members ofthe Judenrat were chosen: Mordechai (Motio) Weidberg aschairman, Rabbi Drimmer, Meyer-Zusla Tabak, Nisan Olinger,Joseph Yaget, Abraham Bilgoraj, and Eliezer Fish as secretary.The members of the Judenrat appeared before the Germancommander, who defined their duties, presented his demands, andimposed the first edicts on the Jewish community: the Judenratwould immediately organize an Ordnungsdienst, a sort of police thatwould enforce the instructions of the Judenrat; every Jew had towear a white armband with a blue Jewish star on his right arm andanyone failing to comply with this order would die. Quotas set bythe commander regarding forced labor were to be met on a dailybasis. Furniture, linens, kitchen utensils, and china had to besupplied immediately and everything was to be of the finest quality.The Judenrat would meet these demands in their entirety andwithout delay. Failure to do so would most assuredly result indeath.In order for the German administrators to know the precisenumber of workers, the Judenrat was required to prepare and submita list of the entire Jewish population of the town which at the timenumbered 1,424 souls. These Jews continued to live in their homes,in the center of town, on the main streets and side streets, and evenin the rural suburb of Stara-Skala (Old Skala). No ghetto or Jewisharea (Judenviertel') was established. However, an order was issuedwhich forbade Jews to enter non-Jewish areas. In August 1942,Jewish homes were marked with a large Star of David drawn on theouter wall or hung in a window, for identification purposes.Thus, the Judenrat began to carry out the orders of the Zoll-grenzschutz Commander. In one day he was supplied with all thearticles and goods he requested. It should be noted that the majorityof the community understood the wisdom of giving up these goodsvoluntarily. However, as the blackmail and demands increased, theJudenrat was faced with opposition from the community andturned to the Ordnungsdienst to confiscate the goods and articlesrequired by the Germans. The Judenrat appointed a “Finance67The Destruction of SkalaCommittee” to assess the financial capabilities of every Jew in Skala,and on this basis taxes were imposed on everyone in order to createa fund to pay for the confiscated articles and goods. In this way, theburden was distributed equally among the entire community. AfterPassover in 1942, Max Sternberg, Yehiel Schwartzbach and SammyHescheles were co-opted as members of the Finance Committee.The Germans’ relentless use of forced labor threatened theincreasing instability of the community. The Judenrat was ordered tosupply 40 to 50 workers every day for the Zollgrenzschutz farm andresidences and nearly twice that number for the agricultural estate.The fear of forced labor that prevailed in the community was dueprimarily to the abuse and severe beatings by the guards whichaccompanied the work. Quite often, people hid to avoid the work.When the quota of laborers was not met, Hera and his soldierswould shower blows on the members of the Judenrat and theordnungsdienst. The Judenrat was thus caught between the threats ofthe Germans, on the one hand, and the suspicion and enmity oftheir own community, on the other. It was a long time before thepeople understood that there would be no escape from the demandsof the Germans.IVIn the beginning of October 1941 the regional headquarters of theGestapo was established in the city of Czortkow. One of the SSmurderers was appointed Judenreferent for the entire district.Simultaneously, a German civilian administration began to operate,and at their command a regional Judenrat was established inCzortkow. The latter’s primary task was the imposition andcollection of taxes to meet the Nazi demands. The mass murder ofdozens of Jewish intellectuals in Czortkow caused great distress. Itwas reported that they had been arrested, transported to a nearbyforest, and executed en masse before a large burial pit. The regionalJudenrat was also summarily executed and a new Judenrat wasappointed and ordered to fulfill the demands of the murderers with68Skala on the River Zbruczmore efficiency. Jews who lived in rural areas were expelled fromtheir homes; poor and empty-handed, they joined their brethren inthe neighboring towns. Their property and possessions had beentaken over by Ukrainians who had collaborated with the Germans.In this way the population of Skala swelled to 1,550 souls. The Jewswho had joined us in April of 1942 came from the rural villages ofBurdiakowce, Losiacz, Gusztyn, Cygany and Turylcze. Some Jewsfrom the villages of Muszkatowka Wolkowce, Niwra, andGermakowka also came to Skala. As the town’s population grew,the means of livelihood shrank. The continued blackmail emptiedthe coffers of even the affluent, and starvation began to afflict thepoor.At the end of November 1941 the German Arbeitsamt (LaborOffice) ordered that a list be compiled of all Jewish men andwomen between the ages of 16 and 60. Each Judenrat was forced tosupply a contingent of people for forced labor at the camp of Borki-Wielkie near Tarnopol. Ostensibly, they were to be relieved everysix weeks by another group. The Judenrat of Skala tried to evade thisedict and argued that all able-bodied men in town were alreadylocally employed at the farm of the Zollgrenzschutz or on the estate.The arguments went unheeded however, and 50 people wereselected by the Judenrat and sent to Czortkow on December 2,1941.At this time, there was still an atmosphere of gullibility ornaivete that pervaded the town. People didn’t know what wasmeant by a labor camp. Thus, though people did not wish to go,they could be coaxed into volunteering. The fifty who prepared togo to Czortkow were under the impression they would have towork and then be free to go when their replacements arrived. Asthey approached their destination, the fifty met the laborers fromother towns who advised them of the conditions of the forced labor.They suddenly knew that they were in danger and began to run inall directions. Twenty-two people from Skala also fled and hid. TheJudenrat was ordered to find the escapees and return them to the69The Destruction of Skalacamp; otherwise the Gestapo would go after them. The situationwas serious, but fortunately, a tragedy was averted.Along with their brethren from other towns, twenty-eight Jewsfrom Skala were imprisoned in Borki-Wielkie. These prisoners wereassigned terribly difficult tasks. It was winter and they worked up totheir knees in mud building a roadbed for railroad tracks. The workwas usually accompanied by severe beatings, torture and murderperpetrated by Ukrainian policemen whose cruelty knew nobounds. The terrible conditions of starvation and dissipatingstrength threatened the lives of the camp inmates. Their familiespleaded with the Judenrat to save them but the long road towardtheir release was full of obstacles. The Judenrat sent an emissary toBorki-Wielkie to establish some sort of contact with the campcommander. During his stay there he was able to help the needyand intervene occasionally on their behalf. Most essential was thedistribution of regular weekly parcels of food, clothing and drugs.This actually saved lives. At the same time, all means wereemployed to secure the prisoners’ release. Even as these efforts wenton, the camp in Borki-Wielkie claimed its first victims from ourtown. Moshe Stock, son of Uziel Stock, was killed in a work-relatedaccident. His father, daring as usual, was the one who was trans¬porting food parcels to Borki-Wielkie from their families in Skala.When he arrived at the camp, Stock discovered his son’s death. Heremoved his son’s body from the camp and alone in the darktraveled over dangerous, snow-covered roads to bring his son hometo Skala for a proper Jewish burial.The community had barely recovered from this blow whenanother edict was issued in February 1942. It demanded an ad¬ditional shipment of slave-laborers for the Borki-Wielkie camp.This time the Judenrat knew that in spite of threats and warnings noone would volunteer to go. Everyone had seen that those in the firstgroup had fled and nothing had happened to them. The Judenrattried to bribe the Arbeitsinspektor (labor inspector) into canceling theedict, but all efforts failed. At the command of the Nazis and withthe aid of the Ornungsdienst, the Ukrainian police first seized Jews70Skala on the River Zbruczfrom their regular jobs and later raided Jewish homes, seizinganyone they could lay their hands on. A few families of thosecaptured bribed Ukrainian policemen and were able to secure theirrelease on the spot. But the majority was transported under armedguard to the regional concentration center for forced labor inBorszczow. On the way a few more prisoners escaped, but 18 menwere eventually sent to Borki-Wielkie. The Nazi authorities werenot satisfied with this number and demanded still more people forforced labor. Fear gripped the community, but at the last momentthe regional Arbeitsinspektor was transferred and for the time beingthe edict was postponed.The winter of 1941-42 brought with it another edict: All winterclothing made of fur was to be requisitioned and anyone evadingthe edict would be put to death. Some dared to hide their furs withUkrainian acquaintances in the mistaken hope that at the end oftheir tribulations the furs would be returned. Other valuables werealso hidden with gentiles for the “time being” -their owners werekilled and the gentiles inherited everything. For some Ukrainians,the Biblical saying “you murdered and also inherited” actually cametrue. In this manner the difficult winter passed-the Jews of Skalafroze, starved, and trembled with fear, but the spring would bringeven more horrifying troubles.VOn April 2, 1942, the first day of Passover, all the Judenrats wereordered to compile lists of men between the ages of 12 and 60. Allthose on the list were then ordered to report to Borszczow thatsame day in order to receive official “identity papers.” (The Naziswere notorious for planning their most loathsome deeds to coincidewith Jewish holidays.) The order applied also to the members of theJudenrat and the Ordnungsdienst. This fact, and the scope of theundertaking, aroused the suspicion of many, but disobediencemeant the death penalty.71The Destruction of SkalaOn the morning of April 2, hundreds of people, most on foot,the elderly riding in carts, set out in the direction of Borszczow adistance of 15 kilometers. (As the journey was necessary for thepreservation of life, the Rabbi sanctioned the travel on a holiday.)At the designated time and place the first 160 people arrived andwere received by the Ukrainian police. Those who had assembledwere directed to large halls where “clerks” were waiting to processthem. But when the Jews from all the neighboring towns arrived,hell broke loose. They were surrounded by Gestapo henchmen andUkrainian police who, with the aid of dogs, brutally herded theJews to the railway station and from there to the Borki-Wielkielabor camp. Among the prisoners were 84 Jews from Skala-arelatively small number compared to the other towns. Those whohad lagged behind were lucky. Thanks to Serka Kasierer, the bitternews of their brethren’s fate reached them before they arrived inBorszczow. This brave woman had been sent by Abraham Bilgorajto warn the latecomers to flee and save themselves. Indeed, we fledin terror through the fields and forests and reached our homes tired,depressed and mournful over the tragic fate of our brothers whowere dragged into bondage so ironically during the Passoverholiday, the festival of freedom.Deep concern and additional financial burdens were thus placedon the shoulders of the affected families, the entire community andthe Judenrat. The Judenrat redoubled its efforts to ease the pain andsuffering of the camp inmates by supplying them with basicnecessities and encouragement, but it simply was not in their powerto save them. Chaim Brettler, emissary of the Judenrat, extended hishelp to the camp inmates-by serving for months as the link betweenthe inmates and the Judenrat. He also brought them money, foodand other aid. On several occasions he interceded with the cruelcamp commander on behalf of inmates who were under the threatof death. During this period the Judenrat also succeeded inransoming or exchanging weak inmates for relatives who hadvolunteered to take their places: All this, of course, through hugebribes.72Skala on the River ZbruczAt this time a second innocent victim fell in Skala. A dreamernamed Leib Schechter lived in our town. He was a learned andpious man, but strange in his ways. With the arrival of the Nazis,Schechter began to write letters to the regional authoritiesprotesting the unjust treatment of the Jews. One day an SS mannamed Bretschneider appeared at the Judenrat office and demandedto be taken to Leib Schechter. He took Schechter to a small woodedarea near the cemetery, shot him, and ordered the Ordnungsdienst tobury him. This murderer was arrested several years ago and wasbrought before a court in Mannheim, Germany, but he died in jailbefore the trial could be completed.VIEven under the terrible conditions which pervaded Eastern Europe atthis time, there were still vibrant communal self-help efforts. Oneorganization noted later by Holocaust historians was the “YiddisheSocial Eleinhilf’ (Social Self-Help Organization) which existed inthe areas of the Nazi Conquest outside of eastern Russia. I turnedto the central office of this organization in Crakow where a fellowtownsman named Zvi Zimmerman (destined to be a member of theIsraeli Knesset) worked and, as a result, I was appointed to head thisorganization in Skala. The Judenrat supported this activity, and itsfirst tasks were the creation of a public kitchen in the basement ofthe “Port Arthur Synagogue,” distributing bread daily to the poorand collecting clothing for those interned at Borki Wielkie. Helpingme in my work were Chaim Hirsch and Chaim Meiselman.Initially, it seemed that we were to play an important part m theattempt to save our people from cold and starvation. But our effortswere not crowned with notable success, as a new outbreak ofbarbarity occurred in the middle of May 1942.The J udenrat received another order to send men to the forcedlabor camps, and it was clearly understood by all that this time theJudenrat would not be able to comply. The people were no longernaive or gullible. The J udenrat informed the commander of the73The Destruction of SkalaZollgrenzscbutz that they could not meet the quota. Thecommander ordered all members of the Judenrat the Ordnungsdienstand a few others to appear at his headquarters. About 50 of usassembled there. Suddenly, we were surrounded by armed guardsand marched to the City Hall. Chaim Yaget, who had replaced hisailing father Joseph Yaget in the Judenrat, attempted to escape andHera shot him in the leg. Afterwards, in spite of his wound, thisbrave young man continued to organize food shipments to thecamps. Our group was kept in a large room of the City Hall.During the night several of our number escaped. In the morningHera took a head count of prisoners, freed about 30 and sent 20,including myself and my comrades from the “Yiddishe SocialeEleinhilf’ to the Gestapo prison in Czortkow. The commander ofthe prison, an SS officer named Weber, treated us to murderousbeatings with a large wooden stick. I absorbed most of the blows, asI was chosen by my fellow inmates as their spokesman because ofmy knowledge of the German language.For a few days we worked at back-breaking labor in the prisonyard where two SS men, Martin and Kochman, ran their own reignof terror. Kochman had a huge dog named Bullo; whenever hepointed his finger at one of us, the dog would leap at the poorprisoner’s face. Martin had a different "hobby”: he would make uslie down on the floor and dance with his heavy boots on our backs.There were 120 Russian prisoners-of-war also incarcerated. Most ofthem had been commissars and many appeared to be Jewish. Everyday they were compelled to walk in a circle with their hands overtheir heads for up to 10 hours. Those who failed to do so, or whofainted, were killed by the Ukrainian policemen with rifle butts orstomped to death by heavy boots. Within a few weeks they all died.The Judenrat made desperate attempts to ease our sufferings bysending us food and by interceding on our behalf at the regionalJudenrat level. Through bribes and the payment of a huge ransom,II people were saved from the Gestapo prison. The rest of ourgroup and Jews from other towns were shipped off to a labor camp.74Skala on the River ZbruczAt the end of June, a new edict was issued. The Judenrat wasordered to send 75 young women to a labor camp near the town ofJagelnica. The Judenrat argued that there were no women availableto work outside the town and only 6 women were provided insteadof the 75 that had been requested. Hera organized a night raid androunded up more women than were originally required. Againnegotiations had to be conducted and again a ransom paid. In spiteof these efforts, 20 young women were eventually sent to the laborcamp.VIIOn January 20, 1942, under the chairmanship of ReinhardHeidrich the Wansee conclave convened. The minutes of thismeeting were kept by Adolf Eichmann. Unknown to the free world,this group drew up plans for the "final solution” of the Jewishproblem. The first stage of the final solution, due to begin duringthe summer of 1942, was the destruction of one-half of the Jewishpopulation-those who had been crowded into ghettos and Jewishareas for more than a year. At the same time, the labor camps wereto be kept fully supplied with manpower and new labor camps wereto be built.These two stages operated simultaneously: one for forced laborand one for death. Then the Arbeitsamt registered the Jews anddivided them into two categories: those fit for work and those whowere not fit. Accordingly, all men between the ages of 16 and 60were ordered to appear in Czortkow to receive identification cardssigned by the Gestapo’s Judenreferent. As usual, the Jews ofCzortkow were the first to fulfill this demand. Led by the membersof the Judenrat and other institutions, they appeared before theauthorities on August 18, 1942. Some of them received the“redeeming” documents, but about 200 others were sent to thelabor camp at Kamionka near Tarnopol. The Judenrats of all thetowns in the district learned from this terrible lesson. A large bribe75The Destruction of Skalasucceeded in having identity papers signed en masse for people whowere supposed to have appeared there in person.Meanwhile, the machine-like efficiency of death deportations,the so-called “actions,” had started to function. Shocking rumorsspread about mass murders in every part of Galicia. During the“action” in Czortkow thousands of Jews were caught and sent infreight trains to unknown destinations. Two names struck fear inthe heart of every Jew: The camp on Janowska Street in Lvov, andthe death camp in Belzec.The head of the “Jewish Section,” the Gestapo officer namedKelner, would often “visit” the Judenrat in Skala and usually leaveladen with valuable articles and gifts that the Jews of the town hadpaid for in blood and money. On September 25, 1942, NisanOlinger, a member of the Judenrat in Skala, delivered a “gift” toKelner in his office in Czortkow, as Kelner had requested. Thatsame afternoon, Kelner himself appeared in the Judenrat office inSkala to make sure the “gift” had been sent to him. While he wasthere, he wanted to know whether Skala could absorb Jews fromneighboring communities. The Judenrat replied that during themonth of March, Jews from neighboring villages had already settledin Skala, and the Jewish area was now severely crowded. Kelnerordered two members of the Judenrat to accompany him on a tourof the Jewish area to verify this report. He also demandedadditional gifts: a large amount of heavy shoe leather and 12 goldcoins. After the tour, Kelner expressed his satisfaction and promisedthe Judenrat that “everything would be all right” (we were informedlater that Kelner had repeated this deceit in every town in the dis¬trict.) Upon his arrival in Czortkow, where Olinger was waiting forhim with the large “gift,” Kelner repeated his promise. Thatevening, when Olinger came home from Czortkow, he reportedKelner’s optimistic words. The “good news” spread through thetown and the Jews naively thought that this time they would beable to celebrate the festival of Succot with relative ease. Many feltso relieved, in fact, they did not take the usual precaution ofsleeping in bunkers or in hiding’ places.76Skala on the River ZbruczThe “action,” began at six o’clock in the morning on Saturday,the first day of Succot, September 26, 1942. We, the few Jewishfamilies still residing in the rural suburb of Stara-Skala, were thefirst to glimpse the impending tragedy. Just before dawn we heardthe muffled roar of automobile motors on the highway betweenSkala and Czortkow which passed near our homes. We had alreadybeen warned by our neighbor Michael Jagendorf, who worked inthe pig sty of the Zollgrenzschutz that something was going to happenthat night. He had been awakened by Wilhelm Feiffer, who haddeveloped a liking for Michael and told him to go immediately tothe farm under the pretext of taking care of the animals. We satnear our windows in the dark and waited. From down the roadcame a long line of vehicles full of armed men. Their headlightswere dimmed and the whole line was moving slowly toward thetown. We fled and hid in nearby fields and bushes, each of us in adifferent spot. (My mother was saved for the time being, but I waslater discovered by Ukrainian policemen who took me, badlybruised and beaten, to the town from which I eventually managedto escape).The town was surrounded by 150 gendarmes of the “Schupo”(Schutz-Polizei), the “Kripo” (Kriminal Polizei), and Ukrainianpolicemen who were led by Kelner and three or four other Gestapoofficers. When they entered the town, Kelner summoned theJudenrat and the Ordnungsdienst and ordered them to accompany themen who were carrying out the “action” and to supervise thecollection of furniture and all movable goods from the raidedapartments. The town was carefully combed from one end to theother. Doors were broken down with axes and poles. Every housewas searched from attic to cellar with the keen attention of huntingdogs. Well-camouflaged bunkers were discovered, and dozens ofpeople removed, beaten and taken to the barracks of the formerPolish Border Guards, now surrounded by a barbed wire fence.(This fence had been erected by the Nazis earlier that spring. Theyhad spread a rumor then that the camp was being prepared forprisoners-of-war or French laborers.) The search parties were77The Destruction of Skalaaccompanied by Ukrainian peasants, who quickly packed the lootinto carts and transported it to improvised warehouses. Ironically,these were the synagogues that had been abandoned for some time.The Ukrainians also looted for themselves. Kelner and two of hisassistants, the Gestapo men Pahl and Frantz, directed the “action.”They acted like wild men-screaming, beating and shooting. Nearly30 people were killed during the “action,” many of them elderly, illor those who attempted to hide or refused to be led like sheep toslaughter. At that time Pahl murdered an old woman who fled intoa cellar of the Judenrat building. Abraham Bilgoraj saw Pahl commitseveral other murders of this nature. (This criminal is being tried inMannheim and the court proceedings have been dragging on forseveral years.) Pahl and his men also conducted brutal body searcheson the prisoners in the barracks and robbed them of any remainingvaluables.The hellish fire of the “action” raged out of control throughoutthe day and into the evening. Only then did the “action” quietdown and a deathly silence came over the town, disturbed by anoccasional shot, the shouts of the murderers as they discoveredsomeone coming out of hiding or the sighs of those languishing inthe barracks behind the barbed wire. It was a clear moonlit night,and heaven looked down on the murder of innocent people and wassilent.... On Sunday, the second day of Succot, the “action”continued but only a few people were found. Our Ukrainianneighbors once more showed their traditional hatred of the Jews,when those who collaborated with the Nazis searched bunkers andturned in those who still hid there.The “action” ended at noon of that Sunday, and the results weredevastating; nearly 700 people were captured or killed, yet Kelner’sappetite was not satisfied, The dead and the living were gatheredand counted, and the Judenrat was ordered to bury the dead in amass grave in the cemetery, At 11 o’clock, a final count was takenby the Nazis. Members of the Judenrat were lined up and informedthat the number of those taken during the action was too small (lessthan 50 percent of the population); therefore, the Judenrat too was78Skala on the River Zbruczto be punished. Rabbi Drimmer, Eliezer Fish, and Meyer-ZusiaTabak were added to the “shipment.” Tabak saved himself bypaying a high ransom. However, Drimmer and Fish and twomembers of the Ordnungsdienst whose behavior did not please Kelnerwere taken away. At noontime hundreds of people of all ages weremarched off to the railway station. Their guards severely abusedthem every step of the way. The Jews were loaded into crowdedfreight cars, 75 to 80 in a car, and transported to a then unknowndestination. After a few days a message was received from theJanowska Camp in Fvov. The prisoners had been taken there andthe “selection” had taken place: the women, the elderly, and thechildren were sent to their death in Belzec and the rest awaited theirfate in Fvov. The death camp of Belzec was shrouded in mystery:very little that went on there filtered out, and no record remained.The Nazis razed the camp to the ground and burned the skeletonsof hundreds of thousands of corpses before the Soviet Armyoccupied the area 10 the summer of 1944. Half of our people fromSkala perished at Belzec. Very few of those transported to Belzecsurvived, except for those who dared to jump off the trains (onewho survived is our fellow townsman, Abraham Brandes-Trasawucki).The tragic news from the Janowska camp was no better. Themen were forced to run up and down a hill carrying loads of bricks.Those who stumbled or fell behind were killed. Rabbi Drimmer,Eliezer Fish, and Joseph Meiselman were among the first to bekilled and the others were murdered later or sent to theextermination camp of Belzec, But, as long as some of our peoplewere still alive in the Janowska camp, they received some aidthrough whatever ways we could devise, A Polish woman whoworked in the camp agreed to pass messages and requests from theinmates to the surviving Jews of Skala. There was also a youngPolish man who, for a price, agreed to bring food once a month tothe same Polish woman, who would then smuggle it, a little at atime, into the camp. It was later learned, from the few whosucceeded in escaping, that these food deliveries sustained many of79The Destruction of Skalaour tortured fellow townsmen who also shared the food theyreceived with others.Several attempts were made to escape from the Janowska camp.Moshe Bilgoraj attempted to escape but was caught by a “Kapo”(camp police) who brought him back to the camp but did not turnhim over to the murderers for immediate execution. He andShlomo Schwartzbach were among the last victims to die in thecamp.VIIIT he “action” ended and half our Jewish community was gone. Theother half were hiding in bunkers, mourning in awful silence,awaiting an unknown fate. Only after a few days had passed did thesurvivors dare to come out of their hiding places in order to pick upthe pieces, to somehow restore their plundered apartments, and toface a life of terrible poverty and decline. After this great tragedy,there was no longer any doubt. More upheavals were ahead, and wewere nearing our end. At the end of the day’s forced labor, some ofour people would lock themselves in their hiding places, or flee to agentile friend’s home for a restless night’s sleep. Others succeeded instaying with their gentile acquaintances for several days andprepared hiding places for themselves should the hour of need ariseagain.The “action” and the labor camps had already destroyed over1,000 souls in the Jewish community of Skala. Very few familieswere spared. The survivors were lonely, broken people: widowers,widows, and orphans who hoped merely to somehow continue theirmiserable existence. Who could have known at that time that a planexisted for the “final solution”-the total destruction of all Jews inoccupied Europe within a specified period of time, and that by themiddle of the summer, 1943, Europe would be declared Judenrein(free of Jews).Less than two weeks after the “action,” the next stage in thedestruction of the Skala Jewish community began. Through theregional Judenrat, an order was issued to the surviving Jews of80Skala on the River ZbruczOzieran, Mielnica, Korolowka and Skala to leave their hometownsby October 22, 1942, and to move into the central “ghetto” thatwould be established in Borszczow. Anyone defying the orderwould be shot. Once more, the local Judenrat attempted to offerransoms and bribes in order to cancel this edict, but withoutsuccess. Every sensible person understood that the concentration inBorszczow was designed to facilitate further mass murders. Thosewho were left penniless, those without friends among the Poles orUkrainians, those who were, overcome by despair and acceptedtheir inevitable fate-all packed their remaining belongings andmoved to Borszczow. Only a few dozen people remained in Skalaand each one of them grasped at a different straw in the wind: onegroup worked as laborers on the farm of the Zollgrenzscbutz and asdomestic servants of the officers and soldiers; another group, the“veterans” at the estate, continued to work in the Liegenscbaji (statefarm); and there were individuals who did not belong to any group,who, for large sums of money and through intermediaries, were ableto obtain certificates issued by the Gestapo which designated themas “important to the German economy” (Wirtschaftsivichtige Juden)as collectors of rags, bones, scrap metal, etc. However, among thesesome had “hard” certificates thought to be safer, and somepossessed “soft” certificates which hardly promised the bearer anysafety at all. In a short time, in fact, the latter proved to be of novalue. Those Jews with the letter “W” (for Wirtscbafiswicbtig)marked on the lapels of their garments, could move around freelywithout being attacked by the murderous Ukrainian policemen orthe Nazis. The fruit of their labor was meager, however, and soontheir German employers “forgot” to ask for the supply of collectedmaterials. They simply became “protected Jews,” but this too lastedonly a short time.Those Jews who stayed with gentile friends did so through thepayment of large sums of money, the deposit of their belongingsand the promise that all their non-movable property would beturned over to their protectors at the end of the war, when thesurvivors would disperse to distant lands to rebuild their lives.81The Destruction of SkalaSeveral dozen Jews, most of them survivors of decimated familiestook refuge in the forest where they prepared camouflaged hidingplaces underground. Under conditions of constant fear, theremnants of our Jewish community passed the winter of 1942-43.On March 6, 1943, all the remaining Jews in Skala, except forthe workers on the estate and the farm of the Zollgrenzscbutz, wereordered to leave town and join the concentration of Jews inBorszczow. The last members of the Judenrat and others who, outof utter despair, accepted the edict, packed their meager possessionsand moved to Borszczow. Everyone else found hiding places inbunkers, in the ruins of houses, in homes of friendly gentiles, or inthe forest. A deathlike silence fell over the town. The looted, emptyhouses stood staring through their broken windows like eye holes inthe skulls of corpses.The blood-thirsty Ukrainian police, many of them from“prominent” families of Skala, patrolled the streets and alleys by dayand night in search of those still hiding. Ukrainian thugs andmurderers assisted the police and all received encouragement fromtheir “intelligentsia,” the priest Derewienko and Dr. Modna. Bothincited the mob to complete the annihilation of the last remainingJews. The Ukrainian murderers were joined by others, who camefrom an unexpected source-some Uzbek deserters from the RedArmy gained the confidence of the Germans and were added to theZollgrenzscbutz. During the summer of 1943, the hiding place ofDr. Steuerman and his family was discovered by the Uzbeksbeneath the Strusover Synagogue. All of them were shot on thespot.The days and nights of the spring, summer and fall of 1943 creptby. From time to time volleys of rifle fire broke the silence of thenight. Again and again, Jews hiding in bunkers were discovered,brought to the cemetery and murdered in cold blood. Horrorstories spread about the cruel deaths of men and womenslaughtered by their gentile “protectors” when the latter had tired ofhiding them. The bodies of these victims were found strewn overthe fields. One morning the police raided the estate farm and killed82Skala on the River Zbruczall the Jewish workers. On the night of October 19, 1943 theworkers of the Zollgrenzscbutz were rounded up and sent the nextmorning to the Janowska Camp. All perished in Belzec, except forone girl who hid in the attic of the Zollgrenzscbutz building.During the same period, the refugees from Skala who had beencrowded into the ghetto of Borszczow suffered enormous hardship.The hunger, crowding, and poor sanitary conditions caused anoutbreak of typhus which brought death-perhaps a charitabledeath-to many ghetto inhabitants. The outbreak of the disease waskept a secret from the Nazis, lest they use this as an excuse to killeveryone without distinction or delay. On the eve of Purim, inMarch 1943, the Ukrainian militia fanned out into the streets ofthe Borszczow ghetto, arresting scores of men and women of allages. The prisoners were kept in a local jail for no “apparent” reasonand gradually were released for ransom payments. Every one of theprisoners was exposed to typhoid and contracted the disease towhich many succumbed.In April 1943, on Passover eve, another massacre followed inwhich several hundred Jews perished. During this so-called Passover“action,” the victims were first brought to the Jewish cemeterywhere they were brutally machine gunned before open pits. Manywere buried alive in mass graves, while still writhing between lifeand death. Their blood gushed forth from the graves in suchvolume and with such force that it was necessary to dig new gravesand new trenches.During the festival of Shavuot, on June 9, 1943, the murderersattacked the remnants of the ghetto for the last time. They brokeinto even the most sophisticated bunkers and hiding places. Theytook the last Jews (about 800 souls) to the Jewish cemetery andmurdered them all, among them the last remnants of the Jews fromSkala. The ghetto of Borszczow, in fact the entire region, wasdeclared Judenrein (free of Jews). Until the liberation of the area bythe Red Army in March 1944, no Jew who had survived theslaughter could walk about freely in broad daylight.83The Destruction of SkalaYehoshua Cukier and Lonek Young from Borszczow. Theirstruggles and their deaths are described in Sefer Borszczow (TheBorszczow Book).There was literally no place where the pursued could hide for anextended period of time. Gentiles who harbored Jews werepunished by the murderers, thus their hospitality turned to fear andthe Jews were forced to leave these hiding places. They went to theforests where their chances of survival were dim. Some Jews went oftheir own free will to small agricultural work camps in the area,such as Dobraniowka, near Jezierzany, Others sought sanctuary atthe camp in Lisowce, near Tluste, which had a good reputation,thanks to two German officers who had taken pity on their captivesand saved many Jews from the hands of the Gestapo. This was theonly camp in which nearly 200 Jews survived the Holocaust. All theother camps were destroyed and their occupants murdered in July1943.IXDwring those nine months (June 1943 to March 1944) the Ukrainianpolicemen and their civilian accomplices searched out hundreds ofJews, caught them in the hiding places or while out at night lookingfor food and murdered them. Many who had sought refuge in theforest were killed by the Ukrainian fascist-partisans, who belongedto the infamous gangs of Stefan Bandera. His headquarters werelocated in a nearby forest. The sufferings and travails of the “Jews ofthe forests” was a bloody chapter, described in this book by one ofthe survivors. Another episode was the heroic but hopeless struggleof the Jewish partisans (among whom were a number of men fromSkala) led by YehoshaThe winter of 1943-44, the forces of freedom and liberation areon the march toward certain victory. The grinding wheels of Nazioppression and murder are being pushed back. Even the monstroushearts and minds of the war criminals are filled with fear andanxiety for their own fate. Still, up until the last moments of their84Skala on the River Zbruczaccursed lives, they are feverishly occupied with planning thedestruction of any victims within their grasp. Even as liberatorsmoved to free us, the suffering and death continued in the camps.On January 13, 1944, Sarni, a city in the southeastern part ofprewar Poland, was the first to be liberated. The Red Army ad¬vanced southward in the direction of Tarnopol and the riverDniester on the old Romanian-Polish border. By March 24, 1944,the chains of Soviet tanks clanked through the deserted streets ofSkala. The Jews, dead or hiding, and the Ukrainians cowering infear of the punishment they could now expect for their crimes.Within a few hours after the town was liberated, the survivorsbegan to come out of their bunkers, their hiding places withfriendly gentiles, and out of the forests. They looked more likeskeletons than human beings, dressed in tattered clothing with ragson their feet instead of shoes, some limping on their walking sticks.This is what remained of our community after 600 years ofexistence and four years of the Holocaust: less than 150 survivorsout of a total of 1,550 Jewish residents of Skala before theHolocaust. Moreover, this number was arrived at only after thereturn from the Soviet Union of those who had fled to the east atthe beginning of the war or were deported there by the Soviets.XT he last few days of March 1944 witnessed the beginning of a slowrecovery from the shock of the Holocaust. There was, however,great concern among the few survivors over the small number ofRussian troops in Skala. There were rumors that across the riverZbrucz, in the region of Kamenetz Podolsk, an entire SS divisionhad been encircled by-the Russians but was still fighting. Early onemorning, heavy fighting broke out and the small contingent ofSoviet troops retreated to the north in disarray. Within a few hoursSkala was again occupied by hoards of Nazi SS men and dirty,hungry and disorganized German troops. Whoever succeeded injoining the retreating Soviet troops was saved. Others hid in every85The Destruction of Skalapossible place, once more people took to the forests. Four more ofour people were killed by the Germans or the Ukrainians-BenjaminGottesfeld, Finio Frenkel, Chaim Gottesfeld, and the little girl,Bracha Tabak. A week passed and our liberators returned withreinforcements and pushed the Nazi divisions back in the directionof Buczacz.The news of Skala’s liberation reached our brothers in Palestineat the beginning of April. Upon our arrival there several years laterwe were shown a clipping from the newspaper Misbmar (sic) datedFriday, April 7, 1944 (14 days in the month of Nisan, 5704).Under the headline “Skala Liberated,” the story read: “Thecomplete destruction of the encircled German Divisions isexpected. It is reported from Moscow that Skala southeast ofTarnopol-has been liberated. Fifteen German divisions have beentrapped in this area. In those battles, the Soviet Army has captureda considerable amount of war booty. Southeast of Tarnopol, thearmies of General Zhukov have repulsed counterattacking enemyforces after heavy fighting in which the enemy has suffered heavycasualties.” We read this news and shed bitter tears, rememberingthat even during this moment of liberation four from ourdecimated community were killed.Not for one moment did the survivors of the Holocaust considerrebuilding their lives on that blood-soaked earth. They didhowever, deem it their moral duty to assist the Soviet military andcivilian authorities in eradicating the nests of Ukrainian fascists inthe forests, apprehending local murderers and giving testimonyagainst them in their trials. Some survivors were drafted into theSoviet Army and contributed to the defeat of the Nazis. Thesurvivors also did everything they could to repay the kindness ofthose few gentiles who risked their lives to save Jewish lives.In the meantime another survivor of the Holocaust wasmurdered by the Banderovtzi (Ukrainian fascist terrorists). This wasyet another reminder to the survivors that they must abandon thiscursed land. Soon after, the dispersion began. Some moved to theliberated part of western Poland and concentrated in the area86Skala on the River Zbruczannexed from Germany, namely Upper Silesia. Members of prewarZionist movements sought to reestablish the activities of theirgroups among the survivors. They formed kibbutz aliyah groups inthe cities of Warsaw, Lodz, Krakow, Katowitz, and in the towns ofUpper Silesia. Desperate efforts were made to gather Jewishorphans, including those who had already been absorbed bycommunist boarding schools, to bring them across the Polish-Czechborder to Austria and southern Germany. A number of survivorsfrom Skala found temporary residence in the D.P. (DisplacedPersons) camps In Germany and Austria. From there they startedout for all corners of the free world-some to the United States andCanada, others to the Land of Israel. According to the statistics (seepage 143), 13 survivors emigrated to Canada over 60 settled in theUnited States, 4 stayed in Poland, 49 emigrated to Israel, and thebalance are scattered in other countries.Over thirty years have passed and our numbers have steadilydeclined. Some have passed away, physically and spiritually broken.The Holocaust, its aftermath and nightmares shortened their livesand sent them to their graves before their time. In the United Statesand Israel annual memorial meetings are usually held on theanniversary of the “action.” Now fewer and fewer of our townsmenappear. We look at each other and discern the wrinkles of old ageand the sorrow that has gnawed at our hearts throughout these yearsand will be with us until our time comes.EpilogueWc, the surviving remnants of the Jewish Community of Skalaresiding in Israel and in the Diaspora, took upon ourselves thesacred duty of preserving the memory of our martyrs and assuringthat the Holocaust of our home town shall never be forgotten. Amemorial tablet has been erected on Mount Zion and placedamong the hundreds of name-tablets of Jewish communitiesdestroyed during the Holocaust. The society of former Skalaresidents in New York contributed a considerable sum of money87The Destruction of Skalatoward the erection of a Kupat Holim medical clinic in Netanya inmemory of our destroyed community. In the bookLandsmanscbajien in Israel, we published a memorial article aboutthe history of our community from its beginning to its extinction.In the Holocaust memorial section of the Holon Cemetery near TelAviv, a tombstone was erected in memory of the martyrs of Skalaand the neighboring villages. The Berl Katznelson High School ofKfar Saba “adopted” our community through a special certificatepresented to Yad Vasbem in Jerusalem. A similar gesture was madeby the Shabazi School in Moshav Even-Yehuda, where I was invitedto give a series of lectures to the school children (most of them fromYemen) about Skala, its Jewish community, its life and tragicdemise. These lovely children were deeply moved by the terribletragedy that befell their brothers in the distant Diaspora. Theycomposed poems, wrote stories, and drew pictures from theirimagination about the town and its extinction. Before his untimelydeath, our unforgettable townsman Shlomo Bilgoraj, himself atalented painter, saw and admired the children’s work.At the Katznelson School, Holocaust studies have been includedas part of the course in Modern History of the Jewish People. Alleleventh-grade students hear a series of 35 lecture-discussions andreminiscences about the Holocaust. I illustrate the horrors of theHolocaust through a description of the destruction of the Jewishcommunity of Skala.The students get to know our town with all its lights andshadows, its joys and sorrows, its personalities and leaders, andevery stage of its extermination. They write extensive term paperson the Holocaust and the authors of the best of these are givenbooks about the Holocaust, awarded at the end of the school yearby the “LachmanWeiss Foundation.” This Foundation wasestablished years ago by my family to preserve the memory of theHolocaust.Before I retire, I intend to tape-record the history of Skala tomake sure that the coming generations of students in my school22 Original Editor’s note: For more than twenty years, the author has been the principal of the88Skala on the River Zbruczwill hear the story of our town; its life and tragic destruction, longafter all of us are gone.nmyarmWoshi.* H.*i03 /TPo-ijn •y/o/djhilxnioon*n»an.vtpn no*.on i*h i*Sy »3*p 4 *3.n jfh *nn3 r o**a *3 ,n*i*in m3 vn»o(...j'f.lisl. r*H3) J g>p> Jl t)jt of fttJjtO rvnp hn n'NinS■on*i*w o’HOPn o*«H)n *o»p >i* Sy nniwn niiwa nam).>)inn oyi m*3ij*nn nt*i«nn Dy <)w>ipa ,aapn n*a >t>dSjinp>npn nnstni iwrmn mynn natyai .mtnanai *pNa na*npnniiyaa o*pd*i oniia* ao*na iwy> ,o>i«m»a owi-i* i> Syway .nSyai n**ns ion ni’npn jin oily aati npyni na pnnw•pawn naipna ntviai npaNQ ,niaua pi rmiwiAjGvp.T^alt, jNt)J fr'hd—^ .a aa*Vic I flut-ya <*  »«97*J.A fotfa.■n**ioft o*7»o>nn *»»»I nvnpn 1U*W« >*a•0*1* mo*o> owi T»a n>ap»» it n*»>oFig. 22: Memorial scroll proclaiming the adoption of Skala by the BerlKatznelson High School in Kfar Saba, Israel in 1968.Berl Katznelson Regional High School in Kfar Saba.89Documents: Crimes Perpetrated by the German-Fascist Occupiers and Their CollaboratorsThis document was written in Skala Podolska. The information contained here wasprovided in July 1944 by persons who survived the war and its horrors.The Coordinating Commission1 for the verification and confir¬mation of the crimes committed by the German-fascist occu¬piers of the region of Skala Podolska in the state of Tarnopol,established and deposited the following:Upon the entry of the German forces into the town of SkalaPodolska, a local administration began to function carrying out theorders of the “Arbeitsamt” (labor bureau), of the “Kreishauptmann”(regional chief), and of the Gestapo in Czortkow, as well as of theGerman police in Borszczow and of the German border garrison inSkala Podolska. The main purpose of the orders of the above-mentioned organs of the German-fascist occupation authorities wasto persecute, torment and destroy the Jewish inhabitants of SkalaPodolska.In July and August of 1941, between 28,000 and 30,000Hungarian Jews-men, women and children-forcibly expelled fromHungary, were driven through Skala. The Germans and theircollaborators led them across the river Zbrucz to the town ofOrynin in the county of Kamenetz Podolsk. In the dense stretchesof forest between Kamenetz Podolsk and the town of Dunayowce,in the so-called “Las Czarny” (black forest), the Germans and theirUkrainian collaborators shot more than 23,000 Hungarian Jews.The remaining Jews in Orynin were told by the Germans that they1 Established by the Soviet-Russian military authoritiesSkala on the River Zbruczcould return to their homes. However, on the road between Oryninand the village of Poklaki, the returning Jews were shot and throwninto prepared mass-graves. This heinous, murderous act wasperpetrated by the Germans and their Ukrainian henchmen.Beginning in December 1941, the German invaders started toround-up able-bodied Jews and to transport them to concentrationlabor camps in Borki Wielkie, Stupki, Kamionka in the county ofTarnopol, and Janowska in Lwow. Out of 400 Jews from Skala sentto those camps, only 5 or 6 survived. All the others were shot,hanged or perished from starvation, disease and unbearable torture.In the summer of 1942 the Gestapo assumed complete controlover the Jews. Gestapomen, criminal police and local Germanforces, as well as their Ukrainian collaborators, surrounded theJewish quarters of Skala and thus began the “liquidation” of theJewish inhabitants. During this so-called “action,” buildings weredemolished in order to detect hidden Jews. Those that were foundwere forcibly placed into freight cars and “shipped” to the horribledeath-camps in the woods of the village of Belzec near Rawa-Ruska.There they were exterminated by SS men in gas-cells or throughmass electrocution. On September 26-27, 1942 almost half of theJewish population of Skala Podolska was thus exterminated. Inaddition some 33 old and sick men and women, who could not betransported by railway to Belzec, were shot in their beds or in thestreets of Skala.On October 22, 1942, the remnants of the Jews of Skala wereexpelled to the town of Borszczow. From then on until June 1943most of them perished during the so-called “liquidation” pogromscarried out intermittently by the Ukrainian police under thedirection of the Gestapo, A small number of Jews were hiding insubterranean “bunkers” that they built for themselves in the forestsof Skala, Cygany, Zelince and a few found shelter among their non-Jewish friends.From the beginning of March 1943 until December 1943 aJewish resistance group was active in those forests. This group ofabout 65 men was under the command of Osias Zucker and Leon91Documents: Crimes Perpetrated ...Young (both from Borszczow). They operated and fought undervery difficult conditions of hunger, typhus and inclement weatherand with very limited light arms at their disposal. At the end ofDecember 1943, outnumbered and surrounded by heavily armed,large German army units, they all died in battle while inflictingmany casualties on the Germans.At the same time the Gestapo turned over full authority overconcealed Jews to the Ukrainian police who sought them out andmurdered them with the help of informers and collaborators fromamong the local peasantry. The Ukrainian police and theiraccomplices carried out frequent searches in the homes of suspectednon-Jews looking for concealed Jews. Those found were led to theJewish cemetery in Skala Podolska, stripped of their clothes, shotand buried in mass graves.In the forest of Skala Podolska 197 Jews perished in this manner.One hiding place was set on fire and 21 men, women, andchildren choked to death or were burned alive.All these crimes were well known to the non-Jewish populationof Skala.They were investigated and verified by the county prosecutor ofSkala. The perpetrator of the criminal act of burning andmurdering 21 people-the forester Czepesiuk-was sentenced todeath. The informer of the Ukrainian police, Lyczak, was sentencedto 25 years in jail. Others were exiled to remote labor camps. Manyother crimes are still being investigated.List of the crimes and of their perpetrators is hereby attached:92Skala on the River ZbruczCrimes Perpetrated by the German-Fascist OccupiersAnd Their Collaborators in Skala Podolska,State of Tarnopol*No.CrimeDateLocationDeathsCrimePerpetrators1Citizens murderedwith handgrenades2July 12,1941House No. 592in SkalaiUkranians:Struczinski andSkoroda2Citizen shot todeath3April 13,1942Street behindGermanheadquartersiGestapomanBretschneider3Two citizens shotto death4May 22,1942Main street ofSkala2German borderguards: Grauerand Schultz4Citizen shot todeath 5Sept. 23,1942At the entrance tothe “liegenschaft”(state farm)1GestapomanBretschneider5Half of the Jewishinhabitants ofSkala includingrefugees fromneighboringvillages wererounded up andtransported to thedeath camps ofBelzec, near Rawa-RuskaSept. 26-27,1942Skala Podolska695Gestapo unitunder thedirection of Pahl,Rosen-hof andFischer; Germanborder guards andUkranian police5aCitizens shot todeath duringabove roundupSept. 26-27,1942Skala Podolska33Same as above6Citizens of Skalamurdered inconcentration andlabor campsFrom Dec.1941through July‘43Borki Wielke,Stupki,Kamionka andJanowska (Lwow)127German SStroops andUkranian police* Verification for all the crimes listed here was by eyewitness accounts2345Roza HerscherLeib SchechterMeg-Chaig Kohn (Dybuk) and Hersch Schor-TrasawuckiChana Grunman93Documents: Crimes Perpetrated ...No.CrimeDateLocationDeathsCrimePerpetrators7Mass murder ofSkala citizensexpelled to theghetto of Borszczowduring the so-called“Purim action”March 17, 1943BorszczowJewishcemetery(MakowaMogila)80Gestapoman andUkranianpolicemen underthe direction ofGestapo officerKellner: theUkranian police-chief Semenczukand his deputyHawryszko8Mass murder ofSkala citizens duringthe so called“Passover action” inBorszczowApril 19, 1943BorszczowJewishcemetery59Same as above9Mass murder ofSkala citizens duringthe so called“liquidation action”in BorszczowJune 5-9, 1943BorszczowJewishcemetery98Gestapomen underthe command ofRosenhof;Ukranian policeunder thecommand ofSemenczuk and hisdeputy Hawryszko10Citizens of Skala shotto deathJune 28, 1943Skala Jewishcemetery28Ukranian policeand Germangendarmes fromBorszczow11Citizens of Skala shotto deathJune 29, 1942On the streetsof Skala andSkala Jewishcemetery14Ukranianpolicemen: SirmaJakowyszyn withthe help of localcollaborates Lyczakand Duchinski12Citizens of Skala shotto death6July 29, 1943Hiding placesin Skala3UkranianpolicemanNakoniczewski andcollaboratorsPetryszyn andSZczerban6 Motel Goldschein, Golda Leibart and daughter94Skala on the River ZbruczNo.CrimeDateLocationDeathsCrime Perpetrators13Citizens of Skalashot to death7Aug. 10,1943“Liegenschaft” (state farm)in Skala,backyard ofSynagogueand mainstreet31Gestapoman Fischer;Ukranian police underthe commandSemenczuk withcollaborator Petryszyn14Citizens of Skalashot to death8Sept. 3,1943Market placeof Skala3Ukranian policemanNakoniczewski andcollaborator Petryszyn15Citizens of Skalamurdered9Sept. 18,1943Forest, 3 kmnorth of Skala11Ukranian police16Mass murder ofcitizensSept. 25,1943Forest, 3 kmnorth of Skala129German SS troops17Citizensapprehended in theforest and deportedto the death camp ofJanowska (Lwow)Sept. 25,1943Forest, 3 kmnorth of Skala28German SS troops18Citizens of Skalashot to death10Sept. 30,1943Village ofBerezankanear Skala1Ukranian policemanLesiuk19Citizens who workedfor the Germanborder policedeported to theJanowska deathcamp (Lwow)Oct. 19,1943SkalaPodolska42German border patrol20Citizen shot todeath11Oct. 30,1943Forest northof Skala35Ukranian policemen,among them Jukubyszynand Bezpaluk21Citizen shot todeathNov. 6,1943Jewishcemetery ofSkala1Stach Mazor-collaborator7 Families Bosyk, Herscher, Dr. Steuerman, Bloch. Leibowicz, Jaegendorf Wladdzio, Kasirer,Badler, and Segal (from Borszczow)8 Bretschneider Aron, Szejndel, and Edzia9 Regina and Moshe Jaegendorf, Roza and Bed Blutstein, Rachel and Izak Steiner and sonMoshe, Dvora Jagendorf, Sheva Fuss and two children: Simcha and Nusia10 Mordechai Bosyk11 Motio Blutstein95Documents: Crimes Perpetrated ...No.CrimeDateLocationDeathsCrime Perpetrators22Citizens shot todeath12Nov. 18,1943Jewishcemeteryof Skala25Ukranianpoliceman amongthem Jakubyszyn23Citizens shot to deathDec. 30,1943Jewishcemeteryof Skala4German gendarmeFrizenwalde andUkranianpolicemen24Citizens burned alivein their hiding placeMarch 1,1944Forestnorth ofSkala21UkranianpolicemenJukubyszyn,Rembochs and theforester Czepesiuk25Citizens tortured andmurdered13Dec. 25,1943Village ofIwankow3Ukranian bandits inthe forest26Citizen murdered14March 20,1943Distilleryof spiritsin Skala1German soldier12 Hersch Helman, wife and child and Yehudit Yusem13 Ben-Zion Gertler and family14 Eliahu Miller (Boserer)96List of Martyrs:Skala Residents Who Perished During the Holocaust Years(1941-1944)FlG. 23: Violin.List of MartyrscviCVJoi M n fN rJ n tN n (NO' O O' O' O' O' O' O' O'aaaaaaaaaC/)C/3C/3C/3C/3C/)C/3C/)C/}< <£ £o oH H< <1Z U2N N N N Nw tfl w t/l (/]D D D X X>u. u.<<<<<<< <<J-JJ_j—1-J—j<<<<<<<53<SZ;z3ZIZ:Z 3Zc/3c/3c/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3rlir,O'00tsr-\ovO'S’O'2U-U-2b.22UJ a! LU LUu u u u£ £ £ £O O O O:z :z u< <<^ o t rlE— H H H H^ I X I I IsassssaaasgggggOQQQQ-J-J-J-j-jSSSS*;<u.UJUJodwz>oc75z-J<<<cCQo<SZX03UJC/3£03C/3<a—CN'T</-.vOr-X LUoo O' ©ttl Xo oS oi<Xu—M r, t f . >0 r- oc O'9820 IRA ASCHENDORF M 44 JANOWSKAC.C. 194221 DINA ASCHENDORF F 42 SKALA Sep. 194222 ME1R ASCHENDORF M 14 SKALA Sep 194223 PEARL ASCHENDORF F 9 SKALA Sep 194224 SARA ASCHENDORF F 7 SKALA Sep 194225 MUNISH ASCHENDORF 36 SKALA Sep 194226 CHANA ASCHENDORF F 38 SKALA Sep 194227 SARA ASCHENDORF F 2 SKALA Sep 194228 MECHEL ASCHENDORF 12 SKALA Sep 194229 MOSES ASCHENDORF M 25 U S S RSkala on the River ZbruczCNCN(NCNClCNCNCNCNCNCNCN<NCNCNCNCNCNCNo-o*O'O'o-O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'ONONCNONONCN8ONO'OnONONO'O'ONONONO'O'CNCNCOCNCOa.Q. O'CLCL O'a.cla.a. o-a.a.a. o-a.CLCLCL O'CLCLCLCL0)U ONOJD ONCD0)o<D ON<d<D<D ONCD<DCD<D OnCDa>(DC/3C/3 —C/3C/3 —C/3c/3C/3C/3 —C/3C/3C/3 —MC/3C/3C/3 —C/3C/3C/3C/3co■O'ON£oN(JNC/5CiOCJu<54C/5ou<<£<<—< H< <<<<<<<<<<_<<< <-i_JoH‘jL-J N-9J-jHJ&-JJJ54-J-]-j -j<<2<<CC< <<<3<<o'<<<<04<<< 35454<5454o54 354 5454*54O545454O5454 54C/5C/5C/5C/5CQc/3 aC/5 C/5C/5COC/5C/3C/3CQC/5C/3C/5C/502C/3C/5C/5 C/5ClO'or~NOO' —O ifcoooOO'r~-CN©1/5mO«nr-~cOO'tNO'O' CNvO V.cnCNr~-oO'coO'CN■'tO'OO <*52u.2u.sULMFULsULsu.£U.2UL2FMX XO CJ< <§3LU UJD D< <54 54 54uiyyiiO U U -1 -4 -1< < < co m mco cq 02 Z z Zo' S a! u u uuuuOOOD D D 3 X D<<<<<<zZzzzZZzz zaC piC54<(4c40404ooogoogg gUJ UJUJsUJUJUJUJNNNNNNNN NZ z54-J-J—JzzzzZzzz z<1 <1<UJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJ UJCQ CQ020222CQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQ CQ-JL-202<2<D<X-jUJ<-JUJUJ>_jUJ02X<zgz Xo u^ S<<<54a.X>-a<-Ja22<CJsCQUJ2Huu<1<-J<UJ|tn<ZoZS—5UJC/3oy<IzaUJC/3oXuo9£3wu<oc-JZULuUJJ N< zCQHzC/3•—>UUl—iUl•—>o__CNCOO'>/5NOr-~00O' ©(Nf*5O'NOVOr-oo©OCNO'COr*5COCOCOroCOCOCOr<5 rj-O'O'■^rO'O'O'Vv-iIT'l99List of Martyrs<Ncm<N<MCMCMCMcmcmCMCM■*3*rr•^rrr^r"'t^rm-ONOnONOnONONO'ONONONO'mrnrornrn- arnrnromroroCOCMrnQ-CLa.a.r3-rfrfQ.C/3 <TfCl rf"I-o.CLa. rt■<1-a.a.-3-oV6ONOnOnOnONO'.03 OnONO'O'Oo0>uONOn9<L>ocnCOC/3C/3•—<•—C/3 —C/3COCOcoCOH HHC/3 COcoC/3££££a aaLUONUONUoNUONU— Cl.o oUi u.LTjczOU.CJ(Jft.ou.< <<<NNNN<<< <h- < < <<< <<<<<<J -1J—1COCOCOCO—1Js J J J—I-i -i—1-JjZi—lJJ< <<<cZoZoZoZ<3D < < •<<< <<<cZ5<<iZ SZSZOOOOIcZsz—1 SZ SZ SZsz sz szUZiZoiZszC/5 COCOCOcaCQcaCQCOCOC/3 C/3(— CO CO COCOCO COCOCOCQCOCOCOCM005o*/->— „CMONNOTf CMONONo>nr-CMo00CM^r— 00cm r-NOCMriIA.rnoivOsu-U-U.2LuU*sU-s sCU2U-u-UusUuUuzzzzz!!<;<;<<<<<,'<-2eZeZ£Z2cZZ E-ai HR Hfe HzzzgzgzgzzzzEEEEEESuqujEEujf— f— t— f— f- h f— f— f— f— !— f—OUUf-f-f-E-HHHHHHHI-0002JDDDDJDJJDDCQCQCQCQCQCQCQQQQQCQ CQCQCQCQCQCQCQQQCQCQQQOQCQCQCQ<aEU.J<>•UJUJ2<<5c75<<ECQ,z3C/3CONOwI>■<CQmOoCOC/3-iUNCOa-COC/3r-00O'o_<NCO^rNO000000O'O'O'ONO'O'O'.| -1 <£ ggJ 03 oZZ2S<<dll<<ds|2<glS2tZ £2 3 £ 8 O £2r-oooo — cNm,^-^vor--ooo'0 —OOC'OOOOOOOOOO — —100112 MEIR BLUTSTEIN M 73 SKALA 1942113 CHAJE BRANE BLUTSTEIN F 66 SKALA 1943114 EPHRAIM BLUTSTEIN M 40 SKALA 1943115 SZAYE BLUTSTEIN M 40 SKALA 1943116 FREIDE BLUTSTEIN F 36 BORSZCZOW 1942117 FEIGE BLUTSTEIN F 13 BORSZCZOW 1942118 LEA BLUTSTEIN F 10 BORSZCZOW 1942119 CHAIM BLUTSTEIN M 8 BORSZCZOW 1942120 MALKA BLUTSTEIN F 61 SKALA Sep 1942121 BRONA BLUTSTEIN 36 SKALA Sep 1943Skala on the River ZbruczmCNCNCNcnCNcnCNCNCN^r^r-*rN"rTTj-ONONONONONONONO'O'ONO'romfOc*5mfOfOm’—~ CNrnCOQ.o.a.Q.Dt -TTr^r■'Ta. tt*TCLa.a.a. ^r^rCl rr4>VoQeO'ONO'ONOnO'O'O'0) O'ONU6o<D O'ONO'0) CN1/500C/5C/5c/5C/5 —C/5C/5C/5C/5 —C/5 —£££££OOooONN53NNCJCJoUQCJCJ<<<< < NNN<<<<{j< N <<<<<<<<< Nj-J-JJ JWC/2c/2-—jJz—»J c/2 JJ-jJJjJJ—J C/5<C/5<<< < 04ZZ<<<<D< Z <<<<<<<<< z54C/554z54 54 OOO54545454 O Zz5454ZzzZZ oonDC/2C/2C/5 C/5 CQCQ03C/2C/2C/5C/2HC/5 CQ C/5C/2C/2on1/2C/2onC/2c/2 CQ00CNoo m,rr■<r,oO 00 ONrro00,o\rrCN <2r-r*1lO in t^rcO■<3-CNNOTj- ^l/“irrCNr-\oVO </2222U.MMu-222u*s2U- Uu222u.22 u.z zLU Ui-J-JOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCOCQCQCOCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQ< <2 2|Z C/2 C/2O Z ZCQ CQ CQXCJc,nZU1HcN<r)Tr«/-)\ot~~oooo — cNrorrinvor^oocNO — cNc'i'i-*/->\ot''~101List of MartyrscnCNcnCNcnCN*^rrrT^r■*rn-N-ONO' ^ONONONONONrnmro—•~ ^ cn~ <N<nromc**>fO(NromcnmmcntTTTa.a.<o, ^ra.G.a. rt^rTfTtTTTfrf^rO. rfO'O'O'a>a> On<Da-*GJ OsO'ONOnO'ONONOONONO'ONON<D OnO'COC/3 Z —CO —C/DC/DC/D —*—•^■*CO —•—*uh-HUu££co3C/3H£££0•<SCONoNCCoOCoONoNON<SCC/3<JUUmU-UUVC/3< <<<<<< ^< <<NN<<NNN<<<<<<C<< <J —iJJ-1 oJC/3C/3j_c/3C/3c/3O aC-J—-J—1_)—1J o>< <<C/D<<<< Z< <<aCDC<<oCoCocZ 5/3<<<<<<< >s<c S<CS<!COSCscZ <SC SCJOOOjcscOOO<3«i3^3^icJ3/3/C/3 C/3C/3DC/3C/3C/3c/3 2;IS) C/3c/oCQCQC/3C/3CQQQCQoninC/3inC/3C/3C/3C/3 ZoNOoo»/->ccr4C^iNO ^ir»—i—On•z,o r-v->ror^-o»A)»r» v*—OOr«*iCN"<r\r*iCN— rrONu-iCNmm rr rtmir-j^rCN— vONONO-TU-U.su-sU.S2U.FMU-U-2£U.£UrnU.DCcCDCDCDCDCUJUJUJUJUJUJCeS c£oioCQQQaaQM>■>-UJUJ.—.UJUJUJ< <<<C/3C/3C/3C/3C/DC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3cnC/3c«g■C./_zMz—0CDC£ £C/3 C/3£C/3£C/3uaUJQUQwQUJUJUJaUJaUJQUJaUJaUJaUJUJQUJaoc pcOC/3uC/3OC/3JUuC/3uC/3uuuC/3UJJ}—uj oC•J UJF“ 373^ ZSCSCzZZZzzzZzzz/ZzZ ^F“H(-f-h"F™HH 5< <<<<<<S< <<<<<c<<<<<<UJ UJUJ-JUJUJUJ-JUJUJ —eC edeCoC0CaCoCeCoCOCcCQicCoCCCoCeCcCOCCC DCDCDCDCDCDCDCaCDC DC03 CQ03CQCQCQCQ02CQ03OQ02CQCQ02CQ0303CQCQ CQ02CQ030Q02CQCQCQ CQDC03UJUJCQJuNh<DC< <^ o£-J °< >£ QT TCQnQQn<XCJC/D<Waa£-JWQ<<a<<NQ-Jw<zXmXo<<I3UJQZiC/3z<N—/CQcsiSo»_/C/DC/DZc/dDC>Z5cCQJDCLUDCoN<<<<aOXoU«<OCQDCa<UJ<ccCCQNUJDCQzCQ£C/DCJs□C/D•<u.C/303•—><C/Da<UJuCNr*3■•TIZ*|NOt—OOONocsf<3<7,VOr-00OvOCSr*jN-IT)m171IT)irj*nNONOVOVONOVOVONONOVOr-r**t-'r~r-UJOzk—1Xm vOr- r-Skala on the River ZbruczCN<NCNCNCNCNCNCNchCNCNCNCN^r•3*^rTt*TfO'ONONONO'ONONO'ONO'ONONCN<N~ r-i•—’rh■"* corhf^.m•h-CNfhPij■<rQ.TTQ.CLQ.Q.Q.a.a.a.Q.cl hrTftThf^r"Ta. ^ro. hrUJO'O'0) CN0>OO<u0><o<L>a>0)ON4) CNO'CNOnONOna> cn<D O'C/3C/3 f—C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3 —C/3 —C/3 —o£N0<zZa.'ZONooNo<<<<<<<<<<<< <<<O<—<<NN<<_jN-J—J-3-4—1-4-J—-4 _4_4JB—)*4C/3ad wj—J-J<0<<<<<<<<<< <<<2d<<edC/3c/3 Qd<<pd0pdPdPdPdPdPdPd PdPd<UUPdPdOC/)C/3 OPdC/3CQC/3ooc/3onC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3or 0/>C/3C/3«ZOC/3C/3CQDD DQonO)C-»O00_OO'OOO mNOoovO<<3_roO VOor~-vOvnO'r-r~-r-~hfhT-3- r«-)O'NOmVOVOvO(N vO'T£u.u-u.£££u-U-MF2Lusu.u. u.2U-£oN. O< NJ C/3< £U Oc/3 CO© © cnO VO M£ U. sz zodIodUJZ* Xod o'oa DQod odUJ UJ-J _J.4 d5 odCQ 03aLcdQd3<CQ<CQ05LUoQQdUJQdUJLUL4UC/3XC/3X<<<<<<<<<<<<<C/3HC/3-zZ£g£(JoaaaOO0a00000000UJJJcCQdQdDDXXDXD0D000000UJUJc^ooCQ03CQCQCQ030303CQ03CQCQCQ03CQCQCQ03aa5aaod cd cdsssuuuC/3 C/3 C/3Q Q Q<Z *[Tj <.I £_JUJ<cdC/3<LU-1UJ<<<X<C^5<<X Qdrj mC/3<z<X<zX>-<Q<2dJ.w MUc/3 hrLUzJ7ClzoCL¬C/3/“S<<z_Jcd—j<<H^ HC/3<odadLUC/3s<adUJoI—XUJOCQJXJUJUJ C/3OXLU0oUJX< CLsUJ0N0<C/30PdCQX UJ5:uCQXV—/<—>J000ONoriC**i■*1-1/3NO00Ovo— CMrhi^4vO00Ovr-0000ooOO00OO00oooo00ONON ONONC3vO'.O'O'OvO'<5 r 3 =5 0 £ h -J '‘u 00 z ad c/3 0Z o < o <EqSI5 < 08 £ £oooooooo103List of MartyrsCNCNCN(NCNCNCNCNCNCOCNTT^rororors■*r*^rrrrfO'oOsONONOvONOvONO'ONCN~ CNco—**“*— CNroCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCO,—COCL ofcl ora.CLCLCLCL Tf'CI¬CL TJ-TTfTfTT•^rCLCL TfCLa> o4> O'O'66O6(U OnO'ON0) ONONONO'ONoOnSa> O'Ogo —GO —C/3C/3GOC/3C/3 —GO —C/3C/3 —C/3us-r—■_ jonC/3££UJ-y££3<1ooccoOUJUJUJoOoCCNNNNNN!NNNNUC/3UUU-UuOOOuUUUrn< ^<N<<<<<N<N<NJHHNNN<<<<—) oJr/.c/2_J_JJnJc/2_JC/2-J:/•:>*>■?-00C/2onmJ-1j_j< Z< 00CZ<<<<So'<0Z52oZbJaioZaJoZaZ<<<<* <C/3C*zZZ*OzoUJCPXPOoOuUJGO SGOD03C/3C/2ononC/303C/203C/2m——f-03CQOQC/3C/3onon— in0000O'moO'o•<t©©©</i©ir.00NT©u->OU1— cocomco©i/~.—1VO©m«/ir<2CN©©r-*2 2Ll.2u.U-2te.2u-22lx.u.ssu.u-U-22ai cZUJ UJcjC/3^ oz oZ oZa a ujcZ oZ cZ oZ cZQ Q Q Q Q5D Dz<Z<Z<Z<Z<Z<Z<z<z5£ZeZUJ(—on£UJHon£UJzUJr-C/2gUJ222222222p—onHonHC/2jj-j-jj-j—i—j-—JJ-J—JJJJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJQQaQQaaaa2aQQQaaUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJ<U § < men <3§IO<iO ZHWZQ .a:2u^^j<qz“qj<x< uH c/3_ z a:UJsa£ilZcna.QZ2uj<!;>-2<0-)ez2ujf-:i.jQc/2O'<2oo on o — cNco^^vOt'-oeO'O — rj n 'T t. o r*- oo on o — <No o ---------- n n m ri n rm cin rim n(S (N <n n n r< n n n n n cn cn cn (S ts cn cn cn cn cn cn cn104233 ITA EHRENBERG F 71 SKALA 1942234 DVORA EHRENBERG F 45 SKALA Sep 1942235 MEIER EHRLICH M 58 CYGANY236 GITEL EHRLICH F 56 CYGANY237 BRAN A EHRLICH F 19 CYGANY238 MOTIO EHRLICH M 17 CYGANY239 SIMA EHRLICH F 16 CYGANY240 NENDEL EISENFELD M 67 CYGANY241 RATZE EISENFELD 63 CYGANY242 ZEIDE EISENFELD M 70 SKALA 1942Skala on the River ZbruczCN<NCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCN CN^r•^r^r■*r■*r rrO'O'!O'O'O'O'O'oO'O'O' O'cn cn”*(NCNCNCOrororor*1mroroCOM •—*a.G.TQ.Cla.^ra.o.a.D.TTTfTTTf*^rtT■*r■*rQ.a. ClO' O'.a>a>O'CJO'oa>O'cja>3393O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'33<U <DcoCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCO CO66CJUU££££EuN<!246CJoNoNoNoN£££C/266CJCJCJCJooo< 2<<£<<<<<<<<*-*NNNN<242424<< <—<H<OzH<H<1—<3H<5jocC/2a!C/2DCcma:C/2aCJ<Z<Z<Z<;<-J -J< <* fi<O*oOooO£>>C/5 Oco7)“1COCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOffiCQDQCQCQCOCOCO CO00mCOV“>VOCNv->CNO'CNmovOCNrj-oCNvOoVOror-VO^r^r^rcn—^rTT00r-tUtu2tuU-LutUU-tu2tusu*2U.tu2tuo£cm<XXXXXXXauCJCJCJCJCJCJj<<<<<<<uuCQ03CQDQCQCO03ZC/2wCOCOCOJ—;_J_}-}—,LUzLUC/2LUUJtuWLUuLULULULU24Ooaaaaar~-CS2-Jj-U-JzZzzzzzCLEWLUwLULULULULULULULUtuo404c4C4UaaLULULULUc4DCc4zLU£LUzLUzLUzLUz5CQ-JcmQQJ00X-JcmQQJ00LUSLUSLU03c4HcmHCOf—cmHcmt—cmf-cmZZZ£ScuXLUXcuCL.CL,0.a.CLLU5LULULULULULULULULULULULbLbLbLbtulbLbc4LU2$XI<(b<edLU2LUQz—i£<>NCJ<COo•<a.LUJo*->Ijs5m<X521U<aLUN.’COzCOa.>COLUtu-Ju2COCLtuL NIZ'ivOr-00O'oCNr^irrVIVO1—-T'ttriiniz-,tr,V",v~.<r,(NCSCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNC^JCNC^4r4CNLUOLUz<o£CQ00 O'in m,(N ClN M M N (S N N f-l n105List of MartyrsOn O' O' O' O' O' O' O'— — — — — — — —a a a a a a a a. rr rr ^ ^rt> a) a) a> o o a> oonO'C'O'O'CnO'CSw£1 tnnnnnnrnnna^r i-'tt'i-’t’t'tt’t(U On O' On O' On On On O' O' O'C/5 — — — — — — —— — —H Hc/5 C/5‘ LUHc/5HC/5ooo2Or t2OrT2ofroooO. OO2Of ToNNdNNNNo siNNUUdUu—MmMmuUUUo (jUMmU< <<<<<<<NN<•—N<<<<NNNN— NN<N-Jj_JnJ-JnJJC/5C/5LUC/5j-j—mJC/5C/5C/5C/52 C/5C/5-JC/533<<33aa22acU2aa<<22222 2QcC<22 v;2LU22Oo2oo22LULUoOooo ooLUoC/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5CQQQC/5CQCQC/5C/5C/5c/5CQQQCDCQCQ CQCQC/5CQr-CNO00VOCNO0000r»5("4Oi/~>VOCNor-O' mCNONTVONOu~,mcn00■>3-CNmr*5rn<NCNvOvOCN— i/>i/.tNlCN3U.Lau-22u.b.222LaU-2u2MMU.LaUO2OoeCO2O2a2a2a2O2a2O2O2a2O2Z25LUZ2Z_JZLUzUJzuzLUZ—LUzUJsLUz2U4UJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJHH(——r—t-HHr—f-f—H02CQQQCQCDfflfflaqCQ“5mmCDC/5C/5C/5C/lC/5C/5C/5ooC/5C/5C/50C5rV2223222222OC222222222Cd22gggUJ_ggUJDLUDggLUDgLUDLUDLU5-ggLUuLUDgLU-LUJyluUJUJ_LULUUJUJUJuUJwUJUJUJUJUJLUE3LULULUE2Euu-u.u.b.LaLau.u.u.u.u.u.u.u.b.b.Urnb.UmUmb.LaUmLab.£UJ-j2wCQ3Ca.UJ 2£ <O Nry- ZSg§^guJaircitrOc/smICQwOOQW!^SC'0-,MffiTJ-iriOi^oooNO — Nr^^r^^oi^oocNO—Mr^i^rNOr^r^r^r^r-r^r'r^r^r^oooooooooooooooooooooNO'O' O' O'(N cs <N cs cn cs cN r) cs r) (N M rm ri (S (N <N cs cn cN <N M M M M106295 CHAN A FEUERSTErN F 72 SKALA Sep 1942296 MOSHE FEUERSTEIN M 38 STUPKI c.c 1942297 LEJZER FEUERSTEIN M 76 SKALA Sep 1942298 SZEJNDL FEUERSTEIN F 69 SKALA Sep 1942299 ZELIG FEUERSTEIN M 51 BORSZCZOW 1943300 TAUBA FEUERSTEIN F 42 BORSZCZOW 1943301 IZAK FEUERSTEIN M 23 BORSZCZOW 1943302 ROSA FEUERSTEIN F 52 BORSZCZOW 1943303 MOSHE FEUERSTEIN M 61 BORSZCZOW 1943304 BRAN A FEUERSTEIN 59 BORSZCZOW 1943Skala on the River ZbruczCNCNCNCNCNcnCNCN<NCN<N-r~r-r~rT-ro-oO'OnONO'ONONO'oO'O'’—■mco•"*rrTa.CLCLCLrrrrTa.TTa.CLCLa.CLCLO'ON<L<ua>0)O'O'ONO'<L>OnO'<L>oa>QJCOCOCOCOCOis.COCOCOCOCOcj 66 cjZ ^Z ZO Ocq cqrr coco N2 u.£<<<<N<3NU-<•NuHoozozoz<NCJN<o6<<<< <oLd—]ddS5jzzzdCOdcdd3—d dCO<<<<COCOCO<<<<;<Z<tt!CO<<<c <COzzzoooD>>>>ZOZoCOzZZz z—itoCOCOCO333OCO03COCQDCOCOCOCO CO»o00CNioNOr-11»nTOO'CNooO'CNrj- CNIT,rnCNCN>o»omr-tor«"iNOo<NCNCNr-ir,to.222u»U-sU-222u-2Pl22u-tuU-2SzZzzZZzzzz52zPU□PUEjPUPUPUF-133333333—H—(—Hh-f—f—H———HHHPr—COCOCOCOCOCOCOCOcoCOCOCOCOcoCOCOCOZKzZzzZZZZZZZo£0^ZzLUPJPUUJgPUPU333333gLU3z5D35333333-5sDD3PUUJPUPUPUPUPUPU333333UJUJ3Puu.u.ppu.PL.pppp333333U-UL3SSSSSSSSS333333333QQQQQDQQQILU.U.U.U.U.U.U.U.gC/3o2o o o om m3CO333<Q<z<ag<><<I(JzgHs<zX33CO§<CO3z<333ZUJ>•<<OLJz03z<><3X3<N3w*X5COO3O333N53X3Oa2—u3UJ<N-*'•—1>0CO33COu-COCQu2c2ooCNroNOt~~00OOCN10,0r-00o•—*i—I—»—•——NCNCNCNC^JCNCNCNCNroCOrnmCOrommcnCOCOmmO oCN rnrn m107List of MartyrsCNCNcn<NcncncnCNcnCNrrrr-T-rTOsOsOsO'OsO'OsO'O'O'CNr«5cncncn—“~~ CNcncna.CLQ.a.a. rr**TTT-T•*ra.a.a.Q. n--Ta.<Do<L>a>O QsO'O'O'OsO'O'O'O'<L>«L»o) O'O'O'cncnC/5inin —inininc/5 —C/5<-/in£<OoOooO< <<<<N_ U< NNUNNUNNUNNUNNUN<<NNUNu<<66<< <J-IO HJ ononononononJs_Jj-4—Ja:< <<<<< cZcZcaZoZoZoZ<<< c/2incn<cd<<<iniZ 3aZLZ3>ZUZ< ^3Z ooOoOCLZLZiZ OOOOszLZU3inon onononC/2on 03CO0000OQCQc/2onon -j-J_)inCQC/2onC/5 u© moso00cn 0000oo00mcncn.m't —r-oo00,_itO'_—rnmmcn— *nU~iCNi-'irvOm— omincnCOcn•Ai<N22MFU.2U.2u.u.u. Su-U-2U-U-2£ £ £uuut-f—h-CZ CZ c/2 on C/2SMfJZZ«:uuwiiaxUW^Fhnn^ijG9SSS!£i222U-U.U_LL-U_U-U.U-iZIXXXXo u o u ut/D ja c2 on 02Ll.U_U.0l.Li.OUUXXX2Ei£J!2£2S£S2£2_j!_jUlLluClLu_ u. u. u.<2UJ/cciUJ<XuonQ<-J<XOz-J<Z<XCl<-JUJ<z<<zSoOX<X<cZNUJt—z■ T 'CZUL><DC<UJ^2u£is-o<X<UJ<minndUJ<UJHC/5O<eZDC<X<VIC4)uuuOOJ—•—>XaC/5N0-uu0-inCQina2CQc/ouaCN■TmOr-0002OCNcnmVOr-00O'oCNmmsOmmmmCOmmmrT•cr•<r■'T*r»ir,m,m•nmmmCOc^,mmrnrnmC^<nrnr**>C^icnC*tc^c^irncnmc^l108357 JACOB FLE1SCHMAN M 19 STUPKl c.c. 1943358 FE1GE FLEISCHMAN F 23 SKALA Sep 1942359 ROZA FLEISCHMAN F 2 SKALA Sep 1942360 SZEJNDL FLEISCHMAN F 24 SKALA Sep 1942361 SAMUEL FLEISCHMAN M 2 SKALA Sep 1942362 CHANA FLEISCHMAN F 50 SKALA Sep 1942363 MOTIO FLEISCHMAN 55 BORK1 c.c. 1943364 MEIR FLITENSTEIN M 37 BORKI C.C. 1942365 CYREL FLITENSTEIN F 33 SKALA 09.1942366 SARA FLITENSTEIN F 10 SKALA 09.1942Skala on the River ZbruczCN CN CN CN CNxr ^ rr rf.TTr-TT-TTr-'T^r-^-^r . ^rO' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O'O'--■ —-— — — — O ~ o — — — — — —-o-o<34Hs—oHHHC/3C/3- •mC/3C/3%£UJvjUJoNUNONUN<<14C4<:4Ks—i>*—j>■ou.Ou.34C/3Ou.ou.oU.NNXN<22<<<<<<£<<<<<U<O<U<O<<C/3JOo-JjJJ-J-o—1-JJ-Ja5oc<J—j<<<<<<<<<<<in222<OO34oo3434343434<3434343/!34OOOo34oaoaC/33434C/3mC/5C/lC/3C/3inC/3C/3C/3C/3J-j-j_jC/3oO'<*1O'uiCNTT1/1O'1*1ooooi/IO'<*1O'C*1CNvOm<*1</i1/1r-~CNO1*1l*1r-~<*iCN<*ir~*ri*ioof~2u.2U.22u.22222U.22b.2U.U.<34mO'2 2c4 c4UJ UJQ Q_) JUJ UJb fcssLi. Ll, Ll U. U. U.UJr-C/5hghhtoot—HoJ 4 J J JUJ UJ UJ UJ UJ34 34 34 34 14z z z z zIIIo u oU.U.U.U.U.U.U.U.C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5DDDDU-Uuu-ULQQQ— — —< < <m oq oa-J J J. UJ UJ UJoooooooooaUJJav XH * <in UJ 04UJ CD 03r~ oo O'O O VOUJn-J1UJcm<oiXin>$<£0uC/5Ct^34UJXuoc4uO<CQ<m<cn£-JXXC/5<C/5<d%si<LUroaUJJUJ—<<<C<fvlNDoo<UJpUJ<aUJ<CLX<UlX•—>CQC/5CQESIC/5£C/5XC/5u.zCQsC/5OcnmtTcno00O'oCNrnO00O'oCNr-r-r-r"r-r-r-r-r-r-~ooOO00oo00000000ooO'O'O'rnrOC*1r+)rni*im<*ir+lrornmrnrnrnro109List of MartyrsCNCNTf. tt ^ tt tt .Tf^rr^rrj-C'C'C'O'C'C'O'C'C'C'C'C'C'C'— O — — — — — — o — — — — —CNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCN^rrr^r^r^rrr^rO'O'O'O'cnTj"O'ONOCNO'cnO'O'O'ONON—•—■*——*—■•—™•—-»—•—ONO'-O'’O'’O'O'ONO'’O'O'"O'O'ONO'’O'’ONoooo—*ooo—o—ooooouuuuoNNOAONoNON£££<IdoN<idoNUWU<JUooOzUC/3UN <<<fflNNN<id<o < <<<<N<<<<N<<<< <on _j% <ujonadoncdonad5z<;Z-j<onadJ<ozonad-j -j -j<< <o ***-JOOOu>>id<ididUO<Oid id idid idCQ c/5C/5C/5OCQQQCQC/5onc/5 c/5ononC/5CQC/5c/5C/5►—>C/5CQC/3 C/2 C/3on onO 00ONoO'r-~ONo\oooo r-r-r-'O'iz,Or»SOofS — msO »Z>iZ-.sz-,cnrisOmcocn— mt-^V-l<ZNtoCNNOCOco** ■'t —O' rnMF2U-22ta.u.Um2U-u-U-222U-.u.22U-2u-2MMFMz z z z z z<<<<<<UtijUlllUlUUlU^B'^Ci:f-f-ZZZZZZHJtUUJlUonv3Sr;r^S"r--_]_i_i_iCQffl0“aaSSHHHH............nnOOOOOOOOUOUOUOQQ cdodadcdedcdededadadOdQdedCd^JWgrj^jQpgjjgijymjjjjm“SSSSSS52oofflfflfflffloSCOOOcnCQaaCDD2CDQau.u,QQQQQQ_umumuuupjtuuiuttiddd£;t£££;£0000000000oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooJ Jad ad ad adui>NC/55 w >—j>■ -J £ ui 2 «b;<wn5eU. ^ J C/5 C/5 Urirriri\or^ooo'0-r')n,tinvotv-ooov. o-Nnrrir.voi^cooNO — cn mO'O'O'O'O'G'O'OOOOOOOOOO — — --— — — — — — C^IC^JCNrinr. nr, nnn^^'r^r^TrTr^ft^rTrrftTj-^trj-tTjTr’t-t’tTr110424 AZRIEL GOLDSCHEIN M 65 BORSZCZOW 1943425 SZEJNC1A GOLDSCHEIN 62 BORSZCZOW 1943426 CHAN A GOLDSCHEIN F 31 BORSZCZOW 1943427 AZRIEL GOLDSCHEIN M 51 BORSZCZOW 1943428 ETHEL GOLDSCHEIN F 48 BORSZCZOW 1943Skala on the River ZbruczrjCS<NriTtJ-rrr~irnrorornror<*.r*~,O'ncn<*•rornrnrnO'fSO'trrrr-t-1-■^r*TO'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'.O'O'O'O'O'O'O'ooof-E-E-E-C/53:C/5C/5onw$£££££SUJUJ££QdOu.ouoNUoNUoNUoXUoNU6doCLzoXuuuoXuXxx>CzLou-cdOU-cdOU-oNuoXxxx<>/NNNNN•—iX—X<>—<<<<NX<<< <0-C/5C/5cnC/3C/5_lc/5zC/5jz-Jz-j-J—JC/5C/5-J-i-J-J<nCZoZCZSZCZcZ00eZCZczcZ<cZ<<<<eZZZcZ<<<5uzOOOOOoXOoOox ouzuzszzOOoJZ-ZU JZC/5C/5030300030300—i00000303m caC/3C/5C/5C/5COCOCQC/5C/5C/5C/3rno(N*T\<No00^rrnoO'O O'—onoO'or-rrTTooCNCN*“\r\Cl(NOi<Nr^*CN222Luu-Ll.5U-2MMU-2U-22u-u-zgzggggzzgggzzzggzgiliiiiig ~Q-JoUUU OOOUUUUUUUut/3ininC/5 C/5C/3C/lC/3c/lC/lC/3C/1C/3C/3C/3C/3QQQQ QQQQQQoQQQaa-J-J—J-J -J-J-J_J-JJ-J-J-J—ijXXWWUJWUJUJUJE* E* E- E- E~ E™U Uq q a-J -JE-m in c/3 m m c/3Q Q Q Q Q Q-J -J JS8S888S888S8SS8S88SSS88S8SaZUJ2Xuc/3CZbJO£3Z<c/3O'<zoiJLUiZC/3UJ03<O<JUJ<23jUJXLuJUJ2<QC/5UJ<zzUaUJXOdCQ<<Xs<s1ZAKGO>zw<fidC/55N2<•-Jo—O<UJzUJ><Z<<XCQXuC/5o<C/3C/5uE-&NXo.c^C/32J03Q2uCZ2oCN’T«A>VOr-00O'onr<3oi-'00O'or*r*->r*3CT)rof*3roT■^r53-T’T^r^r-3-ir.•*r'i-•^r•'Trruz <W iZN Jc/3 UJ"3- if111List of Martyrs<N<Nc*4dcscs<Ndn<NC4(NcnTf^rTTTTTTO'O'O'rj-—-rO'5O'~TO'CN^rO'O'O'O'^rc*>^rO'O'O'a<O'O'O'.ONONO'O'O'’O'O'"O'O'-O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'’O'’oooo—«—«—11ooooooo•—1*—•oooO--HC/53of FOn t/2sso oo£ £O O yN N ^< <Cu.<<u-<u-<<<FNU<INu<cj<<<<UNCJNCJC<<_] _J—)-J-J-J-J—J<-J{be-jJuJGOGOj:-J-J< <<<<<<<<GO<GO<K<<<<oCo4<<<u u54U54545454oOo5454OOO5454ut/5 ooononGOononononJGOJCOcaGOononGOCQCQ03ononGOO "toonCOor-00CNO'tvOr-iromO'inOmfO00-tr~IA,•^r»/*>mtoVOroCOrrm•nm(Nu. u.u.2u-u.2222u.U.u*2Unbou-UuU-U-s2u.£oNN«2O' mt </12 2QQQQQQQQQQDQQQQQQQzz2—_J-J-J-J-J□-J-J-J-J_J-JF-JF—1gUJLULU—LUggUJUJgUJUJUJUJUJgggUJlj-UJli¬b.li¬u.li¬li¬li¬li¬u.b.li¬Fli¬b.Fli¬Fli¬HHt-HonononCOononononononononenonononcnononCOonCOUJUJUJUJLi!FUJFUJUJFUJUJUJFLUFf T]QQQQf-i—FpH-FF-r—FF-FFFFH-Ju-JJHHHHp-f-Ff-FFFFFFFFFh-88888888888888888888888888i/i 'O r* w oin i/i i/i i/i in'T T t T t—i<<Jr/'F 3^UJQUZ<<aX<z<EjQ<JJ5'✓J5<GO3C fo uy COSUJ<So5Q->zo2COc\CLUJCO<Z<c4—UJ<l~*^ ONUJNaLc4o<d0403Pu<mJ-jSQm —>COonCLCOLuCQ■—>0303o04msOr- ooO'oCNmt»ovOt~-ooSOvOvOvOsOSO■cSO vONOi-~r-r^r-~r-r-~fffFFfz zUJ tuO' ot~~ oo■t F112481 ROZA GOTTESMAN F 55 SKALA 09.1942482 JUDA GOTTESMAN M 19 JANOWSKA C.C. 1942483 CHAIM GOTTESMAN M 15 SKALA 09.1942484 SAMUEL GOTTFRIED M 52 SKALA 1942485 CHAVILC1A GOTTFRIED 49 SKALA 09.1942486 JOSEPH GOTTFRIED M 20 SKALA 1942487 ZENIA GOTTFRIED F 17 SKALA 1942488 LEIB GOTTLIEB M 45 STUPKI C C. 1942489 MIRL GOTTLIEB F 39 SKALA 09.1942490 FRYDA GOTTLIEB F 17 SKALA 09.1942Skala on the River ZbruczcNcNCNcNcN(N.CN ■zzz-$^rzzrr Zzrrm<NrnmmO'OoO'O'O'u:mmmrnO s^-^rzS3"S'*sTn-T^r-3-.\!/z^r■^r1 1 *7_oOnOnO'O'O'O'ONO'O'oO'O'oO'■ "O'OooO t-*DDoooooODo DUJUJUJHHOuuOC/3s£UJo'O11S$s£££O££££OooecOoooo<ooooUSzUSXNXXNNXX<<<u—U-uUouC/3UUuu< ei<C<N<NNN<<<<<<aSPjjNNNN0iQ3<J<GflaS<C/3a:saaSy?aS—<oz<-J<3C/3c/iC/3asC/3aSC/3aSC/3aS5DXusUJu:ouoOOzC/3C/3OoOOUS 5COCQCQC/3C/3C/3CQC/3CQCQCQC/3•—>C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3E>CQCQCQCQC/3 DT-«00o—r-oir,1/3m■*rrrrjoor-‘A,mocnmCNCNm^rCNr-mCN00mrnrnoTfmrru.Uuu-2U-u-sU.2u-2u.2u-U-22£UuU-u.OOODat as at atuj uj tu ujcq oa cq cqz z z zjjJ uj U4 U"xaS at at bSa a a oaoaooooaaa-i -j< <X DCat at z zUJ UJ UJ UJZZhhtfl Ifl I ID D U u< < UJ tuIXIIr- HS UJC ><z<HE3<Sg<z<E3<<C/3q/a:z<<<cZUJaJDz*CQLUo 2XI<QiUJOCQOC/3<X>- 2XusC/3Z>CNrn•3-COvO r^00O'oCNr«3O'O'ONoC\ON O'O'O'oOOO*T•*rn-'t»/3»/31/3cnz2_joS<HS<<SsQJUJUJHDIjUJUJIoc:<o2/h-<zUatMeC<aCQUJ<OIUJ<>UJCQS□<aC/3C/3cnEzOCQ <or-COO'o,__nmtnvOOooooo—*——»A)tr,‘A'icn>ncr,»n113List of Martyrscn<NCNCNCNCNCNCNCNcnr>4CNCNCNtT’’TTTTT’TTzzzz^rTJ*■'Tcn £;^r■»rOsO'OsO'ONOsOsVOsO'csTCOrTCO^rCOCOOsX- OS""OsO'C' oO'Oso'o'O'’O'’Os’Os(“ ■_■z_ jO'"OsO'O'O'OsOsOsOs OsO'’Os— oOooooooM—11Ooo— oOo<<<<Ui0H££££uC/3wr\OOoo<2wMHHHHOINJfj<<<<C/3UmN <<<<<<<<<*KU<<<<<< << <<<C/3 _]—1xJxJxJHJxJ-JNNN!NxJJoxJxJxJJ_1xJ xJxJxJ* <<<3<3<<1/3C/3C/3*—iC/3•<<z<<3<<< <<3o uiliucSMM—u<x uu ^cq c/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/32Z5miniooC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3 C/3C/3C/3Os00sOXMO'COo00o00OssOoTfrr00SO»zsO»/-i•'T rlSOsOroOs245ir><Nm,COCN00soCOsoCOm,u. u. SU-U-UuUuMMuu22suu22Uxs2UuUmUuUuUuj j jj< < < <!XXIXPgppz z z zuiMididE E E Ex 11 x< < < <XX XXf- f- f- f-z z z zUJ LU LU uuX X X Iz z z z„ s s s sUOOOOOUUUUJJJJJJW QC dC OC tt!b w w uq wac - - - -OS Qd QC Qt£UJ UJ LU UJa: a: a: ax_ uuuu _W I/) (/) w I/) 1/1aC oC as a: oC cCxU MH Mm xU xU —M xU »U M_ xU xl— xU U— xlx Mm Mm Mm xU xL. xU 4m xU U— xU Mx xUQ><Q< uq> X□ uN 3C/3 cc1Hc/3UU 'r- oo os o — cn— — — (N M N*0 trj so ir. iz\ ir,SoCQ 5xJUJC/3sri Tf i/j \0 h- OO<N cn cn n cn cn*r< ^ ir, *r»XCJUJX□CQXu<-Jor,s/<oC/3<UJ0^3uo£bQ2SC/3<C/3<s<H*P•—>O'oCNCO^r>z,SO<NcoCOCOr-.COCOCOsz-.izssr.KT>\r>%<<%<<Cj N O c/3O >• uj << Cd U U. CQh 00 O O - Mro co ro ■'T ^^ ^ «n v. iri it.114543 SZAJE HERSCHER M 36 SKALA FOREST 1943544 ARON HERSCHER M 34 B0RSZCZ0W 1943545 SHL0M0 HERSCHER M 30 USSR546 ZALMAN HERSCHER M 64 SKALA 09.1942547 FRIMA HERSCHER F 48 SKALA 09.1942548 CHAN A HERSCHER F 18 SKALA 09 1942549 RYWKA HERSCHER F 16 SKALA 09 1942550 JENTA HERSCHER F 13 SKALA 09.1942551 PEARL HERSCHER F 83 SKALA 09 1942552 RACHMIL HERSCHER M 40 BORSZCZOW 1943Skala on the River ZbruczCNCNCNCNCNcnTfTfn-COroroO'roroO'cnroC*JrorriroCNOnONONO'^r*=ror^r^r■ ]' ]O'ONONO'O'O'O'-ONONONONONONONO'O'ONON*———o•—*—•o—•—•——•—oooo££££oooO<NNNNuUU(JC/DNNN<<<<<<<<<N^< <^ ^ ^<<< <inC/5on_J_j_j-3-J-J-3-3ino^ ^a/ a/^_3_JateZ04<<<<<<<<<at25 5 5> >> 5 5<<OOo343434343434343434O<MM MM MMMM MM MM343434 34030303ininmmC/5C/5inminCQ•—>z z zz zz z zC/5C/5C/5 C/5MMoCNMM TfoONNOOOONroov.CNOr-COO00VhroNOVCN —Tror-ViSOroNONOroCOr-NO^rr-r-coCNU.ul2sUm2u-U-U-2U.s2u-2UmsU-2S2UmUmU.q4 c4 e4 o4ssssuuuuC/3 C/5 C/3 C/3a! a! a! a:e4o4o4c4e4c4e4e4o4o4o4o4o4o4o4o4o4o4UUUUUCKJUCJUUOUOUOOUOOOOC/5WWC/3y)WC/)75C/H/5C/)7)y}C/375y)C/)C/3N|NNNa£c£a£c£o£aia'Qic£o£oioZc£aZc£c£aZ.c£&t2z2.ccm fT) LL) M [T] frl fT1 fT1 fT1 W f1! fT1 [il W [T1 tTl m LM fTl fT1xxxXXxxxxxxxxxxxxxxxXaamujZ<<N O2<£tuKH<__COO<CLUJMM<c*CO3-JWCO<-JUU£>04Ho<HCOoazCOa.UJNUmu.sU4VIor-00OnOCNmV,ViV\r,VViViNONONOooNOViViV,VkViVViViv,V,V1-1 =-4 ^isCOD<“32o<20^XCL|<Xs£NO<->■*<LUCOn51uV5u#sw•—>OnoMC^lcoVior-r-r-r-r~"V,VViVViVVio r- ooVi Vi Vi115List of Martyrsr*CNCNCN<NCNCNCN(NpfpfpfpfpfPfpfpfPfCNPi"OSasOsOcppfOs£asCsmpfPfmPfasOasO'Os’oasO'.osO'.O'.asOO'Osoooooooou<szC/D£oz<£ouj uU CJ£ £ £ £o o o oiZ SZ N NU< <3 3Uuu<<<N<<*——NNN<_JCOj-J<<QQC/5COCO_j<<<0Z<<algZ<uzUZUOiZu u: a5CQ5CQCQSZCOCOCOCQCOGOC/D C/DCQCQCOro003«^POUPo0000rn— UPpfa>pf,TTroroUPUPr-CN<oCNCN PfOupUPPfr-U-|u.U-U-U.UuU-2U-uuU.U.FF72u-2u.rnrprprppTpfpTpfO'OsasasHHHHC/DC/DC/DC/DUJUJUJUJCZcZCZCCOOoOU-u-U-(JU<<<<J-j_J<<c<<szSZuzuzC/DC/DC/DC/D„as00CSsOUPsO2u.U.eZ oZ eZLJ UJ UJz J J j5 u a m5 N N N1 z z zX uj uu ujU u. u. u.O O O OX X X XN N Nf- H H^ 5 ^o o ocZ cZ a!o o oIIIU. U. U< U. U.cZ cZ oZ eZ cZO O O O OcZaScZPQpQQSSSzzzZzooowSfiuwujujujooooa«:<!<!<<<:<«:<UJOO — <N ro TpnOhooO'O - (Sm'^r^'or'oooo — N m vhoooooooooooooooooooo^O'CvO'CN^O'O'^O'OOOOOup up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up up so vO so sO so116605 REGINA JAGENDORF F 54 SKALA FOREST 1943606 VLADEK JAGENDORF M 36 SKALA 1943607 MAX JAGENDORF M 39 JEZIERZANY 1943608 ESTHER JAGENDORF F 35 JEZIERZANY 1943609 TAUBA JAGENDORF F 11 JEZIERZANY 1943610 CHAIM JAGET M 33 S.S. PATRIA 1944611 DEBORA JAGET F 32 S.S. PATRIA 1944612 YENTA JAGET F 8 S.S. PATRIA 1944613 CHAYA JAGET F 22 S.S. PATRIA 1944614 YOSEL JAGET M 73 BORSZCZOW 1943Skala on the River ZbruczcncnCNCNcnCNcnCNCNcn"TortTO*^r""T0-rorororoO'O'O'rorororoO'O'O'O'CNr iO'roO'rororoO'rr^r•7T'TO'OnO'O'O'O'"O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'.O'ooOoooooOoHh-f-HHS-CJC/5c/5C/5C/5C/5C/5£luLULULUluluu£oNuNc4OC4oa;oLUu5CjCJc4Oc4Oa:oU<54ONCJ .N <u.<u.<u.<<<<HC/5LU<Lu<LU<<<<<UC/5£<<<<<s-J-J-J—1-JLUa.~—J-J_!—1-J-U_zo——-J—1-Jt/5 _1c4<<<<<-j2<<<<C<<<0^z<<<<<og CO545454545454>•oh-54545454545454o<:54545454542 *oaC/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/D NLUC/DC/5C/5C/5C/lC/5C/5C/503C/5C/5C/5C/5C/503 c/loCNr-oCN00O'o00r-O'CN3COO'Oir,r-ro00VOvOroCNTT■o-COCNCNCNVOCOCOCNVOu-2u-U-sU-sssu-u.U.U-s2sU-,U.tusU~N N Nu u uli jio o o!- £4 (4 C4LU UJ LU LUO 54 54 54< < < <N N Nt— t— t—£ £ £< < <£ £< <C/5LUC/5LUC/lC/5C/lc«C/lC/522sLUz<-NNLULULULULULULULULULULULU—UO--1—j--1JC/5C/5C/5C/lc/lC/53Ooooo•—>oo—1o1—1DgPP2P54^ Z£ <<S»/■> vo t--<ZoNzLUuI2£C/D/*N(4LUN<<O'<<1p5—1h-/->ss03oCJJUJ*<zoLUL—WLU-J<JOUJuJ<;oC/5CQuC/DJC/DuuC/DC/D22•—»UC/D00O'o—CNcovOr-00O'O__CNro"7Tvr,—r—CNCNCNCNCNnnCNriCNrorororororoLOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvOvO< hu 5<zN CC O'117List of MartyrsCNo>CNO'■'T^rmCO^rmTTCNO'nrrO'cnrrO'CNrrO'.cn^rcnC'CNrrO'rn^rrn<NO'mTm■^rrnTcnT<n■*rCNO'CMO'o<ONONoO'O'O'O'O'ONO'O'O'”O'O'O'’O'O'O'ONO'O'O'O'O'-ONoo•—1—r—«—•»—•—oooooo——o—•—•—•*—»oou£>oOXoN■<NNUUNuuC/DUUuuU<c <<<<<NN<<<<<£< <<<<<<——<<<-J u—_JJ—1c/DC/Dj—1-Jj_o-4 -4-J-JNNscscN—i—< <<<<<o'a:<<<<<z.C <C<<UUoCoCu<<sc SCSCSCSCSCOoscSCuscSC<SC SCs:DDOoDSCSCC/3 C/3C/3C/3CO00CQQQC/3COC/D00CO~3CO CO00C/DC/DCQCQCQCQCQCOCOo o■*r_O'r-00oCN■'TmCO00■crCOCNmi/io_001/1TfTf r<i’TNOin'tvOmwir-~roro 'T<ommmlOnoo■'}-•cru- u.2U.2u.2Lu2luU.2u. u.2LuLu2u.222u.UJ UJDCDC0COCacCcceZSCcCcCcdoC qCOCaCqCeCQC: nCoCcCZ ZUJwUJmUUJUJUJUuuWUJ UJUJuuuu1 UJUJUJ< <cCoCgOCg222cCcc£oC oCggg2DC: ^DC222222ooCOCOc^2 00oo221 oo002COCO<<<<<<<<<<<<< <<<<<<: <<<m2SC szS4S4S4scscscsc scscSCscscsc: scscSCSCS4coUJO2<_JSoo2OoCu.UJ>OQO•-MCNm•nNOr-00O'O•-Mr-iro»n'Or^00O'o-r^rsrr*T3T3m.m.m.ir,ir,mmminm.oNONONONONONONONONONONONONONONONONONOCNmmNONOonOoo>NONONO118666 MOTIO KEIS M 55 SKALA 09.1942667 CHANA KEIS F 54 SKALA 09.1942668 LEIB KEIS M 31 SKALA 09.1942669 BASIA KEIS F 30 SKALA 09.1942670 RACHEL KEIS F 25 SKALA 09.1942671 FRIDA KEIS F 22 SKALA 09.1942672 SZEJNDL KEIS F 15 SKALA 09.1942673 JACOB KEIS M 13 SKALA 09 1942674 ZALMAN KEIS M 35 BORKI C.C 1943675 YETTA KEIS F 34 SKALA 09.1942Skala on the River Zbrucz<NCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCN^r^r^r^r^rN-O'.O'Ovc'VOvO'OvO'r^vr^iCNOvOvOvO'Ov*—?’—l^r*“*“**“*^r^r^r•“**”*^rOvO'OvO'OvO'’OvOvOvOvOVOvOvOvOvO'’OvO'.O0O<—O0OO——•—OOO0O< <<ooj 2< QSS4 O< << <<<<U X ^£ £ £o o of- H H< < <£ £ £o o oN N N</3c/3(/3NNN_j_jai ct ai < <<3C/3C/5C/3fflC/3C/3y}73CQD3CQ^^^C/5t/)73< C* < <' c/j ^C/5< ^_ ^ ^ID 75 WO to IT, n^O'rf-O'OO-On-OO-OyOO-Ohh'i,^n-oooOTf--irlTf-oovO‘nvO'OMM-vOnOM2 u. 2 2U. U- u.2 2u. u.2 u. 2 2 u. 2Z<5— Z2Z2S2Z3Z2Z25EuluEIjEuEHwiZZZZZZggg<<<<<<SSSa222222l?|wdujmujmujSuug:□ = □ = = =7375735&r§22222a£a£fiiA52222255252mW<HbzgSO &2 z2 ^ ^ Qb d o -iii^8siSSDugw-J 0£ 2 Zgi!82< ?z<<c/3 CQ2 <oi u.LUXo< QZ g0 8C/3 2X< L>Z *isor^oooo — cn rr vo r^- oo ov o — cn m -*r or^oocvo —hhhhooxooccooMMooooooC'C'C'OC'C'C'C'C'O'OO\0 VO sO vo vO vO vO vO *0 VO vO vO vO vO VO VO O vO '•O vO vO vO vO vO t""- C*”*119List of Martyrs-oCScscscsCNCN<sCNCNcnCNcnCNrr^r^r■^r■^TrfTf'Tf^r^r0O'O'O'O'Q\Onc-OnO'0(SjONO'O'*“**—•Tj-•_—•“4*“■ONO'O'O'O'O'O'ONONO'ONOn'ONONONON©©©©—©—©©©©©©—©©©r^t m m m — roO' 0\ O'. O' O' O'£££££££0u0(JOOOO0NNNS3NNNUuuCJUUOUU< <N<<<<M<N<<<<<<1—1<<<NNNN>NJ -JC/3—-JjC/3—►JJJ'jL—JC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3< 3a:<<<<2<04<<<<<5cd<33c4c4c404O£4Nj^ N^J000343434343434034O0OCCGO GOCQGOGOGOC/3CQGOCQC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3CQC/3GOC/3CQCQCQCQJCQ— VO1/3©r~©N-CNOr-CN_©cnvOCNC*3ON<N cor«3rom<N-rrrCNCNCNCN^rCNO'!r«->^rr~2 Su.UuUuUu2UuUu2u.u_u_U.2UuUu22U.2U.22zZZzzZZ040404<<<<<<<r/a:Q/n/Z04LUU4uu2S>JJmJUUU<UU0-O-—Bjc_<=35Z25ZZzZSZzzzzzzi-JO-JO_1a-JO9a£<<uuuuUJLUa)uu55UJuJ-UJuuUJH□UJ-J-J-i□—1-JJ—1-J-j-j-J—JJjJJ—3-JJ—1j-J—ij34 34343434343434343434343434343434343434343434343434XCL.uuC/3o9 2 £> < oc a £hdun—1OUU<-Juus<£1<X5X<UU<!s0z7<<<Z<<CLonpH>Z0-<Es34NZO>04C/3<UJC/3UJ—'*- ■u_;<043Ecd—10Oo4N<CQaUJQcu2GOQQC/3—]UuUUcd>•CQGO0^(XJCZ*jIZ'.VOr-00©O(Nro■"*KTivOr-~00©©Mc^l©©©0©■—1—1*—'—1■—■rHCNCNCNnr*4i<. —)5 <0- CQv, o hCN rn -rr©©©_____ .. . , .120728 VITIA KLINGER F 72 BORSZCZOW 1943729 MENDEL KLINGER M 29 SKALA FOREST 1943730 IRENA KLINGER F 26 SKALA 1943731 ALTER KLINGER M 65 SKALA 09.1942732 CYLA KLINGER F 64 SKALA 9.1942733 RACHEL KLINGER F 75 BORSZCZOW 1942734 MANIA KLINGER F 45 BORSZCZOW 1942735 GITEL KLINGER F 43 BORSZCZOW 1942736 ZEIDE HERSCH KLINGER M 70 SKALA 9.1942737 FRIMA KLINGER F 68 SKALA 9.1942Skala on the River Zbrucz<sCSCSCS<s<S<NCSCS^rO'(NrrONmTfONmTfONm■*rON•^rON■^rON^rO'rnONO'•^rO'<NrrONO'O'O'^rO'<nO'ON<N•^rO'TfO'O'O'rnTTO'rnO'rorrO'cn^rO'ON—1—*—■—1ONon’ON—O'’O'’-O'O'O'ON—ON——O'O'*———< <itO' O'££££Bi ^ooCjoUoOuOo oNNX\XNN NuUUoCJou(JUU UNN<<<<•—<<N<<<<►—<NN<<—NN Nmc/3JnJJ—C/3-J-J_1_i_jc/3C/3J—3^C/3C/3 C/3os!oZ<5<<<<OZ<<<<OC<o4c4<<CciaZec: CCSOO34o34uo34343434oOO34oOo oCQcac/3C/3C/3inCQC/3go03C/3C/3C/3C/3CQGO0303C/3GO03CQ00 CQ.oCNNOOCNr-CNcnOr-lO'CNOCNO'm ■'rI-~(NTmr-3-incnCN"O'incnCOlOmlONOmmcn —su.52u-s2U.U-2U<u.u-s2U-u.u-sUus2FMsZUJOzo ou. uo oHhhhf-o oo ou utSa J _J _] _J _] Js < < <: <; <; <fz £ £ £ £ £ £o o o o o o o^ *Z ui U Xt US 1*32<IOUJ-4UJHC/3OI03<ZXuuC/3CZ<03<GO2<M<>w-jUJsGO/~s<<GO<N<aXCLUJC/3Q_j<as<<GO£5Uf^u<Oi<N>oXOOLDUJrOwa-13SGOI03GOCJC/3C/3u2GOGOos;U.■—>C/3ooC/32_CNcnTfiOf-00O'O__CNCOvOr-00O'or^icnTfiT'T*/">m,cr,»r>minm•nVONONONOCO o\ o121List of MartyrsCNCNCNCN<nCNCNcNCNCNCNm <NT Tj*'=TO'=rONm'I-mTCNrfonOocnTfn-o^ro^ro■^roOmrrmmrfmrrrnrfmrfO asONONO'OooooOOo*“mOO'O'OooooooHLUC/3u^ s££££S£oNONoNozCJ0u ^uCJU<•UuN <C<<NNZN<<<*—<<<<<—<<<<<< <C/3 JzzC/3C/3C/3_jzzQzzzzzzzzzzzz z£ <<co'z<<Cdz<<<<<q/<<<<<<c c2 *zzooozzZDOzzzzzozzzzZz zCD c/3C/3C/3CDCD Z03C/3C/3C/3CDCOC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3DOC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3 C/3oCNoomoCOoNOr-o^r—NONOCNO00rnrnir.0000rnr-NO■*rrrTr^^rNOrnN/Trnrnrnrnr-UuUuuusuu2Uu2UU22UuUuUu2UuU-sUuUu2Z ZZ ZUJ LUN Nf- f-Q Q Q Q Q Q_I _J Z Z Z Z QUJ LU UJ U UJ 111 JU. t U. U. U. U. UJ!/l M t/1 W M « tt,, , , ,r , ^ ^ _ noOOOO^££££zuql^zuq32|^££S2uu uj z zZ Z, ^ ^ ^ z uj _OOOOio'a:ZZZZZZZZzzzzUJzC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3wC/3“1zzzzZZZ Z Z Z Z Z ZQ Z—3 UJuu pfe 22§Z a:z zz zUP uut— f—c/3 C/3z zo oZ Zz zz zUJ uu(— f—C/3 C/3z zO OZ ZZ Zz zUJ UJf- f—C/3 C/3Z Zo oz zz zBeuBiio^uSuq N ^BrutzujQZ e/3N O«-i— ►A. Cj UU Lu —■ fvJ CJU (J tfl S b 2 5 DO (/) 7)I 2zCJ <H zc/3X Nai ZCJ HUJ UU <X CQ Zc/3 c/3 Nt,iO h oo c o — (Nm'l-mvor'ooovo — csrnrru'icor'ooovOsOvO'O'Osor^r^r^r-'r^r^r^r^r^r-oooocooooooooooooooor'r-r^r-r^r^r^r^r-r^r-‘r^r-r--r^r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r-r*-r-r-122790 SARA KRONSTEIN F 77 SKALA 9.1942791 BERL KRONSTEIN M 43 SKALA FOREST 1943792 CYREL KRONSTEIN F 35 SKALA 9.1942793 MOSHE KRONSTEIN M 7 SKALA 9.1942794 MINA KRONSTEIN F 6 SKALA 9.1942795 ROZA KRONSTEIN F 4 SKALA 9.1942796 HIRSCH KURTZ M 36 BORSZCZOW 1943797 RONIA KURTZ F 35 BORSZCZOW 1943798 TODRES KURTZ M 5 BORSZCZOW 1943799 SOSIA LACHMAN F 62 TLUSTE 1943Skala on the River Zbrucz1942CNON19421942194219421942mTcnCNn-O'cnTTmmTmmmcnCN■'tONmONO'ONO'O'O'O'ONO'O'OnONONONONONONON—•—•ON«—•——*—•On'—*HUonUJUUCJaSo3NNN NNuu.zUO3u u< <U<<<<<<<<<<<<5<<<<<< oS-3-J-1—1-3-3nJJu-J-JCLj-3Jy•y;yy ^C/3200 122<<<3333<<qS<<P<333<3 2OoO OOUSUuSUSuSuSusUSUSou!US—u:USusUSUS <-3-J-J -J-jC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3c/3C/3C/3CQC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3 SZoNO— 00cOmoNOinCN(Ncne'¬NOO'NOoNO5m—ONNO<N —'inininenr-CNTCNCNCMsU-MM22u-U.UL22ULLuLl.2u-U-22U-2s22u-D<Dz<z z< <2 2Q Qz zc <J JN N N N N Nouuuuy<<000000CQCQfflcacQoafflCQEEuuiHulEtljN NU O£ £o ocq oaz<<_ £UJ UJ UJ_1 _J -JUJ LU UJ—J —: —3Xu. 82_iQ -3Z H jS2 H g Ssag?- < d_^ND<5o<c/3 c/3 aS c/3O—^CNr«3Tt-i/3c©t---ooG'© — - N m t r,OOOOOOOOOO —-----NMNNMMoooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo123List of MartyrsCNCN<NCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNcnCNcnCNrr*T”TTmmrrrrrrcnTTCNOnONCNONONONOnONO'ONONONooOoOoONOnONON’—O'’———1—'—ONOn'ONONONon'ONONONO'ONon'o'o'o'o'o’oo'Hf-HC/3C/3C/3“1UJOZaZazuoOoo'u-u.u.< ~<<<<<<<OtL<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<j jz_J-JJJJgogoGOC/3JJ—1—1J-J—1J-JJ-J—1_J-J►J< £2<<<<<<<5<<<<<C<<<<<<<CHi oHi3Z3ZHZ-ZHZHZHi-ZHZ-Z3ZiZHiiZHi;zHic/3 CQC/Dc/3C/3C/3C/3C/3c/3DC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3r-omo00mOrninOomCN^rooor-TTV—•CNOrrCNr-cn.mCNCNmcom^rCNmCNu.2u.U.U.2U-2UutuU.u*u-u.2u-2u-u-u-U-22zzzzzzz ______<<<<<<< zz 222222222222 oo Dd5d5Q Q Q Q Q Q Q O O * <<<<<ZZZzzzzzzz^^ooooo“3“99<<<<<<<<<<gg2|Szzzzgggggsss^>>>^>>r^>>JJJJJD2CQCQCQCQQQQu35SE]25MuuuSS£92£S!iiSiiiaSSS§Q_Jm—z-zx>zCQ i/3<z<aZ032<C/3v© r~ oo O'CN N CN CNOO 00 50 00<-JUJ03or»30003OU<<2C/3zooo UooUJC/3O2<Z<xu—4CNcnmmrnrn00000000in vOro m00 00ooUJ<Hi<2<03<>ooo3-JUJ<H<XowO<<£9<XsZ*oo03UJCJLi-*—>C/lur-00oo_«<sminNOrnrnm-r^r~T'*■00000000000000000000ooOO O Orr ^OO OO 0000LU—IIT-,00124852 BRONIA LUNENFELD F 35 SKALA 1942853 JACOB LUNENFELD M 12 SKALA 9.1942854 HERSCH LUNENFELD M 5 SKALA 9.1942855 BERL MALAMUT M 46 BORKIC C. 1942856 SARA MALAMUT F 44 SKALA 9.1942857 SOSIA MALAMUT F 18 SKALA 9.1942858 NECHE MALAMUT F 12 SKALA 9.1942859 RYWKA MALAMUT F 8 SKALA 9.1942860 1SAK MANN M 56 SKALA FOREST 1943861 SZYFRA MANN F 55 SKALA FOREST 1943Skala on the River ZbruczcncnCNCNCNCNCNCNCNO'rrO'O'■*rO'CNO'CNcnO'CNO'CN"'TO'O'CNrrO'CNO'O'*7fO'N-O'N-O'•^rO'rTO'O'O'O'O'’p™O'1O'’O'’O'O'’o'HuC/3LUu:4Ou.<c£LUuu<<<zC/3£<<<c<<oNUoac4oSo4odo4CJ•—><u•—><<<<<<< <-i-I-1-4ou-i_i-j-)NVviC/3C/3C/3(AC/3I-1J-J-J-j-J-J<<<<z<<<<<C/3C/3C/3C/3QQ<<<<<< <34343434<34343434oooa343434343434 34C/3C/3C/3C/3JC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3CQCQ1DDx>a.Q.C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3O'O00oOroU">OO'tr,r*">CNOO*/">CNO'CNO'vOcnVOir.CN-3-NO00rnlAiTfvOro•*rTfcnu*ULLUsUuu.LUU-LuUuU-sUu2U-2U-2U.2u.-la< uuS Sz z z z z z z<<<<<<<_) J J J J 1-4 -JUj m rrj m m LD UJc/3 c/3 Z3 £ c/3 1/5 1/5^5 uj uj-s0404 04 0£ 04 04 c4UU UU UU UU UU UJ04UJ04UUUJN N N N N NNN—_J _U _U —1 -4 —J1 Jt JUJ uu UU UU UU UJ2222222— — — — — — —-UUZZZZZZZUJ UJ UJ UJ UJID UJ2 2Q><Q<o4Xcuuu<Nm-'i-*/3CCit^ooo© — <Nr‘3-3->/ivOr---ooo©— <Nc«3'sj-i/'>cor~-r^r'~r'i'~r-~r't~~r~'OOooooooooooooooOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOOCOOOOOOOOOO125List of MartyrsCNonon(NCNm r*-. m m m m 2. m m m m ro r4 <N cm CM ^ cm rn<rj- T^- Tj- Tj- Tj* ^ Tj- Tf~ Tj- Tj" Tj“ Tf T}" Tj* Tj* ^ Tj" Tj"O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O'<ton£6CLz* Ion <5V3 gj3 OHt/5UJcjUoOp*OoOOcJOoODd/-No<i /{joNNXNNNNNWNNUUCJcjCJCJcJCJCJUuCJC/5(JUCtNNXXNN•—*<NN<<<<<<N£N—<X<rf\monononononjmon——-_j--Jonoitjon—Jt/JctatatatatatcC<atat<<<<<<oC7at<at<C/5OOOOOOoszOOit-4czitjLOOitOit_>CQCDCDcoDOCOCQonCDCQc/5ononmoninCQ00mCQonOm©O'VO(NoCM©00v£>m*nONoO'mor~rn•*T”t-~IT)>/-.0000Tfm00mm<NvOVO<sU*2u.U.U-252Cl2UL2Cl2222U.222CL2NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNooouuuouuooouuuJ -J J -JuuuuN N N NUOUUz z z zUJUUH£££££££££££oooooooooooQQQQQQDQQQQzzzzzzzzzzzCLiUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJ£O_JQZm2£ £O O_J _iQ QZ ZUJ UJ2 2ooooz z z zon 2 in inm m m inUJ ttl w w2222at at. atUUHUj J j-J j J2 2 20tuaoC^cneimUJjjjfTjttiCJ'rleC2E«z2“j^2^05 O' o - n n00 00 O' O' O' O' . O'UJt—*u< w ZN Q <Owl04 N CJiTj ooO' O' O' O'<HS9x gC/5 vJS UUCN o o o4U3E<2<<ou<>-N<J5-QQtuooQC/52>onCQUJm^rvO00O'o<NmoQocooo•—O'ONONONONONONONONONO'126914 PEJSACH MILLER M 25 SKALA 1943915 SHAUL M0JDL0W1CZ M 34 KAMIONKA C.C. 1942916 SOSIA M0JDL0W1CZ F 35 SKALA 9.1942917 ISRAEL MOJDLOWICZ M 5 SKALA 9.1942918 MARIEM MOJDLOWICZ F 4 SKALA 9.1942919 FATEL MONDSCHEIN M 66 SKALA 9.1942920 MASIA MONDSCHEIN F 62 SKALA 9.1942921 CHANE SARA MORGENSTERN F 66 SKALA 9.1942922 BARUCH MOSHE MORGENSTERN M 42 BORSZCZOW 1944923 SARA MORGENSTERN F 37 BORSZCZOW 1944Skala on the River ZbruczCl Cl Cl Cl Cl Cl Cl Cl ClO' O' . O' *"”!.O' O'' O'— — O' • O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' ■ —■ <—•cs5 0.9 Q.?~“! <D O'. O'.O' C/5 — C/D —o oN Nu uN NC/5 C/5eZ O'O Ornli. u. u.<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<<* <<<j-Jj_l-JnJJ—JJ-J-J—jfJIIeZ ->-J-j<<<<<<<<<<<<<>> <<ZiZz*4ZZZZZ»—~ *ZC/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5c/5150C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5gZ C/5C/5C/5VinClOoC~•*rmOo «*■><NTTCNr-TTOr~r-~-TT00mClr^ir**>C~ rcroc~u-2U.u.2uuu-sU*U-2u.2uusFMu.s sUnszzzzzzcZbZcZoZcZoZzUJUJUJUJui—HE“f-HHC/3C/3C/315/!mC/3ZzZzZzujUJUJUJUJUJOOOOOOoZoZcZcZcZoZoOooOo22£S2aZcZcZcZcZoZUJUJXUJUJUJZZzZZzc/3mC/3C/3C/3C/3OOooOo2S222f- Fp bs sa ap pOZ 0£ QZ BZ OZ OU U UJ u u xJJJJJ«j-r-QQOOOXPP<!<<<<05SZZZZZOoXC/3XuoioXC/5Xuos><—UJzC^LU<z—JUJX<-jUJ<<zsJjSCO2;NQC/5UJ<zX<jUJXuC/3<oZj<c£C/5o5<wC/5oDoUJ<S<C/5oC-Xu<wCJc>cCC/5O<XatCOoZmgiCO22scZft.a.C/5C/3h-OZC/5c£s|—>U-2X<CJXC/5C/5N»/■>r-00O'or^jm«oOr-00ONoCNOr-Clrnrnf*3rnror^.rnrn-r**cr^r^rT*^r^rO'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'127List of Martyrsrnmcn'TTrnCOCNrrONCM"3-ONCNO'roro<NO'CNO'CNOnCNO'CN^1*O'roroTTroCOTroTTT■*rro■^rCN^rO'ONO'O'O'O'O'O'ONO'ONONONOnONO'ONOn—**—•————•—ONONON——O'.ONONONOnO'££OOO0(J00u0OONONNNNNNN< <FUFU<JOuUUCJUU<<FNF<<<NN<<<<<N1—NN>—•<NN<_i -1_icZC/3a:F-JfC/3C/3F—-FJCO-ZCOCOu-JC/3y~.—2<OacO<<<oZOZ<<<<<a;aiCZOZc£<ai0Z<fFN□NFf0OFufF0OOOOUOOjLCO C/3C/3C/3U02UC/3C/3(30CQCOCOC/3COCOC/30003oo00CQC/302CQm roFOr-~</vVIO'CNONCNNOcn0v,Or~V,rjO'r~00"3-•'TFCOCNr-V,F^r00NONOV,v,ir,CN•*rMFU.22tu22U.U-Llu.2u.2u.u-Fu.2Cl2u.2CLu.cZcZoZoZoZcZoZoZcZoZoZoZuiuuuuaiuiuiuuuuooooooooooooOOOOOOOOOOOO. , , l_ F F F I- FSSSSSSSSSSSSgggggrf^E&EEEis_ 1   3 . 3   ]   3 . 3 . 3 . 3   3 . 3 . 3 . 3 ^ . o . r\. ^ f f' 1 1 1 1 1 1ffffff-jffiFffooooooooooooCL, Q- Q. Q.0000C/3cZF F F (— F F<EwjjjjjjOCLClQ-.Q-.OuCLCLClCLCL00 O'rtO' ONJmOC/3<<<5F-J<<gz0<z<<LL)Xu—Z<C/3<wC/3O20<FZ<0CQLQuF<<z02D<_u<az<r<-JHt—z<<C/32<£>rf-<<H-Ju-2SosF2Q20HC/3FO>>ONSoC/3aLzLUOCNm^rIT)NOt-~-00O'0CNro^rV3NOr-00O'0CNiA)iA)ininV3V3V3V,0NONONO0NOONONOr-r-r-'O'O'O'ONO'ONO'O'O'O'O'ONONO'ONONO'ONO'ONONONON<So<ai<2c«NfO'128974 MENACHEM PRESCHEL M 46 STUPKI C.C. 1943975 RACHEL PRESCHEL F 45 SKALA 9.1942976 CHAYA PRESCHEL F 16 SKALA 9.1942977 CHAVA CHAYA RAB1N0WICZ F 62 SKALA 9.1942978 MOSES RABINOWICZ M 26 USSR.979 HARRY RAPAPORT M 23 USSR980 CHAIM RAPAPORT M 45 BORSZCZOW 1943981 SZYFRA RAPAPORT F 38 SKALA 9.1942982 BUZIA RAPAPORT F 13 SKALA 1943983 PINKUS RAPAPORT M 11 BORSZCZOW 1943Skala on the River Zbruczro"3-Ots•*rO'O'CN■n-&CNOCN■n-oTj-CNOrnrj*CNCN<N^roCMCN^roCNOCNo(N*!TOCN^rornTj"mTj-CNTfOCNocn^rocnTJ-•—*—ooo*"*oooo'o'—o'■—o'—oo'oOooo'o'o'——o'o'o'< <Z ZOooo*zUN(JNUX<<<<<<—<<<<<<<<<<<<<NN<<< -—-JjJZ-J-JJJ-JX-J-J-JxX—100C/3-J-JX ^<<233z<<<<<<<<33<3<Zz<<< ¥ZzUJujzZOZZZZZZZZjLzZzzOOzzz oon00OOooooCQooooooooooCOooooC/3ooooC/3ooCQCOoo00oo CQ00■^rnomo<nCNvOinCNomor-8mNO1^*CNCN00rrr-»<nroONr-^rCNr-r-min»nsU.2u-ss2U.2U.2UuU.U-22u-2ssU.U-u.2HHf-HZZzZzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzoccCLUUJUJUJUJUJUJXXXXXXXXzC-(La.i—f--i——f—r-oo<<<<0-XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXa.0;a.a.0-uuuuuuuuuXuuuuXX<<<<<UJUJUJUJUJUJUJXXUJUJUJXUJXzzZZc£zzzzzzzzzzzzzzzzJhI J JUJX-1 Z < X y Xuj d u Z w O x<Hnx<;/JZ<i.c/3e2£a<fl!“OSO< oi.z sX NS xZ -J2Z < x0553* O X< C/3 00Z<CQou<t o m» O' o — — cNm^r^vor-coO'ooooooooocoo(7'0,'a'OG'ONO'ova'0^oooooooooo0>OvC'0>OvC^OOOC'C'C'G'OvG'GnOOOOOOOOOO129List of MartyrsCN<N(N<N<N<N<N<NCN<N^rO'O'943943943coO'coO'943O'O'O'O'O'O'^rON*^rONco^rO'O'O'O'’ONONONONONONONrocororoCNO'tTrr^rrrO'O'ONO'—•ON££5:£££oOooOoNNNNNN< <CJ(J(JCJUUNNNNNN<<<<<<_j JC/5C/5C/5sc/5C/5JJ-J-J-)53 <<c4e4DCaCcCo4<<<<3uc j:OOOOOO-45454545454C/5 C/5COCOCQCQCQCOc/5C/5C/5C/1C/5C/5CNoNOro^roooO'r-NOCOCNNONOCNcoconmU-u-2fafa2fafafa22fa2faUJUJLUUJuCJcj<jwuj£££NN<-Jo-4o541o541o54u-J>CJP <> J<C-J<•J<<_l<-J<J<1—1o—o—o—oC4£ <<<<<<<54N—JwwpP ^545454545454C/1>>Hl— C/5C/>C/5C/5c/>C/lC/lo—CO—oCON-oNOooCNCO•*rCOCOcoO'NOcocofasfa2Uh2fa2fafafafafas2ss&1=[=t-HHHf— HH HHi—HHHS-(-f—QDDD<<<<<<<<<<<<< <<<<<<J<<<<<<-JJ—i-J-JJj—1—!—j-J—J —1J—J-J_JJLUCQCQcaCQCOoaCQCQoaCQCQCJoaoaoacaCQCQCQ CQCQCQCQCQoafaLULU4zZzzZZzZZZzzzzZZz zzZZZzZfafaLULUUL)UJUJUJUJLUUJUJUJ-UUJUJUJUJUJUJUJ UJUJUJUJUJUJLUU-C/DooC/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5 C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/lo ooOOooOoOOOOOOOOOoOO OOOOOOoDC DCDCDCDCDCDCDCoCDCc4DCDCo4oCDCDCDCDCDC DCDCDCDCDCDCc*soo<C/5UJi<ac<IC/5LU<CJ.zo2aCJ< ,-]<<s2CJC/5sUJ2<<C/5OCJZ<UJ<Q<UJC/5>-uwXC/Do3DoC<LUCJZ<<NOXooODo4<*^!yD223odaa§<c2<<<faLU><XCJCQLODCfa-JN222CQfaC/D2CQ2 iD oofaC/DC/DfauoCNrocor-ooooCNco•^rl/"-.NOr-00O' <oCNcoN"NOC"«—c—«*—»*—»—«--r—»<NCNCNnr ItN(N(NnCN COCOCOcocoCOCOrooooOoooooooOOO©oOo©o <oooOOoo©1301038 ROZA ROSENFELD F 20 SKALA 19431039 ISRAEL HERSCH ROSENHAUCH M 45 SKALA 9.1942040 FEIGA ROSENHAUCH F 42 SKALA 9 1942041 JUDA ROSENHAUCH M 21 SKALA 1943042 SIMON ROSENHAUCH M 20 SKALA FOREST 1943043 SZIYE ROSENHAUCH M 17 SKALA FOREST 1943044 CHAIM ROSENHAUCH M 14 SKALA 9.1942Skala on the River ZbruczO<Noo<NTTO(N■^ro^rornCSo(NoTfrnrntTCN•*roOooOooOooOo'Oo'o'o'o'o'o'oxX xxxUJUJXu uuuuU££ £££££££££CJoo oOoooOOOO<<5*4<<NUNoNoNU<<<<<<<<<<<<<NNNN <-J-Jxxx-3-JuxX-JXQ5 55555c/5c/5C/5m _j<3<<333<<o4<<<<csC3 —pio4o4o'Oi& <i4xx,uO*X54COD 5X>5XXOOo2 ^c/5C/5C/3C/3mC/5inC/3C/303C/5C/5mc/5QD 0QoaCQOQoaoaCQCQCQ c/5tr.mOOvOOV)«N50— vOo•*!■<*■.50mo<Nir<VIm'A.ror~-00r-C^-Tv,TV,ir( v~,VInci50501*5rn \ou.Xa*Xu.2u.IXX2XU-x2XFMx2x22xXFFacuXuQQQQQQoOOOoaaaOO2X2X_;A-Jd-J—3UJUJUJUJUJUJwUJUJUJwUJUJ<<<<<<<<p=:pP>pp=X>>c>NNNNNNNNNJNNNNzzZZ7Z/zzZzZzZzzzZzZZ_]XXXXUJUJUJUJUJUJIXUJUJUJUJUJUJuUJLUUJUJUJUJUJUJUJXXXC/5C/5C/5C/5mC/5C/3C/5mC/5C/5C/5C/5C/5C/5mmC/5C/5C/5C/5oaoaCQoaQQoooOOOooOOooooOOOoOOODD5D DoCcioia£oiQiedoio'oi04oic4o4c4c4c404o'o'c4o4o'Cdo40^2Z.XXO<XUJi/3Xd<§<SoOC4)2o<<o1<QXXuooX2Xc4X<04mH<C/3<X52<<<N<oX5<D<>Es<X<<XXCriXDX<X<OCQC/3mIXSXC/3QXXCA)Xo4DC/3C/3XXX<ZCJC/5UC/3o'E'Or-OOoOcscn^r»A)50r-00oo<Nc*>»TiOr-00OoTf*r*^r-T^rIT)IT!ia.»r>ir>ir>V52VO•c5£5•cvO2vOVO50ooooooooOoooooooooOooooOoo131List of MartyrsmmCN^rOnCN^rO'CN^rO'CNO'CNO'CNTf-ONCNSt§OnCNO'CNO'cnrrONCN^rONCNCN^TONC*">"Tc*"i^rc*lc^COCOCOCO^rCOCOcnO'.CNONCNrrONcnorO'COorONONON—ONONONO'OnONONONONON———ONONONONONONONOn'OnOn'On'O'ONONONONONON££££<Z* °> NoNUONON£O cjUUCJyOZ NN<<<<<<<<<<<—*<<N<N<<<<<<C<<<Z ^■j-aaa-J-J-JJJX—J—IJ—)wo—1wo—1JJato)—i—1J—1—i o$ £Z<!<<<<<<<<<<z<Z<Z<<<<<<<<<< z> 2ozzzxxXZXZZXoZZozozZZZZZZZZz o— CQCQwoWOt/1WOwoWOwowowowowoCQWOwoCQwoCQwowowowowowowowowowo ZU-imr-Oi/~,0NT,NO000OnCNt—00044O00nC/“lCOin cn0CN00mCOcoNOcncoCN00CNCOCNTTTT«— inmCNNO2Li-FF2u-U-U-2u-u-2U.2Uu2U-u-22U-2Li-Li-2u-2U-U-OOOO00OOaazzzzzzZZzz<z<Z<zUJZUJZUJUJzUJZUJZUJUJzUJzUJz1_)J<<<<<<<<<222CQCQCQCQCQCQCQQQCQCQzzzz zUJ UJUJUJ222222222n:NOOQOQQQOQ<<<< <03 DQCQQwwowowowowowowowo]_)—-zZZ//ZZZZZXXXX XZI D5DDODD3DDDD<!<<<<<<<<<<UUuu uz zzzzZZZZZZzwowowowowoCOWOwowowowowowowowowo wo-jxs2<COU, <i < tujQ m -izSu< — Q<3 £LUSS^u!5SSi£NOu2^— M nr-o o oTf IT, VOr-o o o ooo o>r- r-~o oo —00 00o o<jX2X<0<ZXX<u0<CJCOHcoCQuzX<0O>-<<<ussCO2aL0£zCOCD(N<nTT*nNOr-00ON00000000000000000s0O0O00O00u <<*<< >d z> wU Nn tj- tr( oz Sc> zZ UJ< IN 00 O'O' O' O'<<2UJ X-J u.o —o oooooooooo — —02 SARA SCHARFSTEIN F 46 SKALA 9194203 SCHEINDL SCHARFSTEIN F 17 SKALA 9194204 CHAIM SCHARFSTEIN M 58 CYGANY05 NISAN SCHARFSTEIN M 18 CYGANY06 SARA SCHARFSTEIN F 11 CYGANYSkala on the River Zbruczr-l M(N CN M M <N'T Tf Tf Tf Tj- TfO' O'' O' O' O'- O' O'C J M fN NO' O' O' O'^^ VO V-/' ^ ^oooooooooooooooo-<N CN CN CN CNXT Tf Tj- rf TfO O' O' O' O'CN CNTT. . __ rotJ- On O' O' On O'' On O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O''OOOO-— OOOOO — OO —£o>■NUuuz<<<<<<<N—<<<<c<<<<<<<•—<< <<-J-iJ-3-3-JC/33Z-3—-3-1-3_JJ-J-3—!Z-i jo<<<<<<<ezeZ<<<<<<<<<<<<CZ<< <>*UiZla*oOz-ZsziZ3ZUiZ3Z3Z-ZoU 3Zu0303C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3CQCQC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/303C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3CQC/3C/3 C/3CNO'_ONc*>CNoOO00vOAOO00cnAAN"CNN-A 00AA>AmcnCNr-r-~TTACNACNr-r-N-r-A*r>A) —O.2U_u.u-22u.222LU222U.u.u.222Li.2U-FFzUJoZcZoZQZaZCZcZoZcZz<aor/—Q-oZcZoZoZcZm3-30303m03030303r-/Ci-03mzQuUJXyC/3UJLU03UJ3-3LU——-—M.Urn-i0.U,30r\U-/zzZzVXxaaaIXXXXKh*HH£—f-pUuuuuuUuuusu.—i4<<<<<<<u03030303030303aaUJ0303033XXaIXxXXIXsaXXXXXXXXXXuCJUUououCJuouuUuuuuuuuuC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/303C/3C/3C/30303C/3C/303c^030303C4>oZUJDO<03oZ’ll<-J<C/5cZ: • 1at:UJr \B—11J<u<X<sJ<03•—JQ/=—J>UJ—Xw• • •s03<JXX503>•0uu<ZX03z>JUHEuMHC/5g<XC/5OC/5uD*U-<c*UJ03o3<03s<XH<-JOcZ03ocZy<CZ><X5SUJauz2XccCL-JC/5X2C/DcoXuC/5<CQzUuC/500CNoCNroV,nOr-00O'oA3AN"»rivOr-00ooCNooo————————CNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNAcnm133List of Martyrs(N<NCNcn cn cnCNCNCN<NCNCNCNCNCNCN~t-r"TTT rr rj-'tmONONONOn On ONONONONmr<">trr*3mONr*3ror*3roO'ONCN^3O'OnONOnrr•'*««. •***»TT■<rrr—^onONONONONONONONONONO'ONONONONONONONONO'O'O'O'O'O'ONoooo o ooooooooOoO££££££££££uCJoOooCJ)oooooo<CJNa-NNNNNNNNJZCJCJCJCJcjcjcjCJuCJCJai N<<<< < < <<£ <<NNMMNN<NNNN<<<<< <Z c/3Z-Jz_3 -3 J—!—1_i z-JC/3C/3C/3C/3—103C/30303zzoz-j—1—- a <<<< < <<<CQ <■<zzzzoZ<O'odCCz<<yz<<<<^ o zzzz z z zzX ZzOOOoozoooozz<fo Zzz zX CD03C/303C/3 C/3 C/3C/3C/3Z C/3C/3CD03cu03cuC/3CQ030303C/303•—iOQC/3C/3C/303m 03mm m00CNNOMMO'ccMMNOMMr-•*ro^ O'TJ-00r4CN O03no ooCNf*N •—•00TfNOCNC3r-CN0303r^iCNCNCN0303 —r-NO0“)ro CN~n NT Tf2 222U-U-Pl2u-2PmPL2Pm2PmPLPL22PL2PL2 2Pl2 2z2ZZZZZZZZZZ-L mm Mm mm Mm Mm Mm Mm mm J-ZCJOCJCJUCJUCJCJZ f£uj SiX Xu cjC/3 C/3zaZzzzza£zLl!UJ33UJLJUJzzzzzZzzULULU<—1mJ—!JzzzUJzzzZzzza apQoQQpNNNNNNNNNLUzLl-1Xgz'z5HHf-Hf—S—f—f-r:zXX5E=XXpXIXXXXXXXsXuuu□uCJCJXCJO0CJuu z ouCJ CJ03C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/1C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3QQ□Zzoao5is-j2. Z C/3 S oiz < O a- za. C/D C/3 z oa2<|<2§*C h <!(J UJ c/3*12 252<i£ 033C U3U CLf^Tr^'or^ooovo —f^inr^nr^f^fOi’rrCN c*i ttTf Tr TfZo< 2f- oa £»/-) \0'i- rrC/3mJXC/3<<w<S5<zZ<NQC/3p<-LOzOEOo■<£<zXozzzN03HC/303QQ00O'oCNrp03NOr-rrTTi/i03O')O^i030-3o-»*r,Z z < ZX 03 Z Nzo2oo O' O - M n64 RYWA SCHNEIDER F 46 SKALA 09/194265 SARA SCHNEIDER F 15 SKALA 09/194266 BEILE MENIE SCHNEIDER F 45 SKALA 09/194267 ARON SCHNEIDER M 18 SKALA 09/194268 MOSHE SCHNEIDER M 16 SKALA 09/1942Skala on the River Zbrucz(N<Nn<Mr-iC^JC*-l^rrr^rO'O'O'O'O'O'mO'<Nmr*lroO'O'O'romrncnmrnTT—^^rTrrrf■TfTO'O'O'O'.O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'oooooo•——•o*—•ooo—•—••—•—UxHHf—H(- HC/lC/lC/3C/3C/3 C/3XX%UJUJUJUJ UJu<3/2<2Xr \xXxoNo=4Oe4Oa2O=4oo4 2o oUgoC/3wxxxu.u.buu.u. u.<<—<<<£<<£<5——<—<<<N<<<<<< <-j-JX-J—1-1o-J-Jo_la.-J-JXC/3-J-JX-J—I-J -J<<e4<<<z<<2<s02040^<<<04<<<<<< <O23=43«2<34<r—OOo3*2343x2O3x!3x23x23x23x23x2 34C/3C/3ffiC/3C/3C/3GOC/3C/3CO030Q03C/3C/3C/303C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3 C/3»nO'rrCl<N—00o■^rsOr^sOsO—O rr rj-O'mr-m■<*-~o^r<N<Nmninr-m<N — Tl-<N”U*2u-2U-u-U-22u-2u-Ux2s 2u.2Lu2XXX<<<<Hht—f-ZzzzUJUJUJUJSaoa04o404o4OOOoz2222<204OCo4cCed04040404o404UJLUUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJQgq29a22Q2XUJ□UJUJUJaUJUJUJuiUJziZ!zz2/2XXX-I£X£XXIIXUyoucjuuuo□uC/3COC/3COCOCACOC/3C/3COGOz<2nS rS rSS U) W U H2 3 X X NUJ tU UJ UJ —IIIIIo u u u uC/3 GO C/3 C/3 C/3e4UDNJf—uC/3-J-J_j-JUJUJUJXc4o4o4 e4NNNNUJXXUJZZzZ(—HHH04LUG4UJUIXC/3C/3GOCOOC4=4XXXXXXXXXXXXuuCJuUuuu uGOGOCOGOGOC/3GOCOCO<UJ_JXUJ ^ a.d5 u<— * goUJ < ON c/3 2^O' O - M nso r- r- t-rr *Aj SOI"- C"O' o -— rinTTiri'Or^ooc'C> — nn tts'00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00 00C'O'C'O'O'135List of Martyrs040404040404040404TfTfrfTTrfTf04O'rorornroOsOsOsroOs04O'Os?5roO'O'04040404TT__'_•'T-__-S’x^x^^r"3*oOsOsOsOsOsOsO'OsOsOsosOsOSOsOsOSOsOsOsO'OsOsO'O'Os*—'•—O——*—•OOo—o—Oo——•oo—•—■——HooHuC/3UJ(JuCOUJuat<c<c4<O M3434O■atOU. (jCOCOu.C/3U< -<<<<<<<<<<£<£ <<<<£<<<<<-J 2-J-j-J_-J—J-J—JjHo—o J-J-J—1ou2_J-J—i< £<<<<<<<<<Cz<z <<<<z<<2<<<it 2it•at3Zitat3/!jz3Z<< 34it343/C<;■ato3Z■at■atCO CQCOC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3COC/3C/3CO-3 coC/3C/3C/3COC/3CQcoCOcom o04■d"^rOO00Oif *—in(NCOo*coCVio,cs—O''d-■cf00id-ror-com|xcof'Ifroin"d-COu. 2U-u.u.u.2U.u.u.2u.2u.2u.2u.su.2z<at 2UU UJf— Hco coD DI Xu uco cohP hhat at, at at< < < 5£ £ £ £I I I Iu u u uC/) (✓)(✓} C/}<QZoN—IUJQ_JUJI<S<jLU<COUJ<zoN<<c3Z<<. >o2r><DC-j-j£g<>-JoZUJa5><U<-UJCOO«5j2>■3COoqUJZUJNP-J<atg1—v—1oSh*co<atCJ<COODjaCQXQatCQCO2uCOuCO2U*CQco<uCOoiUJCO22COmor-00CiO04roTfinOr-00©©CNroo00OsoClO'OiClO'©oOOo©ooo©—•—*I—*—•—04*1 |(N04040404<N04040404040404040404040404041361221 WOLF L1BSTER SCHWARZBACH M 57 SKALA 09/19421222 RIVKA SCHWARZBACH F 48 SKALA 09/1942ZYLINCE1223 JOSEPH SCHWARZBACH M 21 FOREST 19431224 BETKA SCHWARZBACH F 18 SKALA 09/1942225 DZIDZIA SCHWARZBACH F 11 SKALA 09/1942226 BEILE WIT1A SCHWARZBACH F 75 SKALA 09/1942227 PES1A SCHWARZBACH F 71 SKALA 1943228 DORA SCHWARZBACH F 7 SKALA 1943229 CHAIM SCHWARZBACH M 36 JANOWSKA C.C 1942Skala on the River ZbruczCNrnCNCN<NCN<NCNTf■*rrr■^r^rTTO'oroONcnONO'.ocnrornrornrnrnrnoOn<N__rrn-*■}■"t•^rONooONONoOoONO'ONONO'O'ONOOoONOoONoOnOo—oo—ooo——*—*—1*-*•—1'—•———oO—H(—f-HC/3C/3C/3C/D2UJ-y£££££££UJ2—oclooNONuCJoNoNoxOXoN£c4o1CloU-U-.<joCjCJuocjoU-t£i-<<•<< <<CNNC2<<<NNNNN<34<<X<<< <-j>4 -iJc/3C/3-JCLJ-1C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3jjC/D-j-J“4 -4<c< <<04C4<_<<<c4C4c4o4c4<'<<13<<< <343434 3434OO34H343434OoOOO34>3434o343434 34C/3C/3C/3 C/3C/30202C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3020203CQCQC/3£C/3C/3CLC/3C/3C/3 C/3osOo r-r-r-ooON•a>r-00ooor**2o_—NOoONNOtTNO>a,•a.cnNO•AmCNNOrnmrimr-u-22u_U-sU.22u-u-U-u*S22Luu-U-V u u u< < < <a: ca aa 032 2 2 2< < < <X X X X X Xu u u o u u<<<<<<CQ CQ 02 02 03 0Q!/)(/) Wl/l MX X X X Xo o o o u< < < < <02 02 03 02 032222< < < <£ £ £XXXU CJ u u uC/3 C/3 C/3 C/3 C/3^ x w<^zyC/3 C4 -J ^WWX5Z X <J 2O - M rn<^:P<0u§—XuinPzuDc4CQcCj<Q-j2<d<XC✓)a:<Z<<—LaCDoCJOC/DoH<<do5wE<<<1La<LULapjo4<□<LaH*tuXcaPlSc2CQNC/DCOjSCQC/Ds—3C/D2La03utTu-,NOr-00oo_CNmTfVOr-00oO^4CNm•Almn-,mmcnf*3^rT^rrr^r•'t•Ac•A.•A•A,i r,•A,<NCNCN(N(N(NCNCNCNOlCNCNCNO'!CNCNCNCNCN137List of MartyrscnCNCNCN<NfNcnnrnrnrnTnrmCNrnCNcnmONOnO'ONrnCNrnrnCNONO'ONnrnfrnrnfnrnrn-nTnrnrnrO'OONONONOnONO'O'ONONONO'ONONONONO'ONooooooo&3ou.<►J<zC/3{■*COUJ0£Olb< < <-J -J _3< <! <z z zC/3 1/3 C/3UJUUIu u u£ £ £o o oz z zz z zUJUJUiN N NCJ CJ CJCJ<J<Z00 CN O Ov CN 00m rn f-- rf tT rn^U-^U.CL^U.io<<<<<<<<<<<<ZzzC/)o-J-J-JJ-JJJ-jJJC/}C/3C/3z<<z<Z<z<Z<2z<<z<ZZ<<z<UL5COCODC/3C/3C/3C/3c/3COc/3C/3C/3COC/3COzbbo•/>r*i'tCNCN0000Onro■C-,sO•nNO•«1-TfvOU~>nrcnrn00^rCNm2£U.s222U-u.LUSu-UuLi-sU.IIIU U U< < <CQ CQ 03222< < <£ £ £IIIcj u cjC/3 CO COIIICJ CJ CJ< < <03 CQ CQ222IIIu cj uCQ 03 CQ222< < <LQ Ji 52sCO<z<><CJz<MIuu£z<u,—3a><_I<z2<2o—ulC/3Z<<zj—<zQ>2<ZeuUJQZ<CQIIC/3zOUJ•OiIu>Hsj<WCQI<oNUJo<<o<<m2—JyD>a:UJQCQ<oC/32UCQHQC/3C/3f-INOr-00O'oCNmnrITivOt"ooO'O_CNmNONO00O'o«r>ir,>/1v©VONONOVONOoVOVOVOr-r-r>r-r-r-r-r-r-oo00CNCNCN(NCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNnnnC^lCNr4CNn1381282 NUN1A SCHWARZBACH 23 U.S.S.R1283 RIVKA SCHWARZBACH F 65 BORSZCZOW 19431284 JOACHIM SCHWEBEL M 35 GUSZTYN 19441285 SUZIA SCHWEBEL 34 GUSZTYN 19441286 PEP A SCHWEBEL 62 GUSZTYN 1944287 ELISA SCHWEITZER F 65 SKALA 09/1942288 MIRIAM SEIDLER F 55 SKALA 09/1942289 MALKA SEIDLER F 35 SKALA 09/1942290 SARA SEIDLER F 4 SKALA 09/1942291 MOSES SEIDLER M 30 USSRSkala on the River ZbruczcNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNCNT■'T*3-^ro0CNr«pO'O'O'CNcnmO'OON■*rt^ TTO'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O' O'©oooooo©o —HUc/5LUU£r \fiduuLULULULULULULU<owoNNNNNNNXzN0luUUUUUuuz<J<<—<<<—J-J-J--_<o <<N<<<< <-J-JujJ-JP>*>>■P>pC/5—jz*r— rtMon-J—-J-J -J<<<<<oi(SiOtatatatatat<b4>od<<<< <O2424X55-p5C/5Zz**s •—O24242424 24C/5C/5CQonC/5C/5HHf-Hf-HPC/5^ zzCQC/5c/5C/5C/5 C/55up__r-CNOUPCNr-" m^r•'tOOup00Or-sOoro^3“rosOcncnr-sOO— UPUPCNsOUPSOroT—so TfLU222LU25LuLuLu2sLu22222LuLU2Lu2MMC/5 C/5 C/5 C/5 C/5 CO C/5SSSujujujULitLjujujgjujuuDPQ'J^'^CQCQCQQaoacQCQLULULULULULUcdPcdcd^^Pi a;on on3 D§§W tum ca-i rJp? asio oon on on onzz;<<32 2 ^Ot at Ot zWWUu2SSzo o o oon on on onZo o o a <zzzzs_l _J _J _J iZe£ oi a! cU OUUUU1UQ,CLCL£LhC/5 C/3 CO C/3 C/5<ajoaS Z -J CQ2|¥°N B W <C on a.nNZNDSaizom 2 O'N on <Xa.on ma. JTJ < 52 ^ 3 5Szon><Q^Si<iijontt.j!=;a.oncNc^Trupsor^oooo^cNcnTj-upvor-ooGso^cNr^^upvor--OC'C'O^C'G'O'C'OOOOOOOOOO'— — —fSNMMMMNiNnmnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn139List of MartyrsCN (STt-m r<-,Tf’rrQ\ O'' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O' O'— — — — ~ --O O — — — — — — ~ — — — ---H H HC/)C/} (/)£ £ ££££g8CJ uUuoNu£ouuuuo<Jo0oNCJoNCJoNCJoNCJa<Ou.UOU.aCou.tJLJUJWw— m—Ny——NNNN<<<<<ppp<<<<<aC^ COCOzyyC/3C/3COCO_-J-J-J-J-JCOCOCOCO-Ju-J-J_1CO2 occdy<fcta:yyyQCCOCy2<<<<<DE)D<<<<<O OoO*>ooOooOOOyyyyyy—3-J—Ij:zyZCOCQ CQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCQCOCOCOCOCOCOHHPS—COCOCOCOCO3ooCNO'hO'r-r—<r-tj-O'oCNr-CO?or~-r-O'»oO'mo^rr<">mr<~iCNCNroiri n hvO■<rCNCN“rnsU-2Lb2s22u.Ll.2u-u-Um2u-UuUu< <-J -I< <y yCO CO2 u.7oaaOUJaUJ2i<-yeiyyXr==CJgj2aC-a£-y—cZ-aSgygoiuQiLULUyUJyUJyUJoc:a&LUQiUJyUJZ Zac 2UJ05UJUJCQUJCQuCOCJCOZcCL> UCO COz7ZZz—zZzszZ.ZZzzs5z giziLc/SZAUJJ.uUJujm2UJ2UJUJLUUJ22UJUJUJ2 ujUJ UJLUmUJUJUJUJUJUjUjH f-f—(-t-HHf—HH(—Hs—HHf-Hf—H i—H i—h-f—f—HHHHHPCOCOCOCOcoCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOcocococoCOCO COCO COCOCOCOCOCOcoCOCOCO<w00»0"N(0't^'OM!000-Nnt^ON»0'0-Nn^iCiiOM»--NNMMMNNONNWr<imnn(nnM«fnM-'t't^'T'ft'l''rforomrofomrofof^fororoforororororofofororoforofoforofofofomSkala on the River Zbrucz<sCSCSCSCSCScsCS•*r'<rTf■*rTfo(Nr^iTfromcsrornrnrnrnmCsO'O'O'rnror^imO'O'r^iO'■*t-r^rT^j-^r■'TToososOsOsOsOsOsOSO'OsOsOsOsOsOsOsOsOsOsO'O'OsOsOsO'.OsOsOso————•——*•—•———*—11OOOo——•—oo•—O££££££££tjooOOOCjooooOONNNNNNXKSNNN>■cjCJ<JcjU(JCJCJCJCJuCJCJCJZ H< r;<<<—N*—NNNN<—N<<N<<<<NNNN<< < C/3 ^z z_1ZZuC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3-JzC/3-J-JC/3-J—1z-JC/3C/3C/3C/3_J UJ -J< <*■<<<aZZc£ZZzZ<a:Z<<Z<<3<aCOCaCaC3< o 2 <z oZZZOOoooOOOoOzzOoOOj:v^ >• o icCC/3 CQc/3C/3C/3CQCQCQCQCQCQCQC/DCQCQC/DC/DCQC/DC/DC/3C/3CQCQOQCQC/3C/3 CJ LL. C/3r~- oo_OOOo00mO<Noor*">•'J-_<NOu~.r~CSr-~Cv mr~ m1/3>/-,V".•'TcsvOcsC-JsOr^>r'V~,sOroroC*3cscs— </3 00u. 225U.2a-U,u.U-2u.U-u-u.sU.u.U,2U,U.s25 S 2ZzUJEyC/3C/3C/3C^UJWzZzzC/D C/DzZZCJ CJ<<<zzC/D C/Dac-JZZZZzzz zUJUJUJZz:zzzzZZzz8UJUJUJ-J■JzUJZz_c£UJ UJDUJ_■UJU>UJ(JO0oCJOUo88iucCJouo88CJojo-JOJOJOZZozozH H!—HHHH(-HHH :Hf-h“HF-HHHHf—HNNNNNNC/D C/DC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/DC/D iC/DC/3c/3C/3C/DC/DC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3C/3c/oC^C/3C/3C/3* z< <CQ CQ< <f- HZuj00UJEnNXa.52O'<!7d<C/Dza1< j/D<0^<cTdft*<C/D<N<2<z<JENTA<UJSUJN<<QXClUJC/Dn2<z<a.C/D>oH<2zzSS3 C/DODN0<>•>*DoUJr<oa2ujiUJO<UJ u-2 zN-J3u .sC/Do'CJoozCQUC/Du_crjC/DLu—»>-CJu_z<s'Tr-00Osocsf*3•rrsOr-ooOSocsr<-)tTVOVOr- oocr,CZ'.»/■>CZ-.*A-.SOsOsOOsosOsOsOsOSOr-r-r-mromrnmrornrnrof*3m mList of Martyrs5 3O' O'-£oNUNC/3oz5CQ C/3*/r nu- u.UJu£oiz<1DCQir,u.CSCN(NcsCNnT^r^r■^r-*T^rO'.mO'nmroCOONG'O'O'toCOrofO<NO'n(Nmro■*r^rrrrrTT**r•*r■*r_rf^rO'O'ONOvO'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'OsO'O'O'O'ONoo*“*,—oooo1o•“*HHuUuUJUJCOUJCOWu0uo£CJ£2<<<oQUoNu<NCJ<OuzS*'V<<<u<u-<<<<<<<<u.<<1/3£<CO£CO£—<<JJ-JJ-J-j-J--J-J-J•Jo—1oo<<<os:<<<<3<<00C/3<<<<z<z*oUUOo*c<<33COCOCO00COCOCOCOCOCOCO—1-JCOCOCOCOCO—*CQCQ(Ntr,—r~-o\m cnO'<Nro00r-O'00OOin-roo•o■*r— r-r- ttIA-.’'t»o*r jCNroUrnU-u.u.2u-u.2U-22u-2U-<-h-ZLi.I—Xu< < Jr* hr 4 4 4fMwmnnaiata'dillEIMMUUUUU__ Z Z Z < < 4 45,^.cjuuuuuoaoa_5»-ijj33zzzzZZ<<<<<<s£2cce£ecOZq/UJUJUJUJUJUJC/3C/3C/3onononC/3C/3C/3C/3onC/3<<<<<<££££££CQ5<i—i>z—jn<<C )UJ<aUJuZ<Q<Qo<<<i-JXa<XU-<Cd“X<c4<<<a5zCOc2DDo_jIZAHCQCO>-Jocdzu<CdIUJUJ—5<*WD<QiZUJocOo<a<yjUJCOCQu-jU.u-—»COS-JCOu-COtuaCQ2Q>COXQa.O'o<NrotoVO00O'or4r^>»oVO00O'o<Nr*iTTr-0000COooCOCOOO00CO00O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'ooOOOrnCOfOroromrorommmrnmmmmmTT■^r142405 CHAIM WASSERMAN M 54 JANOWSKAC.C 1942406 MANIA WASSERMAN F 49 SKALA 09/1942407 SAMUEL WASSERMAN M 16 SKALA 09/1942408 MEIR WASSERMAN M 12 SKALA 09/1942409 CHAIM WASSERMAN M 86 SKALA 09/1942410 RYKIEL WASSERMAN 55 SKALA 09/1942411 AVRAHAM WASSERMAN M 69 SKALA 09/1942412 ROZA WASSERMAN F 66 SKALA 09/1942413 CHAYA WASSERMAN F 40 SKALA 09/1942414 RACHEL WASSERMAN F 36 SKALA 09/1942Skala on the River ZbruczQ\ O' O' O'* On O' O' O' O'<sr*C4^r^r■*rO'—O'O'O'C*-)mrororr)rnrofO«.__rtrrrr^TrtONO'OnONONONONO'O'O'O'ONONooOoo—-——*——*———f— H f— f—i/i w w w£££LUc4Of TBBLUc4O[ T£££5: £oNoNON(Xofrfitof 1<<<<ONoNONO ON NUUU2y2gUUUU UN<<NN<<<<<* -<<<<<<<N<N<<NN NC/3j-Jonon-1—JJj_J--3C/3JC/3-J-JJ-.on on£4<<c4c4<<<<2%<<<<<C43|4<<c4c4 c4o:434OO343434D5D53434343434O34O3434oO OcaC/3C/3aaCQC/3onC/DC/3(4OL£4aLC/3C/3C/3C/3C/3CQC/3QQonC/3CQca oaV"><NO'CNoTTOO O — t"-oTT<N 00NO—O'00NOO'r-NOr-r-TTO' ^TTT — — 0-5rr—* NO»/-kCO2u.2u-2U-2U- U*2u-u-2U-2222u-u-zZZZzzZzzZZzz<s<<2<<<V<<<<<<<c4LUC4LU£4LUc4LUc4LUacCacd,ao£ooi.aoCacda o£4 c43c4:43rZ(4rv*rZcCS■~zyy_1»J—1-J—1UJLULU-ULULULU LUluLULUEgLULULULULULUUJLUUJonC/3C/3onC/3CQCQCQoaCQCQffl aaononC/3C/DC/3c/300C/DC/3C/3C/DC/DC/DIIXXXr\C\r\or>O OonononC/DC/Donoo00ononC/3C/DC4>UUCJuU———S—£ 9<<<<<<<<<<<<<LULULULULULUUJLULULULULU LU£££££££££££££££XC/3o£sLUaEuLi.< Q 5: ^ 5 5: c_)—j 5- t/j O J5 tu<a:ougg =on tu f- -J c4 Z 5U^vor-'OOO'O — C^lr^Tfiy-iOr^OOO'O — (Nr^^-i^or-OOC'O— — — -<'-NMfNMMNN(NNfSnr>nnnnnnnnt143List of MartyrsCN<N<Ncn(N(NCNCNCNCN(N’'frtrn--r*—comrommror**iromO'O'CNO'O'roro<^iO'O'COr^jrnO'O'mroO'O'O'T-TT■*rT■'TttTTrrONO'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'.ooooooooooo£oHC/3. UJaooCLoOoooCjOo'OoONNzNNNNNNLJf *NNNc£CJCJUuCjUUCJCJu-CjUULUNN-<NNNNN<<—<<1N<<<<<N<<<NN<<—onon(2onononononju-J-jzon-J—i__Jon—j—cnC/5-J—i~Z-o£ci<cioicZoioi<<3<<oi<<<<<oi<<<oiOi<<uj OOLUCOOOOuozoi/OOiLZzJZOuoiliOOzCQcqaC/3fflCQCQCQCQC/5C/3CQC/3C/1•"*CQonC/3onononCQC/3onC/5CQCQC/3cnr-r-•nO'„O'0000VOcnO'r-O'O''OmVOmmi-'ovO„O„■'Tro»n</>(NvOo•m<NcninmCN(N-'Tm'TmomCNCNCNmu-2u.2U-2LU522LUu.22LuU.U.2U.U-22LU2aQaaaQaaa_]_iju_ija uUJUJ-jUJmUJUJUJoQQQQQQHHf-s-f-S-HHHH(—CQCQ CQOi tUu.——u.u-u»gu.J_j□_jjononcncncncncncnoncnC/5DL> Dw zZzzZZZZZLUUJLUUJUJ_UJUJ<<<<<<<<<<<<< <CQ CUcuwUJUJUJUJUJUJ——u_U-—OOOaaaaaOaaoioi oia a9Q99999zZZzZZsZZzzzZzzSzZZ Zw 5wUuS535UJUJLUUJUJUJUJ3UJUJUJ33UJUJ5333UJ533 3£££££££££££££££ £UJXC/5o2<o£u->NC/5Nc/j<C/5O_jaXCJ<<00<-jUJUJX<OCLU<z<UJX2<<UJ<z<CJ<Oi<03ODQPgh-<ooOzoXUJ5UJ<m<2C/3ooO<-UzoHzUJQUJNQoiCQQLu5222JoiJ002oiN2UJ<nor~ooO'oCNrorroh00O'ocsm'*■?3'T-r^rm,ir>cmunmiiTc‘Z'.ininin«vOvOvO■ctt■*f•cfr•'tTftT'Tzi/l^Of'OOO'O —o o \o \0 v© r~~■^r ^ -tr -cr tj-Skala on the River ZbruczCNOlfNcnfNCNCNCNCNrrn-TTTN-rr"T(NCNO'CNO'CNCNO'ror+)O'r*3csO'O'coO'•3’N*rnO'mO',=t■*r^rrrTT^r—__Tt-•*r^rTfN-^r^r'■'■*.&O'O'O'oO'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'—•—<oo—•o—*—•—•o•—•oo—t—io•—•—•—*■*o•—ogCJ££££Hv.LUUJ >£9 2<oNONONGONoNoNczOoQC ’7£<oNa e«C/3GGGGGOUU-U«NOr> ^<*TT£<NN<<<<<<N<—<<NNN<<ct<< eZ<N <d ooxononX—-1nJxXonX2ZX-Jononon-2-1C/3-j-1 LLl-Jon j<<cZcZ<<<<<<oZ<cZ<oZoZcz<3<< M<g <2 <Z<:zOO2Z2Z2Z2Z2ZO2ZOoz2ZOoO3Z2ZC/32Zu2 ^cqc/3•*—3C/32223ononC/3C/3C/3C/323on23C/3C/3222323onC/3IDC/3C/3 —>C/323 on— rrmvOo00'TvO■*r■3-ITiOCSO'oCSO'rir~„oO' roCN00 CSTf IT)»A)CNCNW)CSt-~mmr-■'TTVOr-CSCS'Tm— OvOr- —22U.MMU.u.U.u.2U.U-2U.u.22u.u.2Li.U.u-u.MMU,FM22 03 CDX X Xzz zE w u3££ £22 23232323z;zzzz23D23L_L_L_cZoZcZCZoZeZeZoZcZeZD S< <cZ eZ<dD D232HC/3 Ie7322Wf—C/3UJHonuf—C/3H$—.OcZ23ocZ23iOCZ23UJa£UJazuuO£uua£UJazUJG£UJGZUJG£UJG£UJGZz z< <s 2z zzZsz£z£Zg£ZC/3onononV3cnonC£ononC/3— 15 uj□5cuLZwnu3uuuUJiljujUJ5UJ5UJUJujUJUJUJHiE !uj£ ££££££%<U2_JJ UJ<s<<C/3<sI<j22nrC/3uu4<LL—U_iUJ<Xw -'fUJ Xct<>•<<U<z<X—COUU£<<j*<CQUJ1X<H C/3Oz<o-Jss<czdGc£C/3CJrZ_Jc£-JD—GCZu sO O>UJMXsua<ooi22J<-0<<i/JUJ9<<wUJOQB2 2a03 c/3gLi-Nz'CQ<SoZI>-C/3NCLC/3Hs<^ u-cn mTTir.VOr-00O'O_CNTTvnor-00O'OCNmN-IA)vOr~ooO' or- r-r-r-r-r~r-r»00oo0000OO0000000000O'O'O'O'ONO'O'O'O'O' ortTfs-Tf■^r■*fr•q-*3"■*r'J-tj- mu. eZ X— cso ou-i >/-,List of Martyrs<NCNCMCNrrrrrrrrO'O'f*1O'—1O'r*"imr*»_rrrr"•««.rfrrrrrrrrTTrrrrrr*rrrO'O'O'O'O'O'.O'.O'O'.O'O'O'O'O'O'O'O'oooo•—*£££££££ooOoC_)oOoo0^ cd0*<<NUN<<<NUNNUNNuN0NuNNUNN(JNN(JN<LU—LUH|>-z>-z>-z>-z>zC/5 C/5COc/3_JC/3onC/3SiV'.C/3C/3C/3_1C/5C/5o<-<■<<<<Oi<3<OiOiOiOioiOiOiOi<DPooaoaC/5 C/5C/5UiOSisizoOOOOOooSiJJ>>>■><><>-D DaC/3C/3CQC/3C/3C/3COCOCOoaCOoa0202C/3HHuuuuuoCNNOITir*“<sOrTooO'—00O'00o—oCNso00rror-f^5iTtl/~jCNr-r-rrl/~lrncnCNr-r-VO22U*2222U-222LU2U,22u-2Lu2U-u-u-z z z z z z z<<<<<<<j—i-Ji—ii—i-J—J-J-J-J—J-j-J_J-J-J<<<<<<<<<<C<<<<<<<<xIXXXXXxSxXrXXXXXXXH-;-HHH--FF-r-[HHHF--ZZzZZzzzZzzzzZZzZZzUJuUJUJU)UJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJonononc/3ononC/3ononC/3onononC/3onononononUJUJUJHUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUJUuUJUJUJUJUJ5££££55££5£%%5£Si<sUSi<Nm t m Oo © o oi/i i/i in in<aJ—-2XQ<IC/5<ZZ—JXC/5<O2Q-JLULUDC<I<X□z2<Uu<<<Si_uo>CQaUJo<s■—u<oO'•U/**\NO;"J<<<<LUei3X<h"mJUJoCoCL-JoN<u.C/5eiQCQX2<C/5Ll.UC/3LU<NCQ<SeiHr-00oonmU-3vOr-00O'oCNmrr»r*or-00oOo»—*—<NfNlCNC^l(NoiCN<NCN«Ai»/%•nm,IA2IT)mir\IS)mm,*n»Tim,ir,cr,1461529 CHAIM W1ESENTHAL M 18 CYGANY1530 LEIB WIESENTHAL M 21 CYGANY1531 SIMA WIESENTHAL F 17 CYGANY1532 DINA WITZER K ARM IN F 27 SKALA 09/19421533 SAMUEL WITZER K ARM IN M 1 SKALA FOREST 1942534 MENDEL WITZER M 32 U S S R535 NACHMAN WOHL LANDAU M 60 SKALA 09/1942536 ESTHER WOHL LANDAU F 60 SKALA 09/1942537 JOSEPH WOHL LANDAU M 32 USSR538 JACOB ZEICHNER M 39 BORK1C C 1942Skala on the River ZbruczNMNN(S(S(N(N <NCSCNTt- ^ tnnmM“'Ne'"'0'0'£0'0'°'n0'0'®On On On On On On O' O' O' O' On On O' O' O' O' On O'-—0 — 00000000 — 000< < < < <-J -J -4 »J J< < < < <id id id ‘_d idC/) !/3 V) W W< < < <id id id< <id<id£o12m <O id< <-j _j< <id idwvh/iwmi/h/jwQwmwm m — O' >n <nif1 — ri Vi M N ^r- i r-~ 'T — — - r( m \ou- u.u. u.U-U-U.tL.U-2 u. u.od ad od oduuuuS y u oE E E ENNNNNNNCQoacQDd^ cd cd cd J£ooougoooqcuCL.CL. Qupp5 p£—h-f— t—mmC/3 C/3<fid od cduj UJ Eu03 OQ <— — I<ww $ < HJ ,,UJ W ujO' O — cs mm T T T T?t( \0 hT ^cduQu Qo<z>Qoo1z2_UJg*LU00O'Or4'TIZIOT~7T«Aiv~»u-jminIZ'i>ntr>V“iV1l/~>iT)147These Martyrs I Rememberand My Soul Melts in Sorrow1Chaim BrettlerFlG. 24: Chaim BrettlerFrom April 1942 I was in close contact with the Borki Wielkieand Stupki camps. This was just after the Passover registrationof men in Borszczow during which a large number of Skala Jewswere captured and sent to those camps: that is, to Borki and Stupki.My links to those camps lasted until the end of September 1942,after the large-scale “aktion” in our city of Skala. As therepresentative of the Judenrat, I delivered food and clothing to thoseunfortunate people. From time to time, I was also able to extractpeople from there-literally from the talons of death.In the following lines, I wish to describe, according to myabilities, the bloody scroll of death, the ghastly facts which literallymake one’s blood congeal in one’s veins. Facts seen with my owneyes; images that will follow a man to his grave. Some of us, par-1 Psalm 42: 5. This is also used as the introduction to the Elegy of the Ten Martyrs recited atMusaf on Yom Kippur. The exact translation is difficult.Skala on the River Zbruczticularly those lucky ones of us who survived the time of the dread¬ful Holocaust in another, freer world where the hand of destructioncould not reach, cannot conceive of what took place. Reading thelines of fire and blood-blood of one’s own brothers-they may wellask themselves why and to what end should one rip open nearlyclosed wounds and reveal horrid images that will rob the eyes ofsleep. To all of them one must say that the duty of a memorial bookis to awaken and to remind, and, having these painful images beforeone’s eyes, we will never forget or forgive.I have made a list of all the Skala Jews who were hauled away tothe camps, giving for each of them all the details that are known tome.Since the liberation and since Yizkor Books have begun toappear, dry lists have appeared concerning the extermination in thecamps, ghettos and forests, in which everything is set forth innumbers: so many shot; so many gassed and so on. This does nottake into account that with such an approach we do a great injusticeto our martyrs, because we transform them into nameless statistics.Let the account reflect every martyr’s personality. I hope that eachof us who reads this will see a person with a body and a soul withevery name-a person who is an entire world unto himself, and notjust a dry number. May it be as our prophet Ezekiel said, “I willclothe these dry bones with a body and a soul.”2At the beginning of the Second World War and the entry of theRed Army which occupied the eastern regions of Poland, wetemporarily avoided the terrifying German occupation with all ofits consequences. However other tribulations began. What isnotable is that though we had the good fortune to have our ownmayor, and perhaps even because we had such, the full force of thelaw descended upon the heads of the Jews: the arrests of Jews, thenationalization of Jewish property, and the deportation of Jews.Leaving aside the fact that in Skala we had Ukrainians, activenationalists, and open enemies of the Soviet Union nothing hap-2 The prophecy of the dry bones is in Ezekiel 37.149These Martyrs I Remember ...pened to any of them. These conditions of being terrified of everymorning dragged on until the second phase of the war, when thetwo world-destroyers ceased kissing each other on the lips and onemurderer fell upon the other. Then the blitzkrieg toward the eastbegan. The Soviet armies retreated in disarray, being shot by thesame Ukrainians who had had good situations with them, and whohad waited only for the day of the Soviet defeat. Jews went aboutconfused. Even though they lived beside the border and had everyopportunity to escape with the retreating Russians, nobody (exceptactivists) did that, because, having had a taste of the Red Garden ofEden, the Jews thought that there could be nothing worse. Sadly,they were mistaken. In Soviet Russia, no one was gassed.The intervening time between the change of regimes wascomparatively calm in Skala. In other towns and villages theenraged Ukrainians carried out pogroms against the Jews. Therulers of Skala were more restrained. The newly-created Ukrainianmilitia did indeed conduct searches of Jewish houses and some Jewswere beaten, others were arrested, but except for a solitary casewhen a grenade was thrown into Dudi Herscher’s house in the oldcity, which killed his wife Roiza and wounded his little daughter,there were no other victims.With the entry of the Germans the evil decrees began: draggingof people to compulsory labor, the plundering of Jewish homes, etc.It was at that time that the Judenrat (Jewish Council) was founded.It was made up as follows:Mordechai (Mattye) Weidberg, presidentYosefJagetMeir Zusi TabakRabbi Yehuda DrimmerAvraham BilgorajEliezer FischNissan OlingerDuring the first months of German rule, their duty was toprovide and deliver various articles to the Germans: to the Gestapo,150Skala on the River Zbruczthe guard and border Police as well as to the Ukrainian police so asto prevent, to the degree possible, the robbing of Jewish homes. Itbegan first with the confiscation of Jewish houses, furniture,utensils, leather and so forth. This immediately evoked oppositionto the Judenrat on the part of the population that had had thosethings taken from them. Then a second problem arose: the questionof providing Jewish compulsory laborers for all the German andnon-German workplaces. If the workers were not given over ontime, the Germans or Ukrainians went out into the streets and therewas no shortage of tribulations. With the introduction by the workdivision of the Judenrat, the chaotic hunt for laborers stopped to alarge degree. A certain protocol to the calls for labor was alsoestablished. If a prosperous Jew had to present himself for work andwas willing to pay, then poorer Jews would willingly take his placefor a certain payment. In this fashion, the Jews created stable worksituations with the Germans on the city farms (liegenscbaft) and onthe highways. They worked in the same places and did not have tofear being caught. These, however, were the easier problems:financial problems and the issue of working at the same workplaceand remaining with one’s family. Jews maneuvered with theGermans using the old Jewish weapon-money-and with the adageof “Give me the souls and you take the money”3, as they dreamedof surviving the tribulations, not realizing that greater, moredreadful suffering and pain lay before them.Forced Labor CampAlready in the first months of the German regime, the Jews werecrushed under the burden of the local evil decrees of the Germans,of the Ukrainians, as well as of the Judenrat, which, under pressurefrom the enemy, had under certain situations carried out decreessuch as the “fur aktion” and the almost daily tribulation of havingto gather and deliver the goods and money that the Germans3 Genesis 14, 21.The phrase used by King of Sodom in negotiating the return of the captiveswho were rescued by Abraham.151These Martyrs I Remember ...requested. The Judenrat thought that thereby they would curb theappetite of the Nazis. At the same time, the Germans, with theirwell-known precision and following a pre-arranged plan, began tocarry out their devilish goal of gradually destroying the Jews. Theycreated a network of camps throughout the entire eastern region; sothat they could gather young work-capable people in order toaccomplish important projects through their efforts. At the sametime, they knew that it would then be easier to annihilate themsince they were concentrated at designated points. For the Jews ofthe Tarnopol region and other places, the Germans “cleared out”the property of a Jewish estate owner named Weisglass in the villageof Borki Wielkie near Tarnopol. There was also another camp inthe neighboring village of Stupki. I said “cleared out” becausepreviously there had been a camp there for Russian war-prisonerswho were “liquidated”-which means that they were murdered bythe Germans.They chose the village of Borki Wielkie because there was a trainconnection there. It was easy from there to lay rails for a direct lineto Russia in order to improve the connection to the front. That railline was to be created with the work of Jewish slave laborers.The first week of December, 1941, the Judenrat received anorder to provide fifty forced laborers at the gathering point inCzortkow. The Judenrat had to obey that command and had puttogether a list of unmarried men, aged eighteen to thirty-five. It wasvery difficult to be the supreme decision maker as to who should orshould not go. The choices as to who would go or not were made asfairly as possible. Those who were chosen were required to presentthemselves to the Judenrat on a Sunday evening. They were toldthat they were to be transported to a camp. Nothing was denied.Everyone appeared punctually at the specified time. The Judenrat,anxious that there should be no trouble, had asked for fifty-fourinstead of fifty in case anyone would fail to show up for any reason.Seeing that they all had come, and that no one was missing, theJudenrat immediately excused the four extra people, particularly152Skala on the River Zbruczyoung bachelors from the poorer class, though they freed no one formoney. Here are their names:1. Yaakov Schneiderman, the son of Vevel Basserer who had aparalyzed mother.2. Binyamin Stock, the son of Avraham Stock, who used oftento take on work in order to help his family.3. Henech Giles, who had no father.4. David Klapper, a refugee boy who had no family.Monday morning everyone went out to the already waitingwagons that were directed by Eliezer Fisch and started on their wayto Czortkow. The weeping and wailing of the old people and otherfamily members cut one to the heart. The comforting words of theJudenrat promising Eliezer Fisch that he would certainly know theirlater fate were no help at all. Arriving in Czortkow, they foundtransport vehicles from the entire district waiting. A considerablenumber of our people (22) then succeeded in escaping and theremaining 28 were sent, with the entire transport to Borki-Wielkie.Here are their names:Mendel Feuerstein (from Gusztyn)Munye SchrenzelAvraham GoldscheinShalom GriinbergAharon WiesenthalAvraham SchwarzapelYisrael BlutsteinBenzion (Benye) FeuersteinBenzion (Benye) GemeinermanYehoshua KohnMoshe StockNissan PlittYisrael GoldscheinYeshaya Steiner153These Martyrs I Remember ...Naftali ShatnerYaakov SchwarzbachPesach MillerYitzchak FeuersteinYisrael FleischmanYehuda RosenhauchShmuel WeitmanShmuel MenczelBinyomin KasirerShimshon LeibowiczHersch BretschneiderHersch SchindlerYaakov LieberbaumWhen Eliezer Fish came back from Czortkow with the news, thefamilies of the captives, hearing that others had run off, raised avehement complaint. It was impossible to soothe the embitteredones or to point out that shouting alone would not help. TheJudenrat went to work immediately to gather clothing and food forthose transported. Several wagons were gathered by Ezriel Stockand Fishel Gemeinerman, who at that time still had the horses theyhad had earlier; horses with which they had done a variety of jobsfor the Judenrat. Having sons in the camp, they were personallyinterested in the journey so that they might be able to see theirchildren. Nissan Olinger of the Judenrat came along for thejourney, so that he could be present on the location to analyze thesituation and see what could be done.There, in Borki, Nissan Olinger ran into other members of theJudenrats from the surrounding towns. Together, they sought a wayto free the people. However, things do not happen as quickly asthey are talked of. Meanwhile, people were driven daily to hardlabor. It was frightfully cold. They were given almost no food. Ashad been said earlier, they worked especially on laying the railwaytracks to Russia. One had to chop the rocky, frozen tract under thedirection of supervisors. The smallest interruption could give rise to154Skala on the River Zbruczfearful blows. But, seeing familiar faces every week, the provision offood and the exchange of clean clothes and linens for dirty ones,gave fresh strength to those unfortunates to endure and renewedtheir hope that they would one day be finished with the accursedcamp.One day there was a tragedy-a tragedy within a tragedy. MosheStock was suddenly killed while going out to work one day at theexcavation site. A mound of earth slipped and buried him alive. Bythe time the other workers succeeded in clearing the earth away, hewas dead-the first camp victim. The impact on the others wasdreadful. It was only now that they could realize how close deathwas, and how important it was that it not be at the hands of theGermans or the Ukrainians. Their hearts broken, they carried himback so he could be buried somewhere. Then his father Uzielarrived with packages, hoping to see his son. He saw him dead.Hearing that they were preparing to bury him somewhere, heuttered a heartbroken cry, “No! I will not leave my Moshe here. Iwill take him home.” That is what he did. Who would dare to tellthe unfortunate father that he should not do that, and not drag hisway for 36 hours over bad roads alone with his own thoughts. Thefirst camp Jew was being carried home dead, driven by his ownfather...The funeral in Skala made a very deep impression on everyone.The wailing was especially great among the families of those whohad been sent to the camp. But, as has been said, what the earthcovers must be forgotten. Everyone had to go on with his dailywork and be prepared for new sorrows and blows. In the course ofthe following several weeks, Nissan Olinger succeeded in freeing theentire transport (all 27) in three groups. It cost plenty of money.There was no difference made between rich or poor. The Judenratpaid for those who were unable to pay.Things should have been well, but already in February 1942, stillbefore the final portion had been freed, there came a second edictregarding a fresh contingent for the camp. After receiving the newcommand, the Judenrat knew at once that this time their call to go155These Martyrs I Remember ...to the camp would not be respected. And rightly so. They had seenthat nothing had happened to all those who had fled from the firsttransport. Who of his own free will would report himself to thecamp? Efforts were made via the Judenrat to ransom them from thelabor inspector. When that did not succeed, the Ukrainian police,with the help of the ordungsdiener (order keepers) captured Jews atthe work places as well as in their hiding places and brought themto community buildings to deliver them to Borszczow for thetransport. A considerable number of people were caught, but therelatives of the captives freed a certain number by various means,including, of course, paying the Germans or the Ukrainians. Thenext day, the rest of them were sent to Borszczow accompanied byUkrainian police and members of the Judenrat. Arriving atBorszczow, they were locked up along with the prisoners from theentire district, but again, some of them succeeded in escaping. Inthe afternoon the entire transport, guarded by Ukrainian police,were brought to the train station and loaded onto waiting transportcars. The following vision still stands before my eyes: whileaccompanying the transport to the train along with AvrahamcheBilgoraj, Ezriel Seidman broke loose and began to run off. Here,the district commander of the Ukrainian police, Sementchuk fromour city, gave an order to the policeman Mikhilichya, who at thattime was a policeman in Skala: “Shoot!” He began to shoot afterhim, and then he brought him back. The transport, again, was sentto Borki-Wielkie taking with it the following eighteen people fromSkala:Moshe Fleischman “Terk” (died May 1942)Mordechai WeinbaubYisrael Schwarzbach (Lipe’s)Shaul KohutMeir FlintensteinMoshe GottesfeldBinyamin StockMoshe Zimmerman (ransomed August 1942, died later156Skala on the River Zbruczin the Janowska Camp4)Gedalia KowalShmuel (Munye) RosenzweigMeir SteinerZalman KeisYosef BenzionYitzchak EpsteinShimon FidererYaakov Tseichner (freed April 1942; taken again duringthe Passover Registration).Ezriel Seidman (freed August 1942; died two days laterin Skala).Yakir KeisAntagonism between the Jews and the Judenrat grew after thistransport. Without paying heed to this, the Judenrat had toperform its functions in the city, such as maintaining contact withthe people in the camp, ensuring that packages were delivered ontime in the same manner as before, hoping that with time theymight again succeed in freeing the people. But that did not last verylong and a new trouble developed to such a large extent that italmost paralyzed the entire rescue undertaking. The new troublewas the Passover registration. One must not forget that theregistration orders came a few days after the liquidation of thevillage communities in our district. The Jews, who had lived in thevillages for generations, working their own fields and had carryingon productive village lives, were mercilessly uprooted from theirhomes. Having to leave everything, they were driven into thesurrounding towns. Skala was also flooded with tens of Jewishvillage families. The Judenrat had to concern itself with providingmeager dwellings while the danger of a ghetto decree loomed,which was desired by our Ukrainian neighbors.A pall fell upon the Jews already during the last few days beforethe eve of Passover when the Judenrat announced that on the first4 In the text, this is called the Yanover Camp.157These Martyrs I Remember ...day of Passover all the men aged 14 to 60 must present themselvesto the “labor office” in Borszczow in order to receive a work card.One literally felt in the air that a new tribulation was on its way.Jews ran about, confused, not knowing whether it would be betterto go or not to go. Some who had families or even friends in theJudenrat ran to them for help or advice. Others completely losttheir confidence in the Judenrat. Finally, a great inquiry about thecards ensued; that is, establishing whether the card holder isemployed at an authentic work place in the town and whether theemployer needed him. The price of the cards rose, especially whenthe employer was a German. The card transactions were carried onthrough the Judenrat and outside the Judenrat, until almost the lastminute. The Jews who were not registered did what they could.Some did not present themselves at all, knowing that if theGermans called, it would not be good. There were others who didnot tell their young ones of their family to go. But there wereseveral Jews with white beards and peyos who went, being certainthat no matter what happened they would not be bothered. FearfulJews, even young ones, presented themselves.As one arrived in Borszczow, one immediately saw that one hadentered into a calamity, but it was too late to turn back. The townwas sealed off on all sides by the German and Ukrainian police,because at the same time all the men of the same age in the districtwere called up. Whoever failed to escape at the last moment wascaught by the murderers and driven with blows from rifle butts tothe gathering place near the former district office. In the panic andconfusion a small number of the driven crowd succeeded inescaping thanks to good work permits. The rest were brought to thetobacco shop and there where they were locked up until they weresent away to the camps at Borki-Wielkie and Stupki. And that ishow that first Passover looked under German rule. The brutestransformed that festival of freedom into a dark day of slavery. Thatday, in addition to a large number of village Jews, the followingJews of Skala were hauled away:158Skala on the River ZbruczBenzion Gertler, Stupki (freed August 1942, killed inIwankow, 1944).Leibish Gottesfeld, Borki (freed June 1942, dragged offto the Janowska camp, killed in Losiacz, 1944).Yaakov (Yankel) Roffe, Borki, perished there.Yosef Sternschus, Borki, shot there.Uri Aschendorf, Borki (freed in September 1942), killedin the Janowska Camp.Nachum Elkes, Borki (later Latczki, perished there).Hersch Blutstein, Borki (shot in May 1942).Yitzchak Mann, Stupki (freed July 1942, killed in theSkala Forest).Chuna Perl, Borki (perished there).Menachem Preschel, Stupki (perished there).Yehuda Wachs, Borki (perished there in June 1942).Yaakov-Ber Trosowocki, Borki (exchanged for his son inJune 1942. Killed in Belzec).Zayde Schitzer (exchanged in Stupki for his son Todros(Tani) August 1942, killed in Borszczow).Todros (Tani) Schitzer, killed in Stupki.Avraham Trosowocki, in Borki from June 1942 (freedin September, then escaped from the Janowska Camp, nowin New York).Eliahu Joles, Borki (exchanged via his son in July 1942,sent to Belzec).Mordechai Joles, Borki, from July 1942 (committedsuicide there in October 1942).Hersch Kohut, Borki (perished there).Yisrael Wiesenthal, Borki (perished there).Moshe Weinfeld, Borki (freed September 1942, sent toBelzec).Eliezer (Zyunye) Weinfeld, Borki (perished there inSeptember 1942).Moshe Salzman, Borki (exchanged for his son in July1942, died in New York).159These Martyrs I Remember ...Mordechai Salzman, Borki, from July 1942 (perishedthere).Yosef Gottesfeld, Borki (perished there).Yosef Mondschein, Borki (perished there).Nachum Shenkerman, Borki (shot there in June 1942).Avraham Schwarzapel, sent twice to Borki (escaped1943 killed in the Skala forest).Benzion Schusterman, Borki (shot there in July 1942).Mordechai Leibowicz (Krywicz), Borki (perished there).Yaakov Schneider, Borki (exchanged for his son in July1942, sent to Belzec).Moshe Schneider, Borki, from July 1942 (perishedthere).Yehoshua Hersch Bosyk, freed August 1942 (killed inBorszczow).Yosef Shmuel Feuerstein, Borki (perished there).Moshe Feuerstein (Chana’s) Stupki (shot there in July1942).Fishel Gemeinerman, Borki, exchanged for his son inJuly 1942 (caught in the forest aktion and murdered).Chaim Gemeinerman, Borki, from July 1942 (died inHaluwaczek).Uziel Stock, Borki (freed in September 1942, caughtagain in Borszczow in May 1943 and perished there).Yitzchak Plitt, Borki (exchanged for his son in July1942, died in Borszczow).Shamai Plitt, Borki, from July 1942 (perished there).Peretz Schechter, Borki (shot there in June 1942).Efraim Hindes, Borki (freed September 1942, killed inBelzec).Yisrael Goldschein, sent twice to Borki (perished there).Yitzchak Goldschein, Borki (perished there).Shimon Rosenblatt (Wolkowicz), Borki (perished there).Eliyahu Engelbach, Borki (shot in June 1942).Shlomo Steckman, Borki (shot in June 1942).160Skala on the River ZbruczMordechai Rechter, Borki (perished there).Yitzchak Feuerstein. Borki, sent twice to Borki (escaped,killed in Borszczow).Leibish Landman, Borki (September 1942, sent toBelzec).Berl Malamud, Borki (perished there June 1942).Yosef Schneider, Borki (perished there).Moshe Weisbrod, Borki (perished there).Melech Rechter, Borki (perished there).Yisrael Mendlowicz, Borki (perished there).Shalom Drescher, Stupki (perished there).Hersch Krigsfeld, Borki (perished there).Mordechai Fleischman, Borki (perished here)Moshe Messing, Borki, exchanged for his brother inAugust 1942(sent to the Janowska Camp).Yaakov Messing, Borki, August 1942 (perished there).Eliahu Augenblik, Borki (shot in June 1942).Wolf Herscher, Borki (freed in August 1942, sent to theJanowska Camp and perished there).Zayde Goldschein, Borki (perished there in May 1942).Yehoshua Kleinman, Borki (perished there).Yaakov Tseichner, sent twice at Borki (perished there).Feivish Kasirer, Borki (exchanged in August 1942, shotin Skala 8/10/1943).Shimshon Leibowicz, sent to Borki and Stupki (perishedthere).Shlomo Schindler, Borki (exchanged for his son, in July1942, died in Borszczow).Hersch Schindler, Borki from July 1942 (perishedthere).Berl Schitzer, Borki (perished there).Yosef Wiesenthal, Borki (exchanged in July 1942, shotduring the Purim aktion in Borszczow).Mordechai Wiesenthal, Borki from July 1942 (perished161These Martyrs I Remember ...there).Benzion Krigsfeld, Borki (perished there).Shimshon Leinwandman, Borki (perished there).Shlomo Klein, Borki (perished there).Avraham Bilgoraj (from Losiacz), Borki (perished there).Sali Bilgoraj (from Losiacz), caught in Borszczow).It is hard to convey what happened that day in Borszczow andeven more difficult to convey what was going on in Skala whenindividuals who had succeeded in escaping began to appear in thelate afternoon. Each one told a different story. Women ran aboutweeping, waiting for the return of their relatives, or at least for asign that they had succeeded in escaping. The panic lasted untilmorning when all the escapees returned and the great tragedy wasdescribed. Elderly and sick people had been caught and it wasimpossible to free even one of them. They were sent to Borki-Wielkie and Stupki in the following days.I Travel to the Borki CampThe Judenrat, not knowing what to do on the spot, met with thefamilies of the deportees to provide them with clothes and food.The latter, in those days, was almost impossible to find. Despitethat, they were able to prepare four large wagons with bundles and Irode for the first time to Borki-Wielkie with that transport. Mymission was not only to accompany the bundles and return; but tostay there and to see what could be done on the location, and togive whatever help was possible, particularly for the aged and sick,because it was clear that they would be the first to break down.Arriving there on Saturday afternoon (just a week since the round¬up in Borszczow), I saw our people working on the road that leadsto the camp. They stood almost knee deep in mud. The first one Isaw was Yudel Wachs-half dead. When I asked him if he wantedanything, he looked up with eyes in which the light wasextinguished, and made some movement with his lips which I did162Skala on the River Zbrucznot understand. When I gave him a piece of bread, he grasped itand swallowed it down, not considering that the foreman mightnotice. I myself was astonished upon seeing his situation, thinkingthat we, at home, were living in a paradise and were not aware of it.Thinking such thoughts I drove to the camp to wait there until thepeople were brought back from their work when I would be able todistribute the bundles. As I was standing at the gate, looking on atthis vale of tears, I saw Uziel Stock working at paving the campcourtyard. Here, I have to pause again regarding Uziel; a fatherwhose son was the first camp victim, and now a cruel fate hadbrought him, a 49 year old Jew, to the same place, where his sonhad walked daily, where every step, every place, reminded him ofhis great catastrophe. And yet he himself was unbroken. When heapproached me, he asked nothing for himself; and made nocomplaints. His first words to me were, “Do something for YaakovBer (referring to Yaakov Ber Trosowocki). He has reached the endof his strength. I keep him near me and do his work, so that no onewill notice his condition.” It was true. Later, I saw how he did thework of two in order to spare him.I became involved with a Jewish family in Borki, that of MeirLunschitz. He was the only Jew surviving there, because at the timeof the German invasion in 1941, the local Ukrainians conducted apogrom in all the villages of the region, killing the men only, andleaving the widows and orphans alive. He, Lunschitz, a Jew in histhirties, worked in the Borki camp as an overseer on the same levelas the Ukrainians. Through him, I made my first contacts with thecamp and also sent and received news regarding our people.Through him (Lunschitz) and through others, I got to knowthose I needed to know, and thereby to be in constant contact withour people; and not to be impeded in bringing help to a camp Jewor providing easier work for him. There was still a Jewishorganization “instance” there, in addition to the Germans and theUkrainians. In Borki, there were three Jews from among the firstcamp inmates. One of them, Margolies, was an extremelyintelligent Russian. Since he spoke perfect German, he assisted in163These Martyrs I Remember ...the camp administration. The murderer Minkus, the camp director,relied greatly on him. Margolies, with a Jewish heart, helped a greatdeal-and not for money. He was the only one who did not makeuse of his superior situation for his personal interests. The othertwo, Rotman and Engelkreiz both from Lemburg, were entirelydifferent, especially Engelkreiz. Those who miraculously survivedwill certainly remember the blows of thick sticks on the shoulders ofthe unfortunate Jews. Luckily, I knew Rotman from before the war,so he behaved well with me. I was in daily telephone contact withthe Judenrat of Skala. I informed them of the situation of YaakovBer Trosowocki. A week later, his son arrived to replace him. Thiswas the first instance of an exchange of one person for another.There was also the danger that, in the course of the exchange, thecamp director would detain both of them. This is the reason why ittook some time to get the camp director’s approval before I couldget Yaakov Ber exchanged and taken home. He did not know thatin the meantime his eldest son Hersch had been shot in Skala.Jews Shot at the LatrineAfter the first case of an exchange, I conducted many others (see thelist). Meanwhile there were daily cases of deaths and shootings. Ihad never before experienced face-to- face such a dreadful image,which follows me until today.On a sunny afternoon at the beginning of May, I was going tothe Borki camp together with my friend Hersch Fenster fromOzeryany to meet with Margolies about some matter. Passing thebarbed wire, we saw Nechemia Hechtenthal, an old bachelor, fromOzeryany being carried on a camp blanket. He had an illness in hisfoot, which is why he was being carried. At the same time HerschBlutstein (Koppel’s) and Yaakov Feuerstein (Eliezer Feuerstein’sson,) who lived in Ozeryany, were being brought outside the wirefence to the “latrine,” a huge, deep ditch for garbage into whichdead Jews were also thrown. Nechemia Hechtenthal was throwndown at the edge of the ditch. The other two were also put down164Skala on the River Zbruczthere. Meanwhile, the Ukrainian police were in no hurry to do anyshooting. I did not see Nechemia’s face because he was lying down.Yankele stood astonished, and Hersch Koppel, with his long blackovercoat tied with a string (he was captured in Borszczow wearingthese clothes), calmly took out a prayer book from somewhere andstriking his chest with one hand recited the Al Chet prayer5. Justthen, gunshots rang out and all three of them fell into the “latrine”(outhouse), finding their graves there.Can people in normal times understand such acts of bestiality?There, in that vale of tears, death in all of its forms was a dailyevent. Most people died of hunger, or for simply losing theirstrength from the heavy labor. The first thing needed to maintaintheir health was food, and obtaining such was fraught with greatdifficulties. First of all, at that time, the situation in that place wasvery bad, even among the gentile population. And when the packetswere ready, first of all there were difficulties with delivery: wagonswere needed (Jews had already had their horses confiscated), andthen there were troubles on the roads. Just the same, everythingpossible that could be done was done to provide food regularly. Fora certain period of time, I was able to have bread baked in Skala,where the situation was much better. It was some small help. Butthe destroyers proceeded with their plan of extermination, whetherat home or in the camps. In the camps, the methods were frightful.There were victims every day: some were shot; some fell at work;some, trying to find a place to rest for a day or two in the camphospital, were caught up in a “liquidation” of the hospital and shot.I will not describe the hospital “liquidation” which, among others,claimed the lives of five victims from Skala.On June 5, 1942, an inspection was carried out in the camp.The devils were searching for sick people, weak people, and thoseunfit for labor. They were taken outside the camp and promptlyshot. The killers had dragged together a considerable number ofJews. Among them, five from our town of Skala:’ The confessional recited on Yom Kippur. as well as when death is approaching.165These Martyrs I Remember ...Eliahu Augenblik from GusyatinNachum SchenkermanEliyahu Engelbach (Shlomo Peretz’s)Shlomo SteckmanPeretz SchechterOn that same morning, they were all “liquidated.”The Decapitated Head in a SackThe next morning at around 6:00 a.m., Leibele Brandes ofKorolowka, a foreman and a very decent young man, came to seeme. Terrified, he let me know that the murderer, Minkus (may hisname be blotted out), had been running about furiously during theroll call and now, he, Leibele, had been sent to bring me at once tothe camp. He said, as if to himself, “Perhaps I was unable to findyou at home.” This was a hint that perhaps I ought to run away.However, with a palpitating heart, I went with him, being certainthat some new catastrophe was approaching. I arrived at the campand approached Minkus. I could see at once that he was aflamewith murder. Seeing me, he roared: “Margolies!” When the latterstood before him, the villain uttered a command once more, “Showhim!” Margolies went away and came back bearing some sort of asack which he emptied out at my feet. I saw a human head freshlysevered from a body. Then he yelled to me, “Pick up the head fromthe ground, look at it carefully and tell me whose it is.” I lifted thehead and, though the features were altered, I could see that this wasthe head of the man shot the day before, Eliahu Engelbach. I toldhim that. He said something to Margolies, and then promptly rodeaway. I was left alone with Margolies, who then told me what hadhappened. After the shooting, someone who knew that EliahuEngelbach had gold teeth had gone out at night to the pit, foundthe body and cut off the head to make it easy for him to carry itaway and knocked out the teeth with some sort of heavy object..The head was found in the camp in the morning. It cost a good166Skala on the River Zbruczdeal before we were able to hide the shameful event and avoid aninvestigation.In the Stupki camp, which considered itself the easier of the two,the situation was more or less the same. Perhaps there were a fewfewer shootings and the camp director, Paul Siller, an Austrian, wasperhaps a little less murderous.It is probably worthwhile to provide an answer to the question ofall those who were not there, “Why did the camp inmates notescape?” Having been in daily contact with the camp inmates andknowing what their mentality then was at the time, I can state withcertainty that the camp inmates of 1942 all (with the exception of afew individuals) never even thought of escaping because they didnot want to bring down misfortune on their fellows in tribulationthrough their deeds, and especially not on their families at home.On the contrary, the camp Jews were very angry at the escapees,because in every case when someone escaped those who remainedwere punished, especially the weak and the sicHere, I will cite a case, and I am sure that those who were in thecamp at that time will confirm it. With the first transport from ourregion to Borki, Hersch Lindman (Chaim the Baker’s son), aformer resident of Skala, was also brought from Czortkow. After acertain time in the camp, he disappeared. The next day, ten Jewswere shot as a punishment, including Leibele Blutstein (Leah thedairywoman’s son). After that, the Czortkow Judenrat was orderedto present him (Hirsch) or someone else. If not, they would sufferthe consequences. His father Chaim Lindman was brought with thenext food transport. His suffering there is indescribable. No longera young man, in addition to heavy labor, he had to suffer from hisfellow camp prisoners for the ten victims which his son had caused.He also suffered hunger more than the others. Once when I cameto the railroad bridge in Borki, where some of our people wereworking, Chaim Lindman saw me, approached me, and said,weeping, “It is bad enough that at my age I have to work so hard,but I suffer even more because of others. I know what my son hasdone, but it is not my fault. I have a request for you. Though I have167These Martyrs I Remember ...most recently lived in Czortkow, I am a Skala native. Provide mewith bread, because the little that the Judenrat sends me is not givento me and I cannot survive on the camp rations alone.” After that, Iused to regularly give him bread and whatever I had.A little while later, once, as I was returning from the camp to theLunschitz’s (where I lived). I found Hersch Lindman waiting thereor me. When I reminded him of the danger at being there, he saidhe regretted his deed which had cost the lives of ten people, andthat he wanted to rescue his father who was suffering because ofhim. He wanted to replace his father, but he feared that theCzortkow Judenrat would turn him (Lindman) over to theauthorities. He would be hanged and his father would not be freed.Rather he would turn himself over to me and I would take care ofeverything. At first, I did not want to get involved, not beingcertain of him. I told him to wait. The next day I spoke with hisfather and told everything. His father was against it because heknew the situation. I then discussed the situation with several of thecamp Jews from Czortkow and other places. All of them warned menot to do it, because if he should appear they would immediatelyturn him over to the Germans so that he could no longer betrayanyone. I want to stress that this was how quiet, respectable peoplewhom I had known before the war, talked. One of them, aforeman, told me,“You know, I have the opportunity to escape almost every day. Ido not do it so that others, including my family, will not have tosuffer. Do not mix in.” And that is how it was left. I told Herscheverything and helped him to leave Borki.It was a similar situation with Moshe Feder of Tluste. Once thefollowing took place: a father and son, village Jews who hadwandered into Skala were caught there during a registration,escaped from the Stupki camp. It was a miracle because, findingmyself on the square while it was happening, I was able to prevent adisaster involving shooting as well as the sending of a pursuit afterthem. Both of them, father and son, survived the war.168Skala on the River ZbruczIn the month of May 1942, after one had gotten used to thetribulations involving the registration and the difficulties thatensued, two fresh blows were received. The first, which surprisedeven the Judenrat, took place as follows: The commissariat of theSkala border guard headed by the scoundrel Herre, may his namebe blotted out, informed the Judenrat that on a certain day all theJudenrat officials, administrators and all others who worked indifferent branches of the Council must present themselves so thatthe Germans could ascertain who was employed and who was not.Everyone came at the designated time. The murderer, Herre, beganto select the people and retained a certain number of them. Nointervention helped. He sent those he had selected to prison inCzortkow. He also shot and wounded Chaim Jaget, may G-davenge his blood, a member of the Judenrat. The people inCzortkow were tormented for two weeks and only after theintervention of the regional Judenrat and the payment of aconsiderable sum of money, did the two members of the Judenrat,Meir Zusia Tabak may G-d avenge his blood, and AvrahamcheBilgoraj may he live, who had not left for Czortkow, succeed inransoming some of the captives. The rest were sent to Kamianka orRomanowa Siela, a very bitter camp with a Jewish “director,”Yisraelik of Berezhany, a sadist. If two camps were not enough,there emerged a third one to which the following people werebrought:Mendel (Ziania) Klinger (ransomed in August 1942,died in the forest action).Berl (Bubi) Buga (perished there in the camp).Henech Wachs (escaped, summer 1943, perished in theforest).Henech Giles (perished in the camp).Munia Sommer (perished in the camp).Shmuel Weinstein (perished in the Skala forest).Shaul Weinstein (perished in the camp).169These Martyrs I Remember ...Almost at the same time there was a roundup and those capturedwere sent to Borki and Stupki. The following are their names:Avraham Goldschein (captured twice for the camps:Borki and Stupki. Perished there).Yaakov Scheiderman Stupki (perished there).Shaul Mojdlowicz, Stupki (perished there),Avraham Schwarzapel, caught twice for Borki, escaped1943 (perished in a bunker in the forest in 1944).Fishel Fisch, Stupki (ransomed 1942, died in NewYork).Mendel Schwarzbach, Stupki (perished there).Shalom Goldschein, Borki (perished there).Yeshaya Steiner (caught twice for Borki, perished there).Yehuda Steiner, Borki (perished there).Eliezer Steiner, Borki (perished there).Yisrael Peker, Stupki (ransomed September 1942, nowin Israel).Yaakov Fleischman, Stupki (perished there).Yisrael Drescher, Borki (escaped 1943, perished later).Moshe Jawitz, Stupki (perished there).Leib Gottlieb, Stupki (perished there).In this manner, the days and weeks went by in these camps inwhich deaths from hunger, shootings and other unusual fates weredaily occurrences. Keeping in mind that our Skala people were onlya small number among the thousands of Jews who perished there, itmay be possible to form an image of what truly transpired in thatvale of tears in that whole region and the fearful conditions thatprevailed there. Even though the situation at home in Skala was notmuch better, help came from there on a weekly basis in the form offood, clothing and money for the camp inmates. In this manner acertain number of them were ransomed or exchanged.The work of plucking people free from the beastly paws wouldhave continued in this manner, but the German exterminator170Skala on the River Zbruczproceeded to carry out greatly destructive actions in the city: first,in order to annihilate Jews in great masses; second to liquidate allhelpful work for the camp inmates by destroying their families andthereby paralyzing every organized assistance on the part of theJudenrat, thus leaving the unfortunate people to their own fates.The large-scale aktion was carried out in Skala during the firstdays of Sukkot, 1942, with the grievous tally: 695 captured men,women, children and old people. The younger, work-capablepeople were selected out and sent to the Janowska Camp. Theothers were promptly sent to the gas chambers of Belzec. Thirty-three were shot on the spot.The liquidation of the Skala Jewish community took place a fewdays later. Those remaining were deported to Borszczow for laterannihilation.It is painful that the vast majority of those who were miracu¬lously rescued from the murderous hands in the camps died variousunnatural deaths later. Only the following survived:Shalom Grunberg (now in New York)Avraham Trosowocki (now in New York)Moshe Salzman (died in New York)Fishel Fisch (died in New York)Yisrael Peker (now in Israel)Yisrael Fleischman (now in New York)Binyamin Kasirer (now in Israel)171Surviving in the Forest1Max Mermelstein (Weidenfeld)With generous hand a pair of twinsHad G-d bestowed upon us: aSlaughter and a spring; The gardenWas in bloom, the sun was shiningAnd the slaughterer was slaying...“The City of Slaughter”-By Chaim Nahman BialikFlG. 25: Max Mermelstein(Weidenfeld)hat’s how I remember the spring of 1943. It was the morning ofthe second day of Passover (April 16), when I emerged from thedark and stale bunker* 2 after the “action”3 in the ghetto ofBorshchov. The bright sunshine hurt my eyes. I walked over to thewindow of our crowded ghetto apartment, cautiously pushed asidea corner of the shade and saw a farmer’s wagon drawn down thestreet by two horses. Piled upon the wagon helter-skelter wereblood covered human corpses with stiff limbs sticking out on allsides, terribly distorted faces and extinguished eyes. The horses wereslowly pulling the wagon and its macabre cargo, leaving behind atrail of blood.'This chronicle translated from the original Yiddish by the author is dedicated to the blessedmemory of his cousin Nechemia Stock.: Every hiding place in the ghetto or later in the forest was called a bunker.3 A euphemism used by the Germans for the mass roundups and executions of Jewish men,women and children in Nazi occupied EuropeSkala on the River ZbruczThe streets of the ghetto were nearly deserted. Only from time totime, groups of Ukrainians with beaming faces were seen carryingaway bundles of Jewish owned goods and furnishings. With achingheart I opened the window a crack and a mild breeze brought to mynostrils the fresh smell of spring and of awakening nature. This wasthe beginning of the end in the ghetto of Borshchov. The onlything I could not understand was why the sky was so blue and thesun so bright; why a flood of darkness and fire did not engulf thisugly, disgusting world.After the Passover “action” in the ghetto of Borshchov4 all ourhopes and illusions about our possible liberation by the victoriousRed Army were shattered. Notwithstanding the devastating defeatsof the Germans at Stalingrad, the front lines were still very far awayfrom us. In the meantime the beastly enemy was systematicallydestroying us. Every one of us who was still alive knew that he wascondemned to death, and that it was only a matter of days, weeks,or perhaps months, before he would face the moment of execution.Only our animal instincts drove us to desperately seek a way tosurvive, to hide and to avoid the brutal end.It became obvious to us at the time, that it was no longerpossible to hide and survive in the ghetto, where almost everyonehad some sort of bunker or hiding place that eventually proved, tobe worthless. As the Passover massacre confirmed, bunkers andother hiding places had been discovered and compromised enmasse. Some of the Skala survivors in the ghetto of Borshchov,especially the young, started to look for ways to escape. Although itwas forbidden under the threat of death to leave the ghetto, SkalaJews, singly and in small family units, began to sneak out. Wheredid they go? Back to Skala of course, where some had hopes offinding shelter with friendly gentiles. At the beginning of thisclandestine exodus, once they reached Skala, they surreptitiously4 During this massacre close to 800 Jewish men and women were rounded up by the Germansand their Ukrainian collaborators and brazenly, in broad daylight, machine gunned and buriedin a mass grave on the local Jewish cemetery173Surviving in the Forestmoved back into their own empty and abandoned homes totemporarily hide in their familiar attics and basements.On the eve of the Shavuot holiday, at the end of May, 1943,almost six weeks after the Passover massacre, I too decided to sneakout of the Borshchov ghetto and return to Skala. My main purposeat the time was to find a friendly peasant in Skala, dispatch him toBorshchov with his wagon and horses in order to smuggle out ofthe ghetto my ailing father and bring him back to Skala. One day Ispotted in the market place of Borshchov a peasant from the nearbyvillage of Gushtyn, who agreed for a sum of money, to smuggle meout of the ghetto in his wagon and take me to Skala.My father accompanied me to the marketplace where the peasantwas waiting for me. We nervously walked through the ghetto streetsin silence. I saw tears and desperation in my father’s eyes. Thecombination of my mother’s passing, barely four months earlier, atthe end of February 1943, and his subsequent illness during thetyphus epidemic in the ghetto, had left him physically andemotionally devastated. We had no news from my brother Joshua,who was then in a German POW camp, and now my father wasabout to part with me too, his only remaining son. I was beginningto have a change of heart about my decision to leave and said tohim: “What do you say, Dad, should I go?” He looked at me withhis sad blue eyes and said: “My child, do what your heart tells youto do.” I knew that the only hope to save my father and myself wasoutside of the ghetto. After we hugged and kissed I got into thepeasant’s wagon. The horses pulled away and the wagon rolledahead. Seconds later, when I turned my head, I still saw my fatherin the distance following me with his eyes. That was the last time Isaw my father. I was then only 17 years old.Unbeknownst to me, a day or two prior to my surreptitiousdeparture from the Borshchov ghetto, two of my first cousins,Malcia and Nechemia Stock, also sneaked out of the ghetto andmade their way back to Skala. We met there in the depressingemptiness of the house our two families shared, since it was built inthe 1920’s, up to our expulsion from Skala 7 months ago. Meeting174Skala on the River Zbruczand joining up with these two cousins I grew up with and felt veryclose to, slightly lifted my very depressed and miserable mood. Myfirst and most important task upon arrival in Skala was to contact alocal peasant and arrange for him to drive to Borshchov nextmorning and bring my father back to Skala, which is what I did.Unfortunately, next morning when the peasant arrived inBorshchov, the ghetto was already surrounded by German andUkrainian murder squads, and the so-called “Shavuot action” wasalready in progress. It started on June 5, 1943, the second day ofthe month of Sivan on the Jewish calendar. Over the course of thatweek, several thousand ghetto residents-men, women and childrenfrom Borshchov, Skala, Mielnitsa, Korolovka, Jezierzany andsurrounding villages-who had been crowded into the ghetto in theFall of 1942, were systematically rounded up, marched under guardto the Jewish cemetery, machine-gunned in broad daylight andburied there in mass graves.That week-during one of the periodic pauses in that massacre-my cousin Nechemia and I decided to go back to Borshchov, sneakback into the ghetto and find out what happened to our dear ones,my father Solomon, his mother Eta and sisters Sarah and Rysia.Somehow we could not believe that our loved ones were no longeralive. The open, empty bunker in which all four were hidden andthe plundered rooms covered with feathers up to our anklesconfirmed our worst fears and our tragedy. Heartbroken andresigned from life, we returned to Skala. Miraculously we were notapprehended and shot on the way to or from Borshchov.For a week or two, deeply depressed and despondent, we roamedSkala at night seeking a roof over our heads and a place to hide inthe empty basements and attics of our former homes. What wefound there were only other single survivors like ourselves. Fear andhunger drove us from one abandoned house to another and fromone attic to another. On the hard, cold floor we slept one night, wewere afraid to spend another night. We were afraid to go back tothe same peasant who had given us a piece of bread the nightbefore, as a neighbor or even he himself might turn us over to the175Surviving in the Forestmurderers. Our lives were cheap and worthless. Often, looking outthrough the cracks of our hiding places we were envious of thedomestic pets and animals and of the birds, which unlike us wereun-perturbed and free to move around in the light of day.However, our bloodthirsty enemies did not rest. As soon as theyfound out that surviving Jews were hiding in basements and attics,they started to pursue and kill us. The heavy boot steps ofUkrainian policemen hunting for Jews echoed day and nightthrough the empty, lifeless streets of Skala, heralding the nearingend. Every crack of a rifle shot signaled another extinguished Jewishlife and that the same fate awaited us, a minute, an hour or a daylater. Driven by the raw instinct of self-preservation and fear, wedecided in the middle of a star-studded summer night at the end ofJune, to abandon the basements and attics we were hiding in andescape to the forest near Skala. We had no idea what to expect inthe forest, where and how to hide there and how to survive, but ourinstincts told us that the wide expanse of forest trees andunderbrush would shield us from the human beasts that pursued us.We were a handful of just-orphaned and depressed young menand women, all survivors of massacred families. At 17, I was theyoungest in the group. My cousins Malcia and Nechemia wererespectively 18 and 20 years old. Then there were the Schwartzbachbrothers, Meir 19 and Zunie 20. Dora Feuerstein at 28 was theoldest. We were standing in the open doorway of our house andlooked out in silence into the clear and starry night. The deadlyquiet of the empty Jewish streets and houses with open doors andsmashed windows, cast their frightening shadows. From the nearbyorchards and fields came the scent of trees in bloom and the sweetsmell of honeysuckle. With parched mouths and subdued breathswe listened to the heavy steps of the German and Ukrainian nightpatrols and to the pounding of our own hearts. When the steps ofthe night patrols faded in the darkness and the moon hid behind apassing cloud, we tiptoed single file, passed the synagogue buildingand empty houses, down narrow streets and through orchards,making our way to a steep ravine where a narrow stream, called176Skala on the River Zbrucz“potik” in Yiddish, snaked its way to the river Zbrucz below.After crossing the stream we started to climb up the hill on theother side of the ravine, where standing on the edge, one next to theother, were farmers’ dwellings and barns. Suddenly the dogs of theneighborhood picked up our scent and started to bark from allsides. Lights appeared in some windows and sleepy, angry peasantvoices were heard in the darkness. A cold sweat covered my bodyfrom head to toe. I was out of breath, exhausted from days ofhunger, anxiety and depression. My weak legs refused to budge andI got stuck in the middle of the hill, unable to move. Then I heardsomeone calling my name in a hushed voice and felt a friendly handon my shoulder. It was my cousin Nechemia, who picked me upand pulled me up the hill. We swiftly moved together in thedarkness, away from the peasants’ houses and barking dogs. As wegot further away, walking through the open fields, the blackcontours of the forest grew sharper and larger before our eyes. Atnight, from a distance, the forest looked very threatening, filling ourhearts with apprehension and fear. But the fears that drove us intothe forest were much stronger and more tangible than the visualimpressions. As soon as we reached the forest and got used to itsinner darkness, exhausted, we collapsed on the hard, wet forestfloor, and huddled together, dozed off between the trees and theunderbrush.It took several weeks before we got acquainted with the forestand adjusted to our new environment. Our scarred souls andterrible experiences that we brought with us from the Borshchovghetto massacres and the street executions in Skala were so fresh inour minds that the first few weeks we lay in the forest underbrushand hardly dared to move. Every rustle of the trees, or whistle of thewind or call of a bird, made us freeze up, hold our breath, andstrain our eyes and ears like hunted animals. But the thirst andhunger on the one hand and the cold, rainy nights on the other,forced us out of the forest at night in search of some shelter, foodand water. The strong and courageous among us ventured out atnight to the edge of the forest, and from there sneaked across the177Surviving in the Forestopen fields to a friendly peasant in the nearby settlement of“Mazury”5 or even beyond into the farming area of old Skala inorder to buy or beg for some bread, cooked beans or a bundle ofcom flour. At night we also began to meet other survivors who likeourselves, managed to get out of the Borshchov ghetto, came backto Skala and eventually, also made their way to the forest. That ishow our forest colony grew from a few dozen people in June 1943to about 150 men, women and children by mid-August, 1943, whospread out over various sections and ravines of the forest and heldon for a while to this last refuge.Various scenes and moments from those first days in the forestare etched in my memory. I still feel in my bones the long, cold andrainy nights when we lay huddled on the forest floor, our drenchedclothes stuck to our bodies, praying quietly for the rain to stop. Itwas wet and cold inside and out and the feeling of desperation andhopelessness was overwhelming. The pangs of hunger hurt and ourparched mouths demanded relief. We could not fall asleep in themud so we sought shelter every few hours in an abandonedshepherd’s hut at the edge of the forest. As soon as dawn began tobreak we abandoned the hut and went back into the wet density ofthe forest. Finally, one morning after almost ten days ofuninterrupted rain, an embarrassed sun peeked through the treebranches. We then removed our clothes, wrung them out and leftthem hanging on the trees to dry slowly in the sun. Meanwhile, ourempty stomachs persistently kept demanding their due, but the fearof the unknown forest paralyzed our minds and bodies.We looked at each other in desperation and silence not knowingwhat to do. The answer was provided by my cousin Nechemia. Fiepicked himself up from the wet forest floor, threw a drenched jacketover his shoulders and disappeared among the trees. Where he wentwe did not know. For hours we waited anxiously, not knowingwhat happened to him. Finally, we heard the rustle of trees andNechemia reappeared. Without a word, he pulled-out from his5 A settlement of Polish colonists from Western Poland encouraged by the government tosettle in our predominantly Ukrainian region, in order to "Polonize” it.178Skala on the River Zbruczbosom a bundle wrapped in a coarse peasant cloth. When heopened it, we saw it was a round cornmeal pudding. With hungryeyes we looked at it in disbelief. Someone gave him a pocket knifeand Nechemia cut the cold pudding into small, even, triangularpieces, the way one cuts a birthday cake. With trembling handseach of us picked up a piece of the pudding and swallowed it in asecond. This was our first “meal” in the forest.From ghetto dwellers we quickly turned into forest people.Nature, which at the beginning was very harsh to us, turned out tobe kinder than the human beasts that pursued us. Slowly we got toknow the forest and with time every path and ravine becamefamiliar. The forest birds and wildlife also got used to us andaccepted us as harmless cohabitants. We learned to emulate thevarious sounds and cries of the birds and used them to signal eachother in the thickness of the forest when we called or sought eachother.During the summer months we erected in different sections ofthe forest primitive shacks that provided us with some shelter incold and rainy weather. At the same time, we constructed severalunderground bunkers in which to hide in time of need. In thisrespect we had already acquired some expertise, first in Skala andthen in the ghetto of Borshchov. This experience was quicklyadapted to the conditions of the forest and each bunker we builtwas large enough to accommodate from six to ten people. By mid¬summer our group had grown to 15 people. Some members of ouroriginal group had left and new ones replaced them.All built under the forest floor, the bunkers contained concealedventilation channels and small fireplaces in their forest walls thatenabled us to kindle small fires and cook at night. Mostimportantly, they were so camouflaged by trees, bushes and leavesthat it was quite difficult to spot them. Building hiding places andunderground bunkers in different sections of the forest for differentseasons of the year was our ongoing preoccupation during thesummer and early fall. This was undertaken thanks to the wisdomand guidance of the leaders of our group, Nechemia Stock and179Surviving in the ForestChaim Gottesfeld, who understood that it was too risky to dwell inthe same place for extended periods of time. We therefore movedevery few weeks from one section of the forest to another, and fromone hiding place to another. We were also very careful not to kindlefires in the same section of the forest in which we were hiding,because rising smoke could be seen from afar and wouldcompromise our location. Often, when we managed to gathermushrooms from the forest floor or received some corn flour from agenerous peasant, I was charged with the task of going deep into theforest to start a fire and cook there a meal in a World War I trench.In the winter, when the forest was blanketed with snow and it wasdifficult and dangerous to move around the forest, we cooked onlyat night. That is, when there was something to cook!In spite of our desperate situation, hopelessness, hunger andexposure to the elements, life in the forest also had a positive side toit. After our confinement to the stale and choking ghetto bunkers,the wet and cold basements and hot attics, first in Skala and then inBorshchov, the forest provided us with some physical relief and atemporary release from constant fear and tension. The shimmeringtrees under blue skies, the refreshingly scented forest air and thechirping birds were like a soothing balsam to our aching hearts. Thewarm sun, the mild summer breezes and the illusion of freedom innature, especially during the summer months, strengthened usphysically and emotionally.The appearance of Soviet partisans in the forest had alsoenhanced this feeling and provided us with some rays of hope.Small partisan units of four or five men were passing through ourforest on their eastward moves to Russia. We watched them withadmiration and eyed their automatic weapons with envy. Generallythe Russian partisans tried to avoid us and refused to accept any ofour young men into their ranks. Only two of our men, MosheSalzman and my friend and classmate Samuel Augenblick,succeeded in joining one of the passing units. Augenblickdistinguished himself fighting the Germans on many fronts andreturned to Skala at the end of the war. Salzman also survived the180Skala on the River Zbruczwar, settled in Israel and died there. In the armed Soviet partisanswe saw the first swallows of freedom. They filled our hearts withnew hope, while at the same time spreading fear among theGermans and their Ukrainian collaborators, who initially stayedaway from the forest.One summer day, in addition to the Soviet partisans, we alsomet in the forest a group of our own Jewish partisans, members ofthe so-called “Ashendorf Band”6, which was formed in the ghetto ofBorshchov and was active in a forest near the village of Cygany7.The “Ashendorf Band” also included two young men from Skala,Joseph Schwarzbach and Shmeryl Yavetz. The others were youngJews from Borshchov, Mielnica and other communities in the area.Some of them wore captured German army uniforms and allcarried rifles and pistols. The courageous and determined faces ofour boys carrying weapons raised our spirits and ignited fresh sparksof hope in our hearts. We spent a long time with our Jewishpartisans, listening to their battle stories, admiringly touching theirweapons, and dreaming of freedom and vengeance.In the summer of 1943 after the great German debacle atStalingrad, the Soviet armies along the entire eastern front and thepartisans behind the front lines had inflicted heavy losses on theGerman forces. The appearance of partisans in our area and theintelligence the Nazis must have had about Jews freely roaming theforests apparently alarmed them and prompted them into action.Late in August a small German reconnaissance plane appeared overour section of the forest. Circling low above the tree tops, theGermans threw a few grenades that exploded with a big bang, butcaused no harm. A few days later a stranger in peasant attirecarrying an ax appeared in the forest. He pretended to be awoodcutter and started up conversations with Jews he met. But itwas obvious that he was a German agent and his appearance, along6 Named after its founder. Ing, Wolf Ashendorf, from Borshchov.7 The story of their resistance and heroic end is told in the Hebrew volumes: “Sefer MilchamotHagetaot”, pp.666-67, and “Milchamot Hapartizanim Hayehudim Bemizrach Europa”, pp.240-242.181Surviving in the Forestwith all kinds of rumors that reached us, created an atmosphere ofanxiety and tension in our ranks.Approximately a week before the Jewish New Year at the end ofSeptember 1943, on a mild sunny morning, large German armyunits surrounded the Skala forest. With drawn bayonets, lines ofGerman troops systematically combed every section of the forest.Minutes after we managed to get into our bunkers, we heard theirheavy steps and rifle shots above ground. Those from our group,who managed to get into one of our two bunkers in time, weresaved. Others who did not and ran ahead of the advancing troopswere killed on the spot.The slaughter in the forest continued until dusk. Whendarkness fell and silence enveloped the forest, we ventured out ofour two bunkers. With me in the first bunker were my cousin,Malcia Stock, Joseph Blutstein with his wife Sarah and their fouryear old daughter as well as Chaim Gottesfeld with his wife Blimaand their infant daughter Beile. The children, as if perceiving thegreat danger, kept quiet and slept through the ordeal. In the secondbunker were Abraham and Sarah Frenkel, Frieda Frenkel and herdaughters Mira and Rita, Moses Dunajer, Yehudit Schrantzel andher daughter Nusia and my cousin Nechemia Stock. Aside fromthose inside the two bunkers, other members of our group whomiraculously survived were Finio Frenkel and Ryva Schwartzbachwith her two teenage children David and Suzy and an infant. Allothers who did not manage to get into one of the two bunkers werekilled.It took us several days after the slaughter to find the bodies of thevictims and to bury them among the evergreen trees not far fromwhere we were hiding. First we found the bodies of SolomonBlutstein and Munio Schrentzel. On the second day of RoshFlashanah, following the odor of decomposing bodies, we foundbehind an evergreen tree, the bodies of Julyk Frankel and theorphaned, 11 year old girl, Fancia Tannenbaum. The bodies ofHersch Schwartzbach and his son, my dear friend Max, were foundat the edge of the forest where German bullets hit them and where182Skala on the River Zbruczthey were buried by peasants. Many of our people had beencamping in the other sections of the forest. Most of them wereeither captured by the Germans or killed, as they had no bunkers tohide in.After the bloody forest massacre all our hopes to survive the Nazinightmare were dashed again. The rains and the deteriorating fallweather that set in added to our desperation and hopelessness. Asthe trees were shedding their leaves heralding the approachingwinter, we were driven underground for shelter from the inclementweather and the murderous Nazis.In mid-October 1943, in the middle of a forest clearing shieldedby the thickness of young evergreen trees, we started to build ourunderground winter quarters. To accomplish this task, weborrowed the necessary tools from friendly peasants in the nearby,Polish “Mazury” colony. For many days, starving, cold anddepressed, we labored, first removing trees and then digging threelarge openings in the ground, 5 to 6 feet deep by 14 to 16 squarefeet wide. At night, in another section of the forest, we cut downand brought over young birch trees to provide roofing for the threebunkers. On top of these “roofs” we spread thick layers of earth andreplanted the young evergreen trees we had temporarily removed.Then we covered the ground between the replanted trees with layersof brown dead evergreen foliage, matching the rest of the forestfloor. A small window-size opening through which a human beingcould squeeze was installed and served as the bunker door and onlysource of light. Inside we covered the damp ground with dry leavesand pieces of old cloth and burlap. As our new winter quarters werequite crowded, each person was allocated 9 to 12 inches of space tolie on. Inside the bunkers one could only sit or lie down. It wasimpossible to stand up or to move around, but it was warm.At the end of October 1943 we moved into our winter quarters.In the weeks that followed, our underground colony expanded aswe were joined by other survivors who were forced to abandon theirhiding places in town or with peasants and escape into the forest.Thus in the winter of 1943-44 our underground colony numbered183Surviving in the Forest28 souls. Among them, in addition to the author of this chroniclewere the following men and women and a 2-year-old child.1. Blutstein Joseph15. Gottesfeld Beile (child)2. Blutstein Sarah16. Greenberg Shulem3. Blutstein Mayer17.Kleinman Benzion4. Blutstein Shayndl18. Reinisch Edzia (from5. Dunajer MosesBorshchov)6. Fisch Fishel19. Stachel Leon7. Frenkel Pinio20. Stachel Etta8. Frenkel Frieda21. Stachel Munio9. Frenkel Mira22. Stachel Samuel10. Frenkel Rita23. Stachel Gezia11. Frenkel Sarah24. Shapiro Lena12. Fleischman Israel25. Stock Malcia13. Gottesfeld Chaim26. Stock Nechemia14. Gottesfeld Blema27. Schrenzel YehuditFlG. 26: Three who survived the holocaust in the forest nearSkala. Seen from left to right in this 1946photo are: the author(Max Mermelstein) and his cousins Malcia and Nechemia StockLiving underground on small rations of bread, beans and waterand without sanitary facilities or water to wash with, we wereinundated with lice. Part of our daily routine in the bunkers was tode-louse ourselves and the rags on our backs. Another vital task wasthe weekly or bi-weekly expedition to fetch bread-and-water. At184Skala on the River Zbrucznight, four or five men, one from each family, ventured out of theforest to the “Mazury” settlement or to the forester Radchuk tofetch provisions. Each expedition was fraught with danger and lifethreatening risks-first and foremost to those who went, but also tothose who remained behind in the bunkers, because the Germansand their Ukrainian collaborators were always on the lookout forJews. Every step and every move on the way out of the forest andeach nightly visit to the house of a peasant or forester, had to bemade with the greatest caution. Exiting the section of the forest inwhich our bunkers were located had to be done in a way so that novisible marks or footsteps were left behind. When approaching the“Mazury” settlement at night it was necessary to wait and listen inthe darkness to make sure the peasants’ dogs were not barking morethan usual; otherwise it was an indication that strangers werepresent there, often murderous ones.When the expedition went to Radchuk the forester, extremecaution had to be exercised before entering his house, since he oftenhad dangerous visitors like Ukrainian policemen or henchmen ofthe infamous Bandera bands. When such visitors were in his house,he warned us not come in by placing a flour sieve in his window, asignal agreed upon in advance. This kind and poor forester and hiswife sustained us during the most difficult winter months bysupplying us with bread and water, while shielding us from themurderers.These night expeditions were especially difficult and dangerousduring the winter months when the forest was blanketed with snowand every step in the snow left our human imprints. To solve thisproblem we had to be inventive. In order not to leave behind ourimprints in the snow when exiting our bunkers and returning tothem, we stuffed small burlap bags with straw, spread them on thesnow in front of our path, and with the help of primitive woodencrutches we walked over the stuffed burlap bags. Step by step,standing on one bag we pushed another bag ahead of us, andleaning on our crutches we carefully walked from the top of one bagto the other. That’s how we exited our bunkers from the depth of185Surviving in the Forestthe forest and made our way onto publicly used, well trodden paths,leaving the stuffed burlap bags behind in the underbrush until ourreturn.The bread and water we were able to secure were carefullyrationed, so that our meager supplies would last for up to two orthree weeks. During the long winter months our daily dietconsisted of small slices of black bread, which were often either halfbaked or moldy. Water was also rationed, because we had neitherthe necessary containers nor the ability to bring enough drinkingwater into the bunkers. Along with these meager supplies eachexpedition often returned with good news. Slowly and gradually werealized that our deadly enemy was losing the war. Whether wewould live to see him defeated was questionable, as it was verydifficult if not impossible in our situation to hope and dream aboutdeliverance and freedom. Sometimes we asked ourselves, why woulddestiny select us to be the chosen ones? In what way were we betteror more deserving to survive than our parents, brothers and sisters,who were mercilessly murdered? Questions like these alwaystroubled and depressed us.However, even people condemned to death cannot alwaysremain in a depressed state of mind. Even in the depths of ouraffliction, when our lives hung in the balance, we often tried toforget our troubles for a while and to overcome our depression. Wetalked a lot; we joked and even sang old, melancholy folk songs.One of the popular bunker dialogs went like this: “What would youlike to eat for dinner tonight-fried eggs with fresh buttered rolls, orcrispy grilled duck on a hot plate of mashed potatoes?” Everyonewho participated in this popular sport tried to outdo his partnerwith vivid descriptions of Jewish dishes we had not seen in years.Just mentioning them brought back fond memories of better daysand tantalized our starving taste buds.The long, winter nights when the forest was chained in ice andcovered with blankets of snow were often sleepless and melancholy.Lying in the bunker, talking in the flickering twilight of a kerosenelamp, old Yiddish melodies and folk songs burst forth from our186Skala on the River Zbruczaching hearts. I remember one song in particular, chanted by IsraelFleischman, in his deep, yearning voice that always brought tears tomy eyes. Following is a free translation of the lyrics that apparentlycame from a Yiddish musical entitled “Motie-Meylach theCarpenter”, once staged by the Skala Amateur Theater:“My mother raised me with great tenderness,Always caring, she hovered above me;Ready to take my place,If anything should threaten her child.Nights she stayed awake,Keeping a vigil at my bedside;Imploring G-d not to punish her;And to this day I feel her tender touch.For it’s good to have a home;Who can better appreciate this than I,When one is buried alive andEveryone keeps his distance from me.Most befitting our mood and condition was the last stanza ofthis song, and it seemed to me at the time that the unknown authorhad written those lines expressly for us.In addition to our underground colony, two other bunkers wereconstructed in different parts of the forest, in which small groups ofmen, women and children tried to survive. Unfortunately, the cruelarm of the Ukrainian Police reached them there and they weremurdered in the most gruesome way. One of the bunkers in which12 to 15 Jews were hiding was discovered and destroyed at the endof October 1943. The Ukrainian militiamen discovered the bunkerafter apprehending Max Bretschneider, from the nearby village ofCygany. They beat and tortured him until he led them to thebunker in which he once hid himselfThe Ukrainian militiamen first fired some shots into the bunkerin order to intimidate and force those inside into coming out.187Surviving in the ForestWhen none did, they threw bundles of burning straw into thebunker. When choking from the smoke, people started to climb outof the bunker, they were shot one by one on the spot. Among thosewho perished at the site were the following martyrs: MosheSchwartzbach (son of Zeide) and a child, Aron-Shmuel Schapiro,Moshe Weingast, Israel Blutstein, Isaac Goldstein, Chaya Edelstein,her son Shaye, Berl Schwartzbach and a Mr. Segal from Borshchov.Benzion Kleinman and Menia Schapiro, who miraculouslysurvived, later reported this tragedy.The second bunker in the forest was discovered early in March,only three weeks before our liberation. The Jews who had almostsurvived the Nazi nightmare were instead gruesomely murdered. Astold by Shulem Greenberg, the only survivor of that bunker, threeUkrainian policemen, Rembocha, Yakubyshyn and a thirdunknown to him, were led to the bunker by a young Ukrainian, ason-in-law of the forester Chepesiuk. The bunker was located notfar from the Chepesiuk residence and the young Ukrainian eitherspied on the hiding Jews or noticed one of them in the area. TheUkrainians brought along bundles of straw, set them on fire andpushed them into the bunker. The choking smoke forced some ofthe unfortunate people to come out of the bunker and as they did,the Ukrainians shot them in cold blood. Those who remainedinside were burned alive. Shulem Greenberg, who came out of thebunker, was forced by the Ukrainians to stand at the entrance andstir the smoldering straw so that the fire should not die. Amongthose who perished inside the bunker were Greenberg’s fatherAbraham and sister Henia, Elka Feuerstein, Taube Weisinger,Abraham Weisinger, Yitzhak Goldstein, Moshe Wallach, NathanWeinraub, Dena Schwartzbach, Alter Rosenzweig and NuskeRosenzweig, the last two from the nearby village of Burdiakovtse.Shulem Greenberg survived miraculously by offering the murderersmoney and while leading them to its ostensible hiding place in theJewish cemetery, he managed to slip away and escape.It was the end of December, 1943. A white crisp snow coveredthe ground and hung from the evergreen trees reflecting in the sun188Skala on the River Zbruczwith millions of glittering sparkles. A quiet melancholy envelopedthe forest section we were hiding in. It was warm inside the bunkerand to quench our perpetual thirst we were busy “producing” waterfrom the snow. We made hard snow balls, pushed them into someglass containers, shook them, breathed into them and waitedpatiently until the snowballs melted into a few spoons of water towet our parched throats. The job was slow and frustrating, but wedidn’t tire. From time to time one of us stuck his head out of thebunker to fetch a few handfuls of snow so that the job at handcould continue.Suddenly, as my cousin Nechemia Stock stuck his head out ofthe bunker, he heard some steps in the snow and saw in theunderbrush, just a few feet away, the boots of a Ukrainianpoliceman. He froze for a second, then slowly lowered himself intothe bunker and white as a sheet stammered: “Police, let’s get out ofhere”. He jumped out of the bunker and started to run in theopposite direction, away from the policeman, and we followed himrunning between the snow covered trees. Several rifle shotsexploded over our heads, but a few minutes later the forest returnedto its deep silence. Apparently a single Ukrainian policemanaccompanied by a forester, went into the forest shortly beforeChristmas to get a Christmas tree and accidentally stumbled intothe evergreen section where our bunker was located. When wenoticed him and started to run, he became frightened, fired a fewshots from his rifle and quickly withdrew. Much later we were toldabout this encounter by the forester, but at the time we were certainthat our bunkers had been discovered and that more than onepoliceman had come looking for us. We therefore decidedimmediately to leave our bunkers and seek temporary shelterelsewhere.It was bitter cold and the snow was knee deep. Half naked,barefoot, bundled up in rags, we left our bunkers heading in thedirection of our old, abandoned bunkers near the “Mazury”settlement, where we survived the great September massacre. Onlyafter our liberation we were told, that about two months after the189Surviving in the Forestabove incident and our abandonment of the bunkers in the sectionof the evergreen trees, German soldiers were hunting for wild boarin that section of the forest, stumbled on our abandoned bunkersand blew them up with hand grenades. Fortunately, we were nolonger there and were thus saved by Providence from certain death.Moving into the old bunkers near the “Mazury” settlement werealized that we could hide there only temporarily for severalreasons: Firstly, because they were too small and had partially cavedin; secondly, they were too close to the Polish settlement and werein a section of the forest with sparse birch trees devoid in the winterof their foliage; and thirdly, we suspected that those bunkers hadalready been discovered and exposed by someone. Therefore, wedecided immediately to look for a suitable site on which toconstruct new bunkers. This task was undertaken by NechemiaStock, Chaim Gottesfeld, Finio Frenkel, Joseph Blutstein and thebrothers Samuel and Munio Stachel. After wandering through theforest for several nights, they found a suitable site and in the middleof the winter, around the first days of January, 1944 started towork. They borrowed axes, picks and shovels from friendly peasantsin the “Mazury” settlement and in the course of one week, throughsuperhuman efforts, achieved the impossible. In pitch dark forestnights, in snowstorms and biting frost, without food or hot drink,they felled trees, dug up the frozen ground and with their laststrength constructed new bunkers. It’s now impossible tocomprehend and describe the efforts and perseverance of these men.Returning to our temporary quarters in the gray winter morningscovered with snow and ice and with stiff limbs, they usuallycollapsed from exhaustion. Observing them at the time, I believedthat only The Almighty gave them the strength and perseverance todo what they did.In mid-January, 1944 we moved into the new bunkers fromwhich we eventually emerged into freedom at the end of March1944. Those two and a half months seemed like eternity, and weremost difficult and trying. At that time we suffered very much fromstarvation because we were afraid to leave any footprints or marks in190Skala on the River Zbruczthe snow and our periodic expeditions to Radchuk for bread,became less frequent. During that period, whenever our peoplereturned from those rare expeditions, they always brought backgood and encouraging news of German defeats and Russianvictories that filled our hearts with renewed hopes that were oftendashed by terrible and devastating events. One night at thebeginning of March 1944, members of our expedition returnedfrom Radchuk with Shulem Greenberg and his tale of horrorrelated above.In the second half of March 1944, distant rumblings of heavyartillery and the noise of engines began to reach us at night. Everynight those rumblings became louder and closer. Wide awake inour bunkers, we listened to the sounds of war and the nearing frontlines, the way one listens to a fine symphony concert. We werebeginning to hear the footsteps of freedom and deliverance, eventhough our hearts were heavy with great apprehension and fear. Wewere afraid to hope and reluctant to rejoice yet. We were cautiousand remained inside our bunkers, waiting to see what the day mightbring.One morning we heard an airplane flying low above the treetops.Cautiously, I and a few others stuck our heads out of the bunkers.Following the noise of the engine, we spotted on the wings of thesmall aircraft, the red Soviet star. I started to feel dizzy and my heartwas pounding. Was it a dream or reality? We were all confused anddid not know what to do or to say to each other. The rest of the daywe remained inside the bunkers and only at night did our groupleaders, Chaim Gottesfeld and Nechemia Stock, venture out of theforest into the “Mazury” settlement. They returned within the hourwith the overwhelming news that Soviet troops were already inSkala. That night nobody closed an eye. We were up all night,talking, crying and thinking.A new dawn descended on the forest. That morning the icywinter gave way to the approaching spring. The snow got wet andheavy and started to fall off the trees. Barefoot, bundled up in ourrags, we came out of the bunkers, and slowly filed out of the forest.191Surviving in the ForestOnly after leaving the forest and seeing the others in broaddaylight-28 human skeletons walking in knee deep snow like ghostsfrom another planet-did I begin to comprehend the scope of ourgreat tragedy.192Chapters from a Diary1Sophie ZimmermanFlG. 27: Sophie ZimmermanJanuary 25,1943My husband succeeded in finding a poor peasant who lived nearthe border and was prepared to take my child and me in for afew months. Since that peasant did not live too far from the formerborder with Russia, he was accustomed to smuggling and hiding his“deeds” from a “malicious” eye. Presently, he was lazy, gullible andsuperstitious. It would be enough for a peasant to tell him thatsomewhere a gentile had been imprisoned for hiding a Jew, that allof his energy and courage would drain away in the blink of an eyeand he would regret the entire matter. He would have sent me outthe door had he not, fortunately, been a lazy person who alwaysputs things off until later-and later he would come to his sensesagain.He was loyal and devoted. He went into town every week to buyus provisions to keep us from hunger. This excursion was one of hispassions, but he was in no hurry. He had time. After going a certain'Written during the months and years of the Holocaust. The full original is found in YadVashem in Jerusalem.Chapters From a Diarydistance, he would sit down, catch a little doze, and then continueon his way. It made no difference that his wife quarreled with him.He let her talk and said that it all affected him as little as last year’ssnow. His wife was a complete contrarian. Like all her Ukrainianbrothers and sisters, she was pleased that an end was being made ofthe Jews. She kept us because she was poor but she was not pleasedwith whatever she earned from us because she neither wished to,nor could, help Jews. It was a matter of great shame to her if anyoneknew that she kept Jews. She quarreled about us constantly with herhusband. She was good to us whenever she received a nice presentfrom us, but that lasted for only a little while. The next day she nolonger recognized us and was angry and quarrelsome once again. Itpleased her most when we were without food. Then she grew angryand went away for the entire day so that we might suffer hunger.But when she saw that we had what to eat, she also brought in food.That is how she was. She caused us great anguish, shortening ouryears. But her husband was a pillar of strength for us. Unbeknownstto her, he brought us whatever he could.Our habitation consisted of a dark little room. It had only asmall window through which daylight barely penetrated. We had anarrow bed made of some boards knocked together, a box thatserved as a table, and a small stove on which I cooked. Each day, wehad to struggle to keep from being heard. When there was someonein our landlord’s house, we dared not make a movement or utter asound. We would often sit immobilized for hours on end until weheard that the guests had gone because we were threatened by thegreatest danger. The best of neighbors, if they heard that there wereJews there, would have immediately reported us to the Germanswho would go immediately to the Gestapo. There were Germanborder guards in our village, guarding the former Polish-Sovietborder. The watch went by our little house almost every two hours.When I saw them, my heart filled with fear that perhaps someonehad seen us and was coming for us.That is how the short but endless winter days dragged on-194Skala on the River Zbruczfearful, dark days, without a single glimmer of hope. The one thingI dreamed of was that my husband might come to me bringingsome news of the world. He came regularly once a week and stayedwith me for two days. He brought us provisions, books andnewspapers. On those two days, I was not so sad.I knew that each time that he went away it was a riskyundertaking and that he could very easily lose his life. But we hadno other choice. To remain with me made no sense to him becausethere were still a few Jews in hiding. Not coming to me meant thatmy child and I would suffer hunger. My landlady was disgruntledevery time my husband came, until finally she warned him not tocome. We pleaded with her, giving her new presents, and the resultwas we were the “victors.” Two months went by in this way untilfinally the news came that the Russians had broken through thefront and were approaching us.March 5,1943I was happy, but I did not believe that a miracle could happen to us.I could hardly permit myself to think of it. My landlady becamevery genial toward us. She brought us milk and eggs and said thatshe would keep us for the duration of the war, even if the liberationshould be delayed. We knew her well and knew she was a “finerespectable woman.” That is what we called her from the firstmoment that we got to know her.A short while went by and brought an end to our expectationsand hopes. The Russian offensive was delayed and with it the hopeof being rescued from a certain death was buried. We weredesperately saddened and disappointed. My landlord was confused.He had thought that he would be able soon to end his “business,”and now he could see no end to it. Meanwhile, winter dragged onand spring arrived. There was no change in my life. I thought that Iwould have to leave my prison, come what may, for I could notstand it any longer. Outdoors, all of nature beckoned to me. Ourlandlords spent almost all of their day’s outdoors, warming195Chapters From a Diarythemselves in the spring-time sun. Through my small window, Ilooked out on the lovely blue springtime sky. The brook thatflowed around our house had wakened from its winter freeze andflowed by, murmuring quietly. The woods near the brook began anew life. Thousands of voices of countless birds echoed through thewoods which turned greener day after day, sprouting with life. Onlymy child and I were shut in and could see no way out. My husbandcame, bringing with him fresh, bloody news. We were on the eve ofnew pogroms. The nationalist Ukrainians, to whom most of theintelligentsia belonged, became restless, calling upon the Gestapo toaccelerate the end of the Jews. Every three or four weeks there werenew pogroms, which snuffed out thousands of young lives over thecourse of a few days. As soon as she heard that a pogrom wasimpending, my landlady went to Borszczow to see how Jews werebeing slaughtered. She made things dark for us when she returned.When she came back, she described to us exactly what hadhappened, with all of her natural crudeness. Finally, she told us thatwe should leave because she was afraid to keep us any longer andwhat would she do if the area would become Judenrein. Herhusband was very terrified and said that if the Jews were finishedoff, he would take us out into the forest, and beyond that it wouldnot matter to him at all.We had very “good” perspectives. We could see the day of utterdisaster nearing. There was no end to the pogroms. Nearly all ofour acquaintances were gone. There were new victims from ourfamily all the time. I was already completely anguished andresigned. Often I wanted our lives and our sufferings to end.However, it seemed a pity for my child. He was blossoming like abeautiful flower and I wanted to protect him from a horrible death.I often thought that it would be best if I were to put an end to hislife while he slept, so that he would not have to experience thedreadful moments of despair when one looks death in the eye. Suchthoughts disappeared quickly and I created new illusions for myself.Perhaps I could smuggle my child away and we would survive. Afterconsiderable trouble, my husband and I succeeded in persuading196Skala on the River Zbruczour peasant to dig us a ditch some distance from his house. Wewould he there and he could bring us bread and water daily. Thatwas our outlook and that was our hope for the future.Meanwhile, our situation grew progressively worse. It was oursixth month in hiding. That month, the dreadful news came of thecomplete annihilation of the last remnant of the Jews of Skala. Ourpeasant now never lingered in our room. He just went in and out.He was in constant anxiety about us. He did not know if hecould continue to keep us. Meanwhile, neighbors came, and all theytalked of was the way Jews were being killed. They talked about itwith such equanimity and detachment as if the subject was thecattle slaughter houses of Chicago. They were completely insulatedfrom all human feeling, and did not demonstrate the slightest signof pity.Right after such a conversation with our neighbors, to which Ilistened with great bitterness, my landlady came to me to deliver anew lecture. She began with the same old little song. Where wouldI be able to hide? She was afraid. She wanted nothing. She did notwant money. She did not want to keep people who were going tobe destroyed. I bowed my head. I pleaded. I begged for a couple ofdays of life-which she would allow me to stay there with my child.What I could promise after that I did not know, but my child wascrying; he did not want to die and I was driven mad seeing mychild’s terrified eyes and trembling face. He could not take in thethought that he would die in the midst of his lovely childhooddreams. I tried more than once to persuade him. It would only lastas long as the blink of an eye and life would be ended. And then mychild would begin a lovely life in another word. I told him that hehad a crystalline white soul that was as yet unspotted by sin orsinful thoughts. I told him that there in the higher worlds he wouldbe a child angel who would stand beside the Throne of Righteous¬ness of the Highest King and that he and his friends would be thewitnesses at the Day of Judgment when the murderers who hadmurdered so many pure innocent children would be judged.However, my child was not born into a deeply believing era. He197Chapters From a Diarywas a child of the modern era and was more earthly. He wanted tobe precisely at the earthly judgment. He had been born; he wantedto live, not die. Maybe it was the fault of the parents who had raisedthe children in a different spirit and had not raised them to bemartyrs, because who could have foreseen that a time of bestialityand darkness would be coming.July 15,1943We pushed our way through another month of life and who couldwant any more? After all, it is a long time to be alive. An entireundisturbed month, sleeping and passing the time. But it happenedotherwise. Precisely now, during the days when the exterminationof the Jews was being completed, an unexpected, and for me, tragic,event took place. A neighbor had seen my husband coming in to us.He accused our landlord of harboring Jews, and then went to reportthat to the Germans. It was evening, and my child was asleep. Iwoke him up and, fearfully, I told him what had happened. Myhusband was in Skala and I was afraid to remain here any longer,because it meant certain death. The peasant was very disturbed. Hetook us out to an open barn that did not belong to him and fromthere we decided to go by night to Skala. However, it was not soeasy to push our way through 15 kilometers at night with a smallchild. We had to pass through two villages before we reached ourdestination. It was a very dangerous road. All roads were beingwatched because Russian troops were active, or at least that is whatwas said. However, I had no other choice, and we left the village. Itwas a lovely bright summer night. I, with the child holding onehand and a small package in the other hand, was going home. Buthow strange that home-going was. After such a long time of painand humiliation, I had so long yearned and hoped for the day whenI would be able to walk on G-d’s earth as a free person and not asan outcast who walks with a palpitating heart on uncharted ways sothat I might meet no enemy.198Skala on the River ZbruczWe went across the field-the peasant first and we following him.We stopped frequently. My guide put his ear to the ground,listened and then, concluding that it was quiet, we went further.Thus did we drag our way throughout almost the entire night untilwe were finally on our familiar well-known paths. However, fromafar, we saw two silhouettes. We drew back, hiding in the corn. Thetwo silhouettes approached. We heard German spoken. These weretwo night guards on their way to the border. Finally, they passed byand we, weary and frightened, pressed on to the city. We continuedon our way through the field which led to the house where mybrother lived. I knocked on the door and the window but no oneanswered, until finally I heard the voice of my brother, who washidden in the attic with the rest of the family. He came downquickly. Seeing each other after so long a time and in such a darkmoment, I wept bitterly. My brother told me that today there hadbeen a terrible pogrom in Kopyczyrice and tomorrow there wouldbe one in Borszczow and possibly also in Skala, so I had come backat an opportune moment. My husband knew nothing. He did notsleep at my brother’s. He would know only tomorrow what hadtranspired. By tomorrow, anything could happen. Finally, after along wait, my husband showed up, but how great was his dismay-where should we hide ourselves?Meanwhile, the pogrom in Borszczow had begun. All the Jewshid, and we had no place to go. But my husband did not panic. Heran to a peasant and asked him to put us up for a few days. Later,he led us there. We were now in a “fresh” habitation. This was asmall, low attic in which you could only lie down for it wasimpossible to sit up. The attic was open. My husband broughtbread and we began to live a new life once more. The day passedcalmly. My brother and his family went to a peasant. On thesecond day, my husband went into city and we arranged that ifsomething happened in the meantime-that is, in the event that apogrom should break out-my husband should hide wherever hehappened to be and I would stay here, because one could get shotby moving about. As soon as my husband was gone, the peasant’s199Chapters From a Diarywife told me that the whole town had dispersed because someonehad telephoned that the Gestapo was coming. She advised me to gohide at once in the forest because she did not want to keep me. Shewas afraid. In any case, it was useless to hide. She knew, from whather neighbors said, that not one Jewish soul would be left. That washow she “consoled” me. I begged her and asked her not to drive meaway until my husband would come for me. If I should bediscovered I would say that I had crept up here myself. She calmedherself and let me be, but I grew increasingly uneasy. I could seethat was liable to turn us in herself in order to wash her hands of us.Finally, the day passed quietly by and my husband came. He saidthat his sister had come from Borszczow. She had fled in the courseof a pogrom. He learned of the new tribulations and decided thatvery night to approach the previous peasant, to see if perhaps hewould take us in again. I had no choice and agreed to everythingthough I knew that on the roads there had been countless victimswho had been killed either by the military or by the peasants whomthey encountered on their way.June 18,1943In the morning, it was the same thing. My new landlords declaredcategorically that I must leave their attic. Fortunately; there was asudden heavy rain that poured down endlessly all day long. Theroof was broken and the rain washed pitilessly down on us. It wasall the same to me-let it rain; let it pour, let there already be an endto this dreadful; tormented life.My landlords did not rest. Seeing that there was no end to therain, an idea occurred to the peasant’s wife. She told us that theGestapo was already there, and she wanted to take us to a stranger’sempty attic that was not far from her. My child, hearing that theGestapo was already there, turned very pale and, trembling, clungto my neck with his small fingers and said, “Momma, tell me, doesit take long for one to die? Tell the truth. Momma, does it hurt alot?” I did not reply. He understood me, kissed me, and then put200Skala on the River Zbruczhis head in my lap. “Momma, I want to sleep. Do not wake me, nomatter what happens.” In a few moments, being completelyexhausted from fear, he fell asleep. I pleaded with my landlady to letus stay until evening when my husband would return. I laid thechild down on the straw and sat there alone, entirely stunned and indespair.Who knew whether my husband would return to me. Above all,who knew whether he was still among the living? Perhaps the samething happened to him as had happened to thousands of his sistersand brothers? I saw myself as entirely helpless. I could see that luckhad turned completely away from me and something was pursuingme. I sat, listening intently and I heard steps, but the steps went byand I remained with my despairing thoughts. At last I heardfamiliar steps that were so intimately dear to me. I heard the smalldoor of the room open, and I knew for sure that I had been rescued.That was my husband. He opened the little door that led to me inthe attic. The child, as if instinctively, woke up, saw his father andflung himself around his neck and, weeping, said, “Why, daddy,don’t you want to rescue us and take us to a peasant in the village?”It was as if his life was in the palm of my husband’s hand. Myhusband wept bitterly and consoled him. Incidentally, I want toremark that in the most dreadful of circumstances my husband wasnever confused, and if he was ever himself in despair he never toldanyone that. On the contrary, he expressed the hope that we wouldsucceed in being rescued. That alone made my heart feel lighter.Leaving aside all of our difficulties, we were imbued withconfidence and renewed strength for the struggle. My husband toldme that the peasant with whom I had been earlier was willing totake me back but only after a few weeks, because now he was stillafraid ... the entire town was abuzz, saying that he was harboringJews. For now he had a second place that another peasantacquaintance had recommended to him. The place was with ayoung peasant widow who was prepared to keep us for two months.I could hardly believe our luck. We decided to leave Skala that verynight.201Chapters From a DiaryMy husband went to the peasant’s house. He was told to giveover the few things that we had given him to hide. The peasant’swife laughed at us and said that we no longer need them, so it isbetter that she have them. Having no recourse, we left Skalawithout anything at all. The peasant did not even want to lead usout of his door, so that he could see that we left his attic as quicklyas possible. Thus did we start our second night of wandering.JULY 3,1943W<? found ourselves in a field far from any community. I sat with mychild among the tall stalks of com that hid us. My husband went tothe peasant to let him know that we were on our way to him andthat he should go to meet us. I remained completely alone with mychild in the field, but I was so apathetic that it made no differenceto me. I lay down on the damp earth and listened. Around us it wasquiet, without the slightest sound being heard. It was a bright,warm summer night. I let my thoughts rest, thinking about almostnothing at all. But nature was doing what it did, and involuntarilyhad the effect of balm on my wounds. Memories followedmemories. I remembered other beautiful summer nights as if theywere yesterday. Nature was unchangeable with its laws and itsbeauties. It reminded me of the night when we schoolchildren weremaking a night outing. We were a crowd of happy, carefreechildren. Our dear, respected teacher went along with us and wasalmost as joyful and childish as all of us. We delighted in the lovelynight. We sang hymns and songs about the beauty of the world.Our voices rang and echoed far over the fields. But I was not able todream that way for long. The contrary thoughts came and the truthstood before my eyes like a dark light. I had been cast out on thedung heap of life. My husband had gone once again to beg a safecomer for us. A considerable amount of time went by. I began toget progressively uneasy, and, with increasing fear and a palpitatingheart, I waited for my husband’s return. It was already long pastmidnight when I heard footsteps and in a short while I saw my202Skala on the River Zbruczhusband together with my former congenial landlord. As always, hewas barefoot, in ragged trousers and wearing an open shirt whichcompletely revealed his chest. I could see that he was a littledistressed, and I saw the reason at once. His wife had under nocircumstances wanted us back. My husband had promised to giveher whatever she might want until finally he had persuaded her, andmy landlord had come for me. The moment I saw him, my moodwas lightened. I had someone to depend on. He took my child onhis shoulders and my husband and I followed after him. Finally, weapproached his little house that stood beside the road. But here onehad to be very careful, for the night watchmen passed by often. Wesent the peasant ahead to spy out whether we could go on. He madea sign, and we went quickly along the road and disappeared underthe trees. Suddenly, we saw two Germans who were on their way tonight duty. Had it been one moment earlier, we would have beenlost. We waited until they had entirely disappeared, then weapproached the little house. The peasant woman opened the doorand we went into our well-known room. But now, it no longerseemed to me a dark little room, but rather the dreamed-of palaceof an enchanted prince. We were the happiest people on earth. Wehad our little bed again and once again we were able to hope thatnow we would be able to rest. And perhaps that miracle wouldoccur to us about which we did not dare to dream. Two days passedin such a bright mood. The landlady gave us a little bread and milk.She treated us reasonably well. But that was a situation that did notlast long. Finally, her good mood burst and the wolf crept anew outof the sheep’s skin. She began to torment us with hunger. Verysimply, she did not want to sell us any bread with which we couldsatisfy ourselves, leaving aside the fact that we paid her inflatedprices. She did not want our honey and she left us her poison.There were now renewed quarrels with her husband. She compelledhim to work, and what work meant to our landlord was very clearto us. He fulfilled all of her wishes in order to avoid quarrels thatwere almost linked to a catastrophe. Each time that she quarreledwith him we automatically became his allies, and she threatened203Chapters From a Diaryboth him and us that she would make an end to us both. Webecame uneasy once again because we knew that our lives dependedupon her caprices and from her venomous nature. All that kept usfrom hunger was our blessed little stove. The moment she left herhome and went out into the field, we took advantage of theprovidential moment. Our landlord quickly brought us a couple ofpotatoes and a little milk that he stole from his wife. We lit a fireand ate quickly our stolen food. For the first time I understood themeaning of the adage “stolen waters are sweet.” Never in our liveshad food tasted as good as those stolen bites. Idowever we did notalways succeed in our undertaking peacefully. For the most partthat happened because our landlady returned, interrupting ourplans. I quickly hid our food that had just become warm, and Idoused with water the fire in the stove so that nothing suspiciousshould fall from it. The darkness also helped us, as that she couldnot see clearly what we were doing. I praised the fate that had givenus a dark little room.But an end came even to that idyll. The long summer daysdragged on but did not bring any change. Every day we waited tohear favorable news, but instead of that we learned each day of freshmurders which were carried out everywhere where there still wereJews. We were completely in despair because we had asked for onlya month’s time. Time was not standing still. Every tormenting,hungry day brought nearer the time when we would have to leaveour new “home.” The peasant also came every day with new stories.He saw that there was as yet no end to the war. And what was yet tocome? He was afraid that his wife would not want to lengthen ourstay with them. He was also afraid, for he thought he was the onlyone who was harboring Jews. Very often, just as soon as we wereawake, our landlord would come to us with new stories. He haddreamed of a priest and a church, he knew for certain that he wouldbe arrested and so forth. It did no good for us to take the trouble totell him that a dream was often meaningless. He was, however,superstitious, and refused to be persuaded. And so, almost everyday, in addition to our difficult struggle, we had to deal with small204Skala on the River Zbruczfoolishnesses which robbed us of the little rest for which we hadpaid so much. “A rooster had crowed and a disaster would comewithin a week.” He was only calmed if a week went by withoutsome event.March 25,1944Today is the happiest day in our lives. Is it true? Is it possible? Has G-d heard our fervent prayer? Has the long-yearned for momentcome? Has our hope which our hearts have desired for so longbecome a reality? The day was near. It was no longer the dream ofone condemned who was yearning for freedom. We heard the mostbeautiful, splendid music, which enchanted us and filled our heartswith a superhuman feeling of spiritual good fortune. That was thepounding of the canons near us which spoke to us of a new life.After hundreds of days and nights locked under the most frightfulcircumstances, after so many countless days when the Angel ofDeath was our only guide to life, the day of liberation was nowapproaching.We lay in our attic full of hope. Suddenly, we heard nearbygunfire above our heads. It was two opposing airplanes battlingeach other nearby and above us. Bullets were flying above us. Weflung open the door of our hiding place and ran breathlessly downto the stable. The shooting stopped after a few brief moments. Wecalmed ourselves. Suddenly, we heard footsteps. It was peasantsmoving quickly and nearly shouting. We had guests. TheBolsheviks were already in our village. How did that happen? Wecould hardly believe our own ears. A peasant woman ran by andsaid the same thing. We began to believe, and we wept likechildren, saying Mazel Tov to each other and kissing each other.We felt newly born. A little time went by. Neither of our landlordsshowed up. What could that mean? Perhaps it was one moreexaggeration. Once again we were sad. But finally, the landladycame up. She was pale, grim, with tears in her eyes. She begrudgedus our luck. “What does it mean?” she asked, “that you have packed205Chapters From a Diaryup? The Bolsheviks are not here yet. Those are some kind of foreignsoldiers-not Germans, but also not Russians. Don’t celebrate yet.”That was how she spoiled our joy. But we could see that she waslying. Our landlord had gone to see for himself but he had notreturned. Night fell. We sat and waited. Finally he came up andbrought us the happy news. But he, too, was sad. The Ukrainianshad lost, and the Poles were rejoicing. Fie felt like a strikebreakerbecause he had rescued us. But we no longer paid attention to hismoods. We were somewhere else with our thoughts. We werebeginning to weave a new life. We did not sleep all night. Early inthe morning our landlord took us into our little room so that wecould wash ourselves and pack. We had gone just a little way whenour peasant came in, pale and anguished. There were threeGermans in his stable. They were begging him to keep them in hisattic until nightfall-the same attic that we had just left. We laughedand were happy to have finally survived to see that. In the afternoona messenger came from my brother with a letter for me. In theevening my husband went off to my brother and from there theywould go to Skala. I would come later with my child, because wewere very frightened of the Ukrainians, and things had to calmdown first. I was not in any particular hurry. The first impressionhad passed. I was happy. We had parted from our long-timecompanion-the fear of death. But something pained me and keptme from thinking of joy. Where would we go? Our town was nolonger our beloved hometown. The people there were strangers whohad seen how cheap our blood was. There crept into me the kind ofthought that occurs to people returning from a funeral after buryingtheir nearest and dearest. This was a sad and endlessly painfulfeeling. I would prefer never to encounter our neighbors, theUkrainian murderers. However, there was a voice from the depthsthat called to us and said that we had to return to our posts to fulfillour holy duty-the duty of revenge for our innocent blood. We werenot to move away until we had taken revenge. That could not be agift, and would not be a gift.206_The Yanovska Death Camp in LvovAbraham Brandes-TracyOn the second intermediate day of Sukkot 1942 around eleven inthe morning the entire transport-train, in which the Naziscarried several hundred Jews from Skala, arrived at the Kleparovstation in Lemberg. Several of us, who were familiar with theregion, recognized the station through the small window. In a fewmoments, a crowd of S.S. people and Ukrainian police appeared.Just then the door of our train car opened.The command of the killers was “Laus! Raus!” All of us began tojump out of the car and the killers welcomed us with fierce blows.The command was to line up in rows of four. At the same time, thekillers opened several other cars from which they drove out peoplefrom other towns that had been designated to go to the camp.Thus, all the young working men of our district lined up in rows offour. Dreadful cries of the mothers, fathers and children heard fromthe other cars. When we realized that this was the moment whenwe would be separated forever from our nearest and dearest, it madea fearful impression on us.Our hearts were oppressed and anguished. It was impossible thento control oneself. Only the frightful blows of the killers compelledus to control ourselves. I will forever see before my eyes the brightimage of our entire young people who had, as if on purpose,blossomed during those dreadful days. Very shocking was the imageof the young girl, Leah Shapira, who called mournfully for herbrother Yaakov with unintelligible words.Am I in any way capable of describing that moment in writing?How brightly the sun shone. How lovely, as if to spite us, the daywas. And how great was our pain and anguish! Can I express that?Immediately, the command came, “Caps ofifi The whole column,The Yanovska Death Camp in Lvovstand still!” At once a taxi drove up and a commander of the killersemerged, who passed among us, looking his victims over. Heselected some people immediately out of their rows and gave ordersto have them driven back to the other railroad cars.On the spot, we were given orders to bandage those among uswho had been beaten. At that moment, Dr. Rosenblatt ofBorszczow approached me. He asked to be given some water torinse out my mouth and smeared my wound a bit with iodine. Ofcourse, my face was swollen and my shoulder hurt terribly becauseof the two blows. However, when I saw my little brother biting hislips and groaning dreadfully with tears in his eyes, as well as MeirJoles in such a state, I forgot my own pain.Immediately thereafter, several of the killers ran up to us andinformed us that two of their number would come among the rowscarrying baskets, and each of us had to put in whatever money,valuables, documents, knives, mirrors, purses and so on that wehad. In short, we had to give up everything. Anyone who did notobey the command would be shot at once if he was found withsomething. Indeed, everyone put out whatever he had. Then wereceived the command to undress until we were naked. Compelledby heavy blows from the killers, the command was quickly carriedout. There immediately came several camp inmates who took all ofthe clothing away. Others soon brought camp clothing which wasdistributed among us. This “clothing” mainly consisted of remnantsand rags from the Russian prisoners.We received shoes with wooden soles in which it was frightfullydifficult to walk. Soon, one of the killers came by and began tomake a speech about the discipline in the camp. He told us that ifanyone escaped from his work or from the camp, ten others of uswould be shot in his place, either people from his same town ormembers of his work-brigade. Therefore, each of us had to watchthe others to prevent that from happening. Further, he said that ifanyone was found with money he would be shot immediately. Also,anyone who did not behave well or work well could receive variouskinds of severe punishments up to the point of death, and so on.208Skala on the River ZbruczThat was how several hours passed. Then we were taken in groupsof five to the square in the camp and left alone. Our first entry ontothe camp square made a very bad impression on us. Varioushaggard looking people with pale faces were wandering about.When we had gone a little further we saw that some corpses werebeing carried, of people who had fallen and had been shot at worknear a construction site where new barracks were being built. TheS.S. people, Ukrainian police and Kapos went about carrying whipsin their hands.My younger brother and the Joles boy met me with greatweeping. I could not control myself at that moment, but, with adreadful pain in my heart and tears in my eyes I tried to do so forthe sake of the two children. In truth, my tears choked me and Icould make no answers or even open my mouth, especially whenthe two children, as if they had planned it cried out: “Why did wenot travel onward with our dear ones?” Nothing I said to themhelped. I told them, “Dear children, whose fault is that? And whatcan we do about it? The end, no matter what, will be the same.”Yet, in that moment, I could not imagine that I was just speakingwords. We had only just then looked around to see where we wereand what the expressions on our faces were. But, sadly, what couldone have done? Various people we knew went by. We nodded ateach other. Good, we have survived... I made the tragic accounting.And now I understood that I was the father of two children,because they were both left entirely without guidance. I turned tothem and said, “Come, let us look around and see how the camplooks. We will get to know something about the camp.” I, withthem and several other Jews from our district, approached someJews who, in truth, no longer had a human appearance, and webegan to make some inquiries.The news of life in the camp was frightful. I asked if help fromhome was permitted. Sadly, there was nothing to be said on thatscore. It was not to be imagined that we might expect help fromhome. First of all, there was no one from whom one could get help,and second, it was too far away. Then I asked about a place to sleep.209The Yanovska Death Camp in LvovAgain, we got a sorrowful answer. I told them that I had alreadybeen in a work camp, but we had had quite different livingarrangements. We had received help from home, and we had asleeping place for 35 to 40 people. They replied that we had been inparadise, because in this camp there was absolutely no place tosleep. There were in the camp some eight to ten thousand peopleand only one barrack. A new, large barrack was just now beingbuilt. It was the same answer regarding food. “Children,” one ofthem called out, “Woe is to us ... to all of us together here, wherewe have ended up.” They described what happened to people; theway one endured torment to the point of death. Every time therewas a new transport of people, the old ones were taken away toBelzec.It was then that we learned something about Belzec where,evidently our dear and loved ones had been taken. We learned howthey had taken many people to the Janower Cemetery where theywere shot, and we heard much other dreadful news. I absolutely didnot know what was happening to me as I heard this news. Iencountered many people from my home district. We looked ateach other. I also met people with whom I had been at Borki. Fromthem there was only one word to be heard. “Would it be that wecould go back once more in the Borki camp?” That is how it was.There was nothing to be done. To search for a bed somewhere wasabsolutely useless, so we decided to sleep in the new barracks whichhad only their four wails and a roof. No windows, no doors, nofloor. No talk about any reasonable place to rest. That is how timepassed until evening. Then the throngs of camp inmates returnedunder guard from their work.The First “Mealtime”One bad to stand in long lines for a piece of bread and “coffee.”However, none of us had anything into which to put the coffee, so,we had to give away one of our three pieces of bread as a way to buya little pot into which to put the coffee. The Kapos ran about,210Skala on the River Zbruczbeating people. That was how we entered a barrack that had nodoor and no window. We shoved aside the wood chips and pebblesunder foot and laid ourselves down to sleep on the bare earth. Thethree of us clustered together. Unable to restrain ourselves, unableto speak a word, we simply wept. G-d alone knows the truth thatthat entire night I did not close my eyes. Tears involuntarily welledup in my eyes. The misfortune was huge! At five in the morning thebell began to ring. The Kapos ran about murderously beatingpeople in order to drive the crowd out of the barrack. There weremany who could not even get up, because they no longer had thestrength; worn out by their slavery. Clearly, these were people whohad been in the camp from earlier, and already tasted its bitternessfor a long time.We got up and went to wash at the faucets where the cold waterflowed over the tubs. Right after we washed we got into long linesto get our “breakfast.” The breakfast consisted of black, bitter coffeeand a 50 gram piece of bread. Soon, the bell began to ring oncemore and the Kapos began to shout “Roll call! Roll call!” Manypeople did not even have time to get their “breakfast”. Soon, therewas a second command that all the new people who had come intothe camp yesterday were to gather at a designated spot. The otherstook their places in “brigades.” Each brigade had its own place in avery large circle in the midst of which there was a podium with thebell and near it a larger podium for the camp commander.All of the brigade commanders had their own way of musteringtheir brigades. However, since we did not have a brigadecommander, we did not do anything but stand. Then an S.S. mancame up to us and gave a command, “Work column, stand still!Caps off!” Thus we stood and watched as each brigade commanderreported how many people he had. The S.S. commanders began toread out various names of people who were to step out of their rowsand take their places near the podium with the bell. Then the S.S.leader recited the number of ways in which they had “sinned” andhow each of them was to be punished. For example, there was oneperson who had not performed some work diligently enough, so he211The Yanovska Death Camp in Lvovreceived 50 lashes. Another one had not left his bed quickly enoughafter his Kapo had awakened him, so he received 25 lashes.Someone else had been found to have several zlotys so he wouldhave to be shot. Someone else, at work outside of his barracks, hadbegged for a piece of bread. His punishment: to be “tied.” This wasthe worst and gravest punishment. Another one had been caughttrying to escape. He would have to be hanged.That was how dozens of punishments were meted out every day,with everyone having to look on with the command “Caps ofifiStand still!” The camp was surrounded by two rows of barbed wire.There were tall watchtowers at every corner upon which the armedguards stood.After the murderers had carried out their punishments and givenvarious instructions, the command was issued that all the brigadesshould go to their work. Only we, the new ones, should remain.After the others had gone off to work under guard, the campdirector came to our brigade with several S.S. people and appointeda bachelor from Ozeryany as brigadier. A second person fromMielnica was appointed as deputy brigadier. Then the campdirector inspected us to see that everyone had the yellow patches ontheir chests and shoulders and that the red bands on the back andfront of the trousers were clearly painted on with oil paint. Then heissued a command to the brigadier and deputy brigadier to maketwo lists of the new people, giving their names, birth dates andplace of birth. That lasted until about nine o’clock. Then nineRussian policemen appeared the so-called Askari, and nine S.S.people. They were all well-armed with automatic rifles and otherweapons. They ordered us to line up in rows of five and then tomove keeping time in march step. They led us out of the camp inan unfamiliar direction. On our way, they demanded that we singsomething. Thus did we go under guard, not knowing where. Wemarched along various small lanes until we they led us to a largevalley. A very narrow path led up a steep hill, where there was abrick kiln.212Skala on the River ZbruczThe First Victim from SkalaWhen we arrived at the brick kiln, they ordered each of us to takefour bricks and carry them up the hill. There, on top of the hill,they placed several people to lay the bricks. The murderers stoodthemselves along the entire length of the path. Two people withmachine guns stood on top of the hill, and two more at the bottom.The rest of the murderers beat and drove the crowd mercilessly.“Laus\ Laus\" Thus did we all, one following the other, run up thehill with the bricks, and again down the hill empty-handed to getnew ones. It seemed at first that this work was not too difficult,because four bricks weighed approximately 16 kilograms, but itquickly became clear that it was not easy because we had to run thehill quickly. The murderers shot one shot in the air in order toinstill in us a great fear. Thus, without having any choice, we ran. Irecall precisely that it was when I was running down for the fourthtime, the first victim of Skala, Shmuel Piakernik’s son, was alreadylying on the ground, struggling with death from a bullet that hadapparently hit him in the lungs. He was struggling hard, next to asmall gutter. The murderers were standing by and enjoyingthemselves, not wanting to shoot him. I ran up again with thebricks, and when I ran down again, there was already a secondvictim, from Mielnica. The first victim was still struggling withdeath, but was already in the gutter. He either rolled in therehimself or the murderers tossed him in there. He passed away aftergreat suffering...213Humor From the Dark DaysBy Chaim BrettlerJews are well-known as a people with humor. In every situation andtime a Jew can make jokes and even laugh. That is why the juicyJewish expressions “laughing through the tears,” “it is painful tolaugh,” and other similar expressions are well known to us. Here Iwant to give a few examples of that kind of humor when each of uswas sitting with both of our feet practically at the edge of the grave.I want to add that these are not imagined stories but authentic facts.In the first period of the German occupation, when the Nazismurderers merely robbed Jewish property and wealth leaving theirphysical extinction for the time being until later, their first wrathwas wreaked above all on Jewish furniture and kitchenware. Everyday, they demanded pots, plates, barrels and so on. The Judenratundertook to provide all the things required so that the villainswould not undertake, go through Jewish houses on their own. Thetask of providing kitchenware was especially difficult because onehad to deal with the housewives who uttered outcries over everypot. Some of them cursed or ran to complain to the Judenrat, just asif that were a serious problem. In addition, every “ordnungsdiener”(order keeper) was ready to do any kind of work to avoid bringingany pots. These difficulties continued until the L-rd took pity andsent an angel (I mean a pot-taker) in the form of Chaim Jagendorf(Shife). Himself not a very dutiful workman, he voluntarily took onthe painful task of providing kitchenware. Paying no attention tothe wailing and cursing of the women, he carried out his workhonorably, and the pot-scarcity ended. He concentrated onPassover dishes, so he avoided the rooms and went directly to theattics. Our Mattye Weidberg, chairman of the Judenrat, whofrequently reassured the housewives who used to come to complainSkala on the River Zbruczabout him, liked to talk with Chaim about the “matters.” Especiallywhen it was an easier day, Mattye, would begin his conversation asfollows: “Oh, Chaim, Chaim, Are you in trouble. Every Jew ispraying to survive until the salvation, and if the salvation comes, thewomen will take you out to the marketplace and hang you for thepots, plates, barrels and who knows what else that you took.” Thenone day, Chaim plucked up his courage and asked Mattye, “Whatwill you do, Mr. Weidberg? You have taken money, jewelry andfurs from the Jews, and sent people away to the camp.” Mattyereplied at once, without smiling, “I? I will escape with theGermans.” Hearing that reply, Chaim was stunned. MattyeWeidberg would run away with the Germans?! For several days hewent about in silence until he went one day to the Judenrat,approached Mattye, and said: “Herr Weidberg! Yesterday I talkedthings over with my wife, Reise, and we have decided that when theliberation comes, we will sell our house and buy new pots for all thewomen. And you, if you want to run away with the Germans, goahead and run!”The Jewish RegimeTbe winter of 1941-42 was very difficult for the Jews. Everythingwas lacking, beginning with freedom and ending with a piece ofbread. The Creator did not spare his Chosen People two things:troubles and snow; and these two were bound together. Every daythe Jews were driven to clear away the snow, and every day therewere troubles. Merely providing the required contingent for thebitter labor was fraught with all sorts of difficulties, particularlyafter the second camp transport where a large number of thecaptives were involved in clearing away the snow. That created agreat schism between the Jews and the Judenrat, producing a crisisof confidence between the former and the latter. I want to relatehere an event that took place which will directly show the discordof that time.215Humor From the Dark DaysOn a Thursday, at the end of February in 1942, a number oftrucks with Hungarian soldiers on their way to Russia arrived fromsomewhere. However, the road to the bridge was overblown withsnow and they could not drive through. They turned to thecommunity for workers to immediately clear the way, and themayor Kowalyszen immediately requisitioned people from theJudenrat emphasizing that one must not let the soldiers wait for toolong as troubles might ensue. The ordnungsdienst was sent to bringthe necessary people because the sooner the villains drove away thebetter. However it was easier said than done. Upon hearing thatthere was some sort of disturbance in the Judenrat involving theGermans and that the ordnungsdienst was looking for workers,almost all of the men hid. If anyone was indeed found, he refusedto go. All reassurance on the part of the ordungsdienst, pointing outthat this was not a camp and that all that was wanted was to preventthe soldiers from creating trouble if the work was not done on time,was to no avail. Nothing helped. And when Moshe Bilgoraj may G-d avenge his blood, who was running from house to house, came tothe house of Moshe Weingust and found him at home, he refusedto go. Despite all of Bilgoraj’s reassurances (they were friends)Moshe Weingust said, “How can I believe you, since you work forthe ‘Jewish regime? And I do not believe them.” When Bilgoraj,weary and upset, replied, “If words and reassurances do not help, Iwill have to drag you.” Moshe Weingust replied, “I know that youcan do what you like with me, as with other Jews. But Moshe, doyou know when I will know that you really have authority? Whenyou go to Mattye Weidberg’s house and take Black Metri (meaningthe gentile Dimitri Muliarczyk, an absolute idiot who was alwaysseated in front of Mattye Weidberg’s house).” That argumentworked. Moshe Bilgoraj did not take him, but, deep in thought, hehurried off to search for other laborers.216Skala on the River ZbruczThe Fur Mitzvah1This happened, on the famous Sunday in December 1941 when allthe Jews had to turn in all men’s and women’s fur garments to theJudenrat. The “fur aktion” included all sorts of furs, includingcollars, hats, and even gloves. With the warm clothes of the Jews,the Germans (of cursed memory) planned to clothe their soldiers onthe Russian front and in that way combat the fearful “Uncle Frost.”The command to deliver the clothes came at the last moment sothat the Jews would not have time to sell the things. A panic ensuedin the city. Every Jew tried to sell or to give to some gentile at leasta part of the valuables. Therefore, during the first hours, almostnobody showed up at the Judenrat and the anxiety there grewbecause, according to the order, the punishment for not turning thethings over was death.One of the first to show up was Shlomo Sofer, may G-d avengehis blood, bringing his possession-his ratty fur hat. When MattyeWeidberg saw this state of affairs he said, with a wry smile, “You arebringing fine present for the German army.” Turning to secretaryFisch, he said, “Inscribe a fur mitzvah” (meaning to write in therubric “pelts mitesh, "a hat).'A mitzvah is literally a religious commandment. However, the term is used colloquially for agood deed.217How We Saved the Torah ScrollsEsther YagendorfFlG. 28: Esther YagendorfThe first shameful act of the Germans, when they entered ourtown of Skala, was to gather up all the Torah scrolls in a horse-drawn wagon, as they rode from synagogue to synagogue. They putthe scrolls into a room in a courtyard where we were doing forcedlabor, such as preparing straw for their cattle. The Torah scrollsrolled around that courtyard.One day the Nazi commandant entered and told my husband,“Gather up this filth, and bury it in shame.” We were to bury theholy scrolls in a large square ringed with stones in VelvelWasserman’s courtyard, where cattle droppings were dumped. Wereplied, “Yes, sir Commandant.”When he had gone, my husband asked Hirsch Bretschneider,another forced laborer, “How can we do such a thing? My heart willnot permit it. We will yet see what we can do.”Two days later, the Nazi came back shouting at us anddemanding to know why his command had not been obeyed. Myhusband replied that we had to wait until the frozen groundSkala on the River Zbruczsoftened up. “In short”, the commandant said, “By tomorrowmorning, that filth must be gone.” We ran about seeking a hidingplace. We found a little attic that no longer had its stairs. Workingourselves almost to death, we shoved the heavy Torah scrolls upinto it.On the day when the Russian army liberated Skala from theGermans, we were too weary and too worn out to check if our holyTorah scrolls were still where we had hidden them. When we hadcalmed down somewhat, my husband and several other Jewsremoved thirty-nine Torah scrolls from that attic. They were all ingood condition; even their coverings had survived. We placed themin the Strisever Kloiz.At the beginning of June, 1945, we cobbled several cheststogether and put the scrolls inside them while we were packing toleave Skala. One Saturday morning, someone came from the trainstation and told us to put our baggage into the train, because itwould be leaving that evening. People ran about looking forwagons, packed their possessions, and drove to the train. We wereall weary and weepy, as we thought of our dead friends andrelatives, and of leaving our town.My husband and Yisrael Peker reminded us that the Torahscrolls had not yet been brought to the train station. We got out,found a wagon, put the chests containing the scrolls into it, andtearfully followed the wagon with lowered heads as we wept ourway to the train, remembering all the people we would never seeagain. The moon was shining on our last night there. I wasoverwhelmed by what had become of our lovely and lively town.That was my last glimpse of the place where I was born.One Wants to Free Oneself of the Great Fear ofDeath, But That Is Not AllowedOne evening in March of 1943, all of us slave-laborers sat in MosheWeidberg’s house waiting to hear some news. Aharale (YitzchakYaakov Klezmer’s grandson) had just arrived from Borszczow. He219How We Saved the Torah Scrollssometimes even burst into song for the young people, because hewas a very accomplished singer. He told us that the Jews inBorszczow were living in terror.While he was being questioned about Borszczow, Hirsch, YisraelShimon’s son, entered. Seeing Aharale, he said, “Oh, Aharale, it isso sad here; one does not see a soul anymore. I come running herefrequently so that I might hear something, and now I have foundyou today. Sing something for us so that we might forget our greatsorrows for a few minutes.” Aharale needed little encouragement tosing “Mayn Sbtetele Belz”. Hirsch sat, delighted and said, “Ah, ifonly I could accompany him on my fiddle.” And, indeed, for a fewmoments we forgot where we were.Suddenly, the door opened, giving us all a fright. Moshe“Zubeh” (a grandson of Yoel Katzav) walked in and shouted, “Whyare you sitting here singing? There is an aktion (a massacre)beginning right now in Borszczow!” We dispersed. In one moment,the entire house was emptied. That was Taanit Esther, and indeedthere was a large aktion in Borszczow, during which many Skalapeople were killed.220Skala on the River ZbruczFlG. 29: Former residents of Skala in Israel at the unveiling of thememorial tablet for the martyrs of Skala on Mt. Zion, Jerusalem4 *ryvyr\ 'vmp S>^ t>n:>?bnhpp( ybip fwbipv; ynat -ana by »Snpy>* ta>0 xmp by tJ\yj>a an non-maattiwa19^1-19**** T’VIJlmma ian b an ti'v>vtpn -otS *pp;>Tn tar*Jv:ry )•a *The text of the monument reads as follows:A Monument of testimonyIn memory of the martyrs of the city of SkalaOn the Zbrucz River in Eastern Galicia, PolandWho gave their lives in sanctification of the name of IsraelDuring the years of the Nazi Holocaust5701-5704 1941-1944The memorial day of these martyrs in 22 TishreiMay their souls be bound in the bonds of eternal life.221List of Skala Residents1Who Survived the Holocaustand Their Newly Acquired Residences2Augenblick, Samuel New York, USAApfelbaum, Israel Paris, FranceApfelbaum, Chana Paris, FranceApfelbaum, Hadassah Paris, France*Banner (Gelbard), Esther Givatayim, IsraelBilgoraj, Abraham Givatayim, IsraelBilgoraj, Gitel Givatayim, IsraelBloch, Shaul IsraelBlutstein, Leizer-Urn USSRBlutstein, Meyer Montreal, CanadaBlutstein, Sonia Montreal, Canada1 As of 19782 Of the original 145 survivors on this list, only 26 whose names are followed by an asterisk(*), were still alive when this book was printed in 2010.Skala on the River ZbruczBlutstein, Joseph Winnipeg, CanadaBlutstein, Sara Winnipeg, CanadaBlutstein-Gottesfeld, Beile Winnipeg, Canada*Brettler, Chaim Margate, N.J. USABretschneider, Menahem Givatayim, Israel*Dunajer, Moses Miami, USAEdelman, Aron IsraelEdelman, Simcha Holan, IsraelEdelstein, Munio New York, USA *Epstein (Edelstein), Sholom New York, USAFiderer, Samuel New York, USA*Feuerberg, Abraham USAFiderer, Samuel, New York, USA *Fisch, Chaskel Haifa, IsraelFisch, Fischel New York, USAFisch, Hinde Haifa, IsraelFisch, Yitzhak New York, USAFleischman, Israel New York, USA223List of Skala Survivors ...Frenkel (Hyman), Frieda Los Angeles, USAFrenkel (Schafirofl), Mira Los Angeles, USAFrenkel, Moses New York, USAFrenkel, Nunia New York, USAFrenkel (Stein), Rita Los Angeles, USA *Frenkel (Krantz), Sara Los Angeles, USAGottesfeld, Arthur New York, USA *Gottesfeld, Bluma (murdered after liberation by Ukrainianbandits)Gottesfeld, Sheincie New York, USAGottesfeld (Heller), Fancia New York, USA*Greenberg, Sam New York, USAGreenberg (Feuerstein), Mala New York, USAHausner, Mrs., S, IsraelHechtenthal, Wolf IsraelHechtenthal, Meyer Winnipeg, CanadaHerschowitz (Lamensdorf) Cesia, New York, USAHerscher, David Philadelphia USA224Skala on the River ZbruczHerscher, Nena Philadelphia, USA*Herscher (Feuerstein), Hay a IsraelFierschkowitz (Lamensdorf), Cesia New York, USA*Fierschkowitz, Meyer IsraelFierschkowitz, Genia Carmiel, IsraelFierschkowitz, Dusia Carmiel, IsraelFierzog, Meir-Leib Haifa, IsraelFierzog (Blutstein), Shein del Haifa, Israel*Fiescheles, Samuel New York USAFiescheles, Sara New York USAFlescheies, Victor New York, USA*Jagendorf (Tannenbaum), Bell, New York, USAJagendorf (Rosner), Chaya New York, USAJagendorf, Esther New York, USAJagendorf (Nenner), Esther Beersheba, IsraelJagendorf, Mechel New York, USAJagendorf (Fieller), Yehudit New York, USA*Jagendorf (Kaminer), Zenia RamalAviv, Israel225List of Skala Survivors ...Kasirer, Benny Haifa, IsraelKasirer, Joseph, Tel Aviv, IsraelKasirer, Moses Haifa, IsraelKasirer, Pepa Tel Aviv, IsraelKirschner, Urn Buenos Aires, ArgentinaKirschner, Joseph Buenos Aires, ArgentinaKleinman, Ben-Zion IsraelKleinman (Schapira), Menie IsraelKleinman, Max IsraelKremnitzer, Motik Rebovot, IsraelKremnitzer, Moses Rebovot, IsraelLachman, Gedalia Kfar Sora, IsraelLandau, Wolf Toronto, CanadaLebard (Shafran) Frieda Kiryat Bialik, IsraelLiebling, Leib Buenos Aires, ArgentinaMosner Leibush Montreal, CanadaMelzer, Shimon IsraelMessing, Mechel New York USA226Skala on the River ZbruczMiller, Hersch Petach Tikva, IsraelPecker, Israel Bnei Brak, IsraelPecker, Tzirel Bnei Brak, IsraelPlitt, Max New York, USAPlitt (Schnitzer), Cbaya N, Y, USARingel, Mendel Tel Aviv, IsraelRosenblat, Berl Petach Tikva, IsraelRosenwald, Shrnil-Srul USASandberg, David New York USASandberg, Liba New York USASaltzman, Moshe IsraelSchechter, Yente IsraelSchneider, Mendel IsraelSchneider, Chaya IsraelSchneider, Shlomo IsraelSchnitzer, Abraham New York, USASchechter, Yente IsraelSchrentzel, Yehudit Canada227List of Skala Survivors ...Schatncr, Shaul Wroclaw, PolandSchapira Eliezer IsraelSchapira, Joseph New York, USASchapira (Gottesfeld) Rena New York USA *Schwarzbach, Babe Rebovot, IsraelSchwarzbach (Weingarten), Chaya Los Angeles, USASchwarzbach, David New York, USA *Schwarzbach, Fryma New York, USASchwarzbach (Flyn), Henie Toronto, Canada*Schwarzbach, Israel New York, USASchwarzbach, Jacob Rebovot, IsraelSchwarzbach, Leon New York, USASchwarzbach, Meir Rebovot, IsraelSchwarzbach, Ovadia, IsraelSchwarzbach, Rywa New York, USASchwarzbach, Rywka (Died after liberation in Skala)Schwarzbach (Sala), Sarah New York, USASchwarzbach (Karpfen), Suzy New York, USA*228Skala on the River ZbruczSchwarzbach (Kruger), Toby Toronto, CanadaSeidman, Abe New York, USASeidman (Hescheles), DanaAYw York, USASeidman (Sandberg), Dora PolandSeidman, Fawunio PolandSeidman, Marcus PolandSeidman, Rywka Carmiel, IsraelSilberbusch, Gusta USASchneider, Mendel IsraelSchneider, Chaya IsraelSchneider, Shlomo IsraelSchnitzer, Abraham New York, USASchrentzel, Yehudit CanadaSommerman, Dr, I, IsraelStachel, Leon Vienna, AustriaStachel, Etta Vienna, AustriaStachel, Gizia Vienna, Austria*Stachel, Munio Vienna, Austria229List of Skala Survivors ...Stachel, Samuel Vienna, Austria*Stock, Nechemia Montreal, CanadaStock (Rothstein), Malcia Miami, USA*Tabak, David Mays Landing, NJ. USATabak, Sara Mays Landing, N.J. USATabak (Zuroff), Renata New York, USA*Trasawucki (Tracy), Abraham New York, USA*Wagner, Moses, Montreal, CanadaWeidberg, Berish New York, USAWeidberg (Pollack), Lucy New York, USA*Weidenfeld (Mermelstein), Max, New York, USA*Weitman, Nathan, Ramal Gan, IsraelWeinraub, Motel Ramal Gan, IsraelYaget (Eckhaus), Ziata Zichron Ya’acov, Israel*Zimmerman, Zygmunt New York, USAZimmerman, Sophie New York, USAZimmerman, Daniel New York, USA *230"A Night in a Soviet Jail"Esther Banner-GelbartFlG. 30: Esther Banner-Gelbarthey imprisoned me together with hundreds of other Polishprisoners in a jail in the city of Orsha. We, the Polish prisoners,were considered political prisoners, and thus were separated fromthe other prisoners. After countless interrogations, mostly done inthe middle of the night or the wee hours of the morning, a group ofus women were called to hear our sentence. After the verdict wasread, we weren’t returned to the same cell, but, rather, we weremoved to another cell that was barely large enough for 10 prisoners.We were 25 women, squeezed together, without any mercy, intoone cell, and we were only able to stand upright, crowded andsuffocating all day and all night. This all happened during thescorching days of summer, and, when we had no more strength towithstand this torture, we started to scream as loud as we could. Wewere no longer afraid, for we had already despaired. There wasnothing to lose, for we were far away from our dear ones and wewere cut off from the outside world. Alas, our screams only reachedthe ears of the prison guards. The administrators of the prisoncame, and in a silent, secretive way that was typical of Soviet Russia,A Night in a Soviet Jailthey quickly put an end to the matter by transferring some of us toanother cell. However, they warned us that, once we were in thisnew cell, there would be no going back, and we agreed to this. I wasamong those people who were transferred to this new cell in themiddle of the night, in total darkness.The door closed behind us and we found ourselves within a bigdark cell. It was lit by only one small bulb. My first impression wasthat this cell wasn’t so bad. We hoped that there would be thepossibility to sit, or maybe even to he down. Suddenly, from theground began to rise up half-naked bodies, many of them bearingtattoos of all different kinds. We understood that we had beentricked. They had brought us into a cell filled with a group ofwomen who were part of the criminal underworld. Shortlyafterwards, we realized that there was also amongst this group amonstrous, androgynous creature, half man and half woman, whowas dressed in the clothes of a man. To our astonishment, it wasexplained that that this creature was brought into the women’s cellbecause of the fear that, if she would be placed in the men’s cell,they would take advantage of her for sexual purposes.Initially, this group of prisoners greeted us with a sense ofcuriosity. But once they knew who we were and where we werefrom, they began to bombard us with insults and threats, usingdisgusting, obscene language, such as is spoken among elements ofthe criminal underworld. I want to stress that most of the peoplewho were suffering along with me were Polish women, and I wasthe youngest among them and also the only Jew. Having nostrength left, I sat on the floor and began to cry bitterly. All mypain, despair, disgrace, and lack of hope were expressed in this cry.Women came to me and held my head in both arms to hug me. Iwas so frightened and panicked that the screams that came from mythroat were, evidently, strong enough to awaken some humanemotion in the heart of the jailer guarding the corridor next to thecell door. He opened the door and warned the prisoners to dare notabuse us. However, the others ganged up on this jailer and he wasforced to retreat and close the door behind him. Luckily, I caught a232Skala on the River Zbruczhigh fever and they transferred me to the prison infirmary.The writer of this account was an active member in the ZionistYouth Movement in Skala; she was also married to an active Zionistand was sent by the Soviet authorities into exile [Siberia].233Our Remnants After LiberationChaim BrettlerOn March 23, 1944, the longed-for liberation arrived-but itunfortunately came too late. Only a small number of Jewssurvived. On March 24, those who miraculously survived-ragged,emaciated and abandoned, barely able to drag their suffering feet-began to arrive. Seeing other afflicted brethren, the wellsprings oftears opened once more as if to rinse off a bit the heavy stones thathad pressed fearfully on their weak hearts. As we, for the first timeas free men, saw the city emptied of Jews, we absorbed the greatdisaster for the first time. Our gentile neighbors went about withlowered noses, staring at us “degraded” creatures. The so-calledbetter ones among them made seemingly sympathetic expressions,wondering “from where had the Jews reappeared? They, the Jews,would certainly take back the things that had been given to us andwhich we have made use of for so long.” They had been certain thatno one would survive to demand anything back. On the very firstday, the worst of them did not show themselves in the street,fearing revenge.We began to search through the half-ruined Jewish houses forsome place into which we might go. We chose wholly intact houses,those that had been occupied by them or by local Ukrainiansduring the German occupation. Others of us went to the “good”gentiles to ask for our things back in order to cover our half-nakedbodies as well as to get some foodstuffs; hoping that, in a peacefulsituation, they might to get their strength back and to begin torebuild a new life over the ruins. But that did not last long.Already, on Monday, March 26, rumors circulated that theRussians were going to pull out under the pressure of a localGerman offensive. It was also easy to see, from the faces of theSkala on the River ZbruczUkrainians. When the frightened Jews asked the Russian officers(Jews) stationed in Skala, they laughed and reassured us saying thateverything was in order and that we had nothing to fear. Webelieved them (what choice did we have?) seeing how the Russianswere organizing themselves and taking apartments for their officers.Things went on this way until Wednesday, March 28. At about10:00 a.m., we saw that the Russians had suddenly packed up andwere hastily leaving the town. The panic and dread of the few Jewswas great. Each person did what he thought best.Some ran once again to hide with gentiles they knew, knowingfull well that they were entrusting themselves into their hands. Theywere weakened and in no condition to flee, so they simply had noother choice. A certain number of individuals, I among them, wentoff with the departing Soviets. I recall something of that bloodyWednesday: I had stood in the confusion of flight near Frenkel’shouse, deliberating about what to do. Then Chaim Gottesfeldapproached me and we both considered what to do: to flee with theSoviets or to hide somewhere in the town.Then all at once we saw a German tank that was coming fromthe street of the Dom Po/ski turn into the main street in thatdirection of the old city. Not losing a moment, we both ran. Whenwe reached the Beis Midrasb, Chaim Gottesfeld, worn out, seatedhimself on the cement near the Beis Midrasb, unable to go anyfurther. I wanted to help him get up. He replied, “Go save yourself.Nothing is going to help me.” (He was indeed shot then). I ran tothe synagogue and from there, together with Russian soldiers whohad left the town and then returned. On the way, I succeeded intaking with me Fishel Fisch, who died recently. The first stop wasFosiacz, 12 kilometers from Skala. There I found the Heschelefamily and Nechemia Stock. There too, I learned about the greatdisaster that had overtaken my uncle David Tabak. He was amongthe few who had succeeded in saving himself and his family (a wifeand two small girls). The younger girl was shot in her mother’sarms while they were fleeing in a Russian transport truck. Thus,there was one more victim just after the liberation. In pain, we fled235Our Remnants After Liberationfurther-at first on foot, and later we pleaded with Russian officerswho brought us to Kopyczynce. When we arrived in Kopyczynce,we asked about any Jews (some few Jews were living with thedentist Yosef Teig). They laughed at us when we recounted to themall our news, but it later turned out that we were right. We spentthe night at Teig’s and in the morning, Thursday, we left the towntogether with the Kopyczyncers and arrived in Chorostkow. Westayed there for several days and when more Jews arrived, we fledonce more and went to Podwoloczyka. There we heard that theRussians had retaken Skala. Not having any money with which tobuy food, Fishel Fisch and I worked in a military bakery andsupported ourselves in that fashion. We remained there for severalweeks and then we returned by the same military road to Skala,arriving at home on a Friday afternoon. Because we were hungryand ragged our fellow Jews seemed to be “counts” in our eyes —dressed cleanly, provided with places to live and jobs and so on,while we were obviously in a downtrodden state. However, that didnot last long. Through Dora Sondberg, I informed GedaliaLachman where I was and what my situation was. Dora quicklybrought clothes, linens, boots and other things from Gedalia. OnSaturday morning I went to the bath, leaving my “nice” clothesbehind with their dirt and emerging from the bath a new person infresh clothing .On that same Saturday I was called to the RussianSecurity Organ where the head (Golubyev, I think) spent nearlytwo hours with me getting details about particular people and theirbehavior during the German occupation (particularly about theUkrainians). He wrote it all down and finally told me to writedown all the details and give them to him.I immediately went to work at the train station and therebyremained in Skala. I worked at the train station for only a littlewhile because I was taken over to the Yoyenkomit, that is themilitary kommandatur, whose prime task was to enlist all the menfrom ages 18 to 50 for military duty-of course, after a physicalexamination. I had a responsible job there and was able to do allsorts of things. From the beginning, before I came there to work,236Skala on the River Zbruczseveral Jews were sent to military duty: Leibish Mazner, who wentas far as Husiatyn, later presented himself in Tarnopol (died inCanada, 1969); Shalom Epstein, who was discharged after severalmonths of military service (now in New York); Mendel Ringel(now in Israel), Moshe Donajer (now in Miami) and AvrahamFeuerberg (died in America).For me, the chief goal of the work was revenge on the localenemies; to pay back, even partially, our destroyers, the Fikrainians,who had practically bathed in Jewish blood during the occupation.They did not even think it was necessary for them to run away andwere certain that their Jewish victims would not turn them in forthey were no longer alive, and as for their own, the gentiles, therewas no need to fear them because they were no better thanthemselves. Therefore, I did everything I could to put the organs ofthe regime work. The Fikrainians, headed by the little priest1 (mayhis name be obliterated) also did not rest. They worked with alltheir might to keep their Slavic brothers from having an attitudetoward all such things, utilizing the excuse that, “after all, theFikrainians are productive workers. It may be that in certain casesthey were compelled, by the Germans, to do certain things. Butwho did that hurt? The Jews.”We, for our part, opposed them with such arguments that mightappeal to our liberators. For example: we showed, in black andwhite, that all those intractable anti-Semites were at the same timehaters of the Soviets who wanted an independent Ukrainian stateon both sides of the Zbrucz, and in order to achieve that they hadbound themselves with the Germans and were still linked to them.They are the murderers of your people and ours. Our argumentsworked.With the coming of civilian rule we went right to work. Andnow I must call to your attention the good achieved by BerishWeidberg, may he rest in peace, who died here in America. In thosetimes, we shared our tribulations. We hid together and survived the*Here, ‘little’ is used as a derogative term.237Our Remnants After Liberationcatastrophe. After the liberation Berish Weidberg was active morethan anyone else in the punishment endeavors against the killers.He himself had gathered sufficient material proof, and he persuadedothers to do likewise.As a consequence of our activities, the following were con¬demned to 25 years in prison:1. Dr. Katarina Modna2. Milke Skoroda (the killer of my parents)3. Mikhaill Kunka4. Jan Litsaak5. Stefan Dukhinski6. Milka Krowczyk (Kwasniak’s son-in-law)7. Petra Sapjanjok8. Mikhail Wielikanowicz9. Josef Fischer10. Cypoliuk of Cygany (the killer of my uncle Meir-ZusyeTabak, may G-d avenge his blood) died under investiga¬tion arrest.11. Adam Jabak. Captured in Czortkow, condemned.12. Siekierewicz—the killer of Aharon Schapira of Podfilipia.Others who were shot for a variety of reasons were:1. Joska Staritcki-a Ukrainian policeman2. Miroslov (Slowka) Majdanjuk3. Mikala Czepesiuk (the foreman of Engel the Nazi).4. Jarema. He was an armed Banderovchik2 bandit. Whenhe was captured, he took the rifle from his shoulder andtried to shoot. He was shot down on the spot.5. The younger Kunke, who threw the grenade into DudyeHerscher’s house, killing his wife.2 The name of a Ukrainian gang at the time.238Skala on the River ZbruczActive Ukrainians from the surrounding villages were also shotor sent away.Various details emerged regarding the destruction of the Jewsduring the course of the investigative hearings. But it would take uptoo much space to list each entry. I will however offer a unifyingfact because it shows just how many secrets we will never knowregarding the annihilation:The total annihilation of the Jewish communities in our districtbegan on Saturday, June 5, 1943. There was a large aktion inBorszczow in which many people from Skala were killed. I was inSkala at that time, and I sent a messenger the next day, Sunday, toBorszczow in order to find out who among my family had survived.I received the reply from Magister Tauber that my father-in-lawChaim Rappaport, may God avenge his blood, survived but hismother had been shot on Saturday. My aunt, Meir Zusye Tabak’swife Saltsia had also been shot. On the other hand, there was amystery regarding Meir Zusye. He succeeded in ransoming himselffrom a Gestapo man and he had disappeared someplace. He wasnot to be found among the dead or among the living. Only laterdid I learn from gentiles from Cygany that they had seen MeirZusye on that dreadful Saturday in the village of Cygany and thatthe gentile Czyfaliuk had killed him. I knew the killer from beforethe war and it was hard for me to believe that he, Czyfaliuk, couldindeed have done that. I just thought (though I did not believe)that if I survived, I would check that out. A year after the murder,when we began to demand an accounting from the town’s Jewkillers, I began to publish and demand that Czyfaliuk of Cygany bearrested in order to find out the truth. However, it was a difficultmatter. Cygany was separated from Skala by seven kilometers offorest (the so-called Cygany Forest), and that is where theBanderovchiks raged so that going or driving through it was fraughtwith mortal danger. Finally, they succeeded in arresting him. Iremember it as follows: One afternoon when I approached hiscourtyard he was standing, raking in the straw after threshing.Before he had time to say anything, I noticed that he was wearing239Our Remnants After LiberationMeir Zusye’s trousers! His first words to me (he knew me) were: “Idid not kill your uncle.” Without further words, he was driventhrough the woods to Skala. To this day I do not know how we gotthrough the woods without being disturbed. At the first of severalnight hearings, the murderer denied everything. However, hebecame better, and not only admitted that he had killed Meir Zusyebut also that on that unfortunate Saturday he had caught and killed18 Jews. He spied on Jews who had escaped the Borszczowslaughter. He brought them into the forest, robbed and murderedthem. He said that he had killed Meir Zusye as well as a little girl.To this day that has been a mystery, because Meir Zusye had nochildren. Certainly, that must have been someone else’s child, aJewish child. Who knows whose it was? I have waited for afavorable opportunity to take that gentile murderer into the forestto make him show me where he had buried the Jews. Thatopportunity, however, did not present itself. The murderer diedafter 20 days in jail, taking his bloody secret with him. Andtherefore it was impossible to give the murdered victims a Jewishburial.There were also other cases. A Soviet officer came to investigatethe bestial murders that took place during the German occupation.Since he could not find any Jews, the Ukrainian priest Derevenko,got rid of him with the banal excuse and lie that 2,000 Sovietcitizens had been killed during the occupation, without mentioningthat all of those killed were Jews. When I met that Soviet officer ina restaurant by chance, I heard about that vile crime and the lies ofthe priest. I told the officer the truth. When the priest, Derevenko,was asked about that, he twisted about and babbled, pleading withme not to put him in a “situation.” When that did not work,Derevenko, with the silent approbation of the local administrators,brought forth a new story: knowing that the Jewish birth certificateshad been destroyed so that there could be no proof of anything, hedemanded that the birth certificates be presented or at least a list becompiled that would show how many Jews were in Skala. He wascertain that nobody would be able to do this, and that his claims240Skala on the River Zbruczwould therefore not be rejected. To his consternation, I was able torecreate from memory a list of all the Jews of Skala with their namesand ages, and thereby stupefy the anti-Semitic priest. A copy of thatlist is in this Yizkor Book.There were also several cases when arrested Ukrainians, well-known nationalists who had cooperated with the Nazis, weresuddenly freed without explanation, and we were in no way able tofind out why. The pain and helplessness was great until we learnedwho it was who had meddled in their favor. During the course ofan investigation conducted by higher authorities, Nikolai Vlasov,the head of the N.K.V.D., an old party member whom theUkrainians had bribed, was arrested and convicted.The few surviving Jews were not organized from a materialperspective. Several of them worked. Others did business, so thatnobody lacked an income. However, it was a life without a purpose.We had to be constantly among our Ukrainian murderers; withoutany future for our little children or our youth, having to be proppedup constantly by the Soviet powers. We were completely uncertainof our future. That is, the Soviet power would make use of you solong as it had need and after that set you aside...The Jews waited for a miracle and it came in the form of therepatriation; that is, an agreement was made between the SovietUnion and the provisionary Polish Communist regime that allformer Polish citizens who found themselves in the Soviet Unionand Ukraine had the right, if they wished, to make their way toPoland. Repatriation committees were created in all of the citiesand Jews began to register. Of course, the Soviet powers lookedwith disfavor upon those who signed up, particularly if they wereJews and made angry accusations: “We liberated you and gave youback your human and civic rights and you are returning to yourmurderers?” A valid question to which there was no convincinganswer at that time. The government made difficulties for some ofthe Jews for whom they had need. Things went more or less in anorderly fashion in Skala, and in the first days of July in 1945 all theJews left Skala and made their way to Poland. Only then was it seen241Our Remnants After Liberationthat the Soviet warnings were correct. Jews could not remain in theanti-Semitic “new” Poland. The wandering began once more untilevery person made their way to a free country, pitched their tentthere, organized themselves anew and brought generations into theworld. Let us hope that our townsfolk, wherever they findthemselves, will continue to exist.242The Survivors (A Poem)Chaim GradeIt happens at midnight when the bats flutter about,The spiders of dreams and darkness spin their web—A woman jumps out of bed and shouts: Mother!It could be that the old woman still lives.The face full of wrinkles, like many beams of light.It happens that a woman sees a girl with braids,She recalls—the Germans were treading on the steps.Was she not taken away when everyone else was?She sees in the bunker the harmed heads...Her little daughter would have now been a bride.It happens from time to time in the quiet.Sometimes on an April dayWhen the survivors weep in public:When the yahrzeit candles put on their bloody showWith eyes that are already dusty in the grooves.Also those who do not see things in the night,And who during the day hide behind a face that laughsLike everyone who walks around burdened by a yokeAnd who have already made peace in their livesWith stoning, burning, killing and strangulation1.1 These are the four forms of court executed death sentences mandated by Jewish law (at thetime when the Sanhedrin was active).Atthe Trials of the NaziMurderers in GermanyChaim BrettlerWhile compiling a list of all the men, women, and children fromour destroyed Jewish community of Skala, who weremurdered in the most terrible ways, I decided it would beappropriate to tell what happened to those who murdered us.During the last year of the war, when the Russian army liberated usfrom the Germans, some of our few survivors turned a number ofUkrainian and Polish murderers of Jews over to the Sovietauthorities, who arrested them and imprisoned them. They werethe local murderers. They had not even tried to flee from justice,because they were sure that no Jew had survived, and that no onewould ever hold them responsible for their crimes. Nobody thoughtit would be possible to take vengeance on the German murderers.I will tell everything I know about how the German killers weretried for their anti-Jewish crimes in our town. These trials weresmall in number and limited in scope, but they were better thannothing.I read an advertisement placed by the World Jewish Congress inthe Jewish daily newspaper, the Forward1, in 1965. The noticeannounced that atrocities the Nazis had committed against the Jewsin Czortkow and its vicinity were under investigation. The articlementioned specifically Nehemia Stock and Meir Blutstein, ofMontreal, me, and several others, whom they sought as witnesses.One of the Nazi criminals being investigated had been infamousin Skala. His name was Artur Engel. Five years later, in 1970, thesewitnesses, and also Mrs. Riva Schwartzbach, testified personally at'An American Yiddish daily newspaper.Skala on the River ZbruczEngel’s trial in Hamburg, where they confronted him, face to face,with his evil deeds.We witnesses were frequently invited to the German consulatesin New York, Philadelphia, and Montreal to testify about what wehad witnessed. I was interviewed with great care, and my testimonywas compared to that of other witnesses, and also to the personaldata about each of us in the files of the West GermanWiedergutmachung Authority.2All Engel’s phony excuses that he had merely been followingorders fell apart during the investigation of his cold-bloodedmurder of Chone Schwarzbach on 19 June, 1943. There was no“Juden Aktion” or organized massacre of Jews by the Gestapo, thatday. Engel alone, as the “master of the town”, shot and killedChone Schwartzbach in broad daylight.The Hamburg court informed me in September, 1969 that theinvestigation against Engel was complete, and that his trial wasscheduled to begin the following February. I was further advisedthat if I were willing to testify at the trial, I must fill out an attachedform and return it to the court. I of course completed the form andsent it off. Several weeks later, I received a summons to appear inHamburg on February 4, 1970.I had mixed feelings about the coming trial. I felt satisfactionthat I would have the opportunity to look at the murderer sitting inthe defendant’s dock, trembling in fear for his hide, but I also felt anagging pain. All the frightening images of the destruction wouldagain appear before my eyes, in which the murderer was always thedominant, vivid presence. There he goes, stiffly erect in hisarrogance, walking through the Jewish streets, accompanied by hisfellow murderers, Herra and Feifer and their German shepherd dog“Betti”, waiting for the command to attack Jews and tear them topieces. Engel’s appearances were always fearsome, whether he wasmaking trouble in the “Judenrat”, dragging people to forced labor,2 The German word refers to reparations and restitution the West German government agreedto pay after the war to Holocaust survivors for the pain and suffering they endured in Naziconcentration and labor camps.245At the Trials of the Nazi Murderers in Germanyor plundering Jewish homes. Jews, their property, and their liveswere all in his hands. In a single word, Engel was the Hitler ofSkala.I impatiently awaited the day of the trial, if with some apprehen¬sion about what this encounter would mean for me when I wouldrelive the frightening years of the Holocaust. My thoughts were inSkala day and night. I arrived in Hamburg on February 3rd, 1970.The weather was like my mood: wind and snow slapped me in theface. As I rode a taxi through the streets of Hamburg to the hotel,looking at the newly rebuilt streets, the stores full of goods, and theprosperity the Germans enjoyed, I compared Hamburg to thePolish cities and towns the Germans had destroyed and emptied oftheir Jews. My heart clenched in pain. Nazi Germany had indeedbeen defeated, but for us, Hitler won.I arrived at the hotel thinking these depressing thoughts, where Imet, in addition to the previously mentioned Nechemia Stock andMeir Blutstein, Mrs. Reva Schwartzbach, the unfortunate mother ofthe murder victim, Chone Schwartzbach. Her surviving daughter,Susie Karpfen, accompanied her to testify against the murderer ofher son. Her court testimony with all the pertinent details was verypainful and left a deep impression on all who heard her that day.The following day, Wednesday, the fourth of February,Nechemia Stock, Meir Blutstein, Rywa Schwartzbach, herdaughter, and I arrived at the court to bear witness against thecrimes committed against Skala and against us personally. Sitting inthe defendant’s chair I saw a middle-aged, overweight, fat Gentilewearing a brown suit, having the face of a drunk, and whose blue,watery eyes looked like those of a pig. This creature could hardlyanswer the questions the court posed him. He burst into tears whenhe found it convenient to make that impression. I asked myself if itwere possible for this bag of guts to be Artur Engel, the cold¬blooded murderer before whom an entire town trembled. Is thiswhat happens to a mighty army when you take their soldiers’ capsoff? Seeing his pitiful state in that German court, among armed246Skala on the River Zbruczguards and facing a jury, I was proud of our martyrs, his victims.They were less decrepit than he was at the moment of their deaths.The presiding judges, the defense attorneys, and the juryinterrogated me for a few hours. Engel denied some of theaccusations with a grimace and wet eyes; he had to admit others.His shrewd lawyers helped him. They confused the witnesses withall the judicial circumventions at their command in order to weakenthe impression of murder. Engel at first denied that the Jewishwitnesses had proved murder beyond a reasonable doubt. Hislawyers then claimed that, firstly, Engel shot only one Jew, and thatwas at a moment when he thought Chune Schwartzbach was aboutto assault him. Engel maintained that he had killed the Jew in self-defense, and that he had acted on the basis of his instinct for self-preservation. To this he added that he now regrets having killedChune Schwartzbach.I realized how hard it is to be a witness thirty years after theevents. In addition to the pain of reliving the Holocaust, thelawyers pepper a Jewish witness with questions from every angle, inhopes of unnerving him. If a shrewd lawyer succeeds in throwing awitness into a quandary, the witness is in embarrassed agony, whilethe murderer can go home if the witness’s testimony fails topersuade the court. This actually happened in Engel’s trial. Themurderer was freed, even though he admitted that he shot ChuneSchwartzbach.I think this was our own fault. Every Jewish witness who wantsto aid in the prosecution should ask for a lawyer to advise him ofhis rights and to defend him when he needs help. The accusedmurderers have this right, and so should we. It is not surprising thatmany Jewish witnesses who are at first willing to testify against Naziwar criminals change their minds when they realize how it feels tobe cross-examined. Jewish organizations who deal with thissituation must consider this issue and provide witnesses with legalhelp they need at those hard moments.About that time, the Mannheim prosecutor’s office opened aninvestigation of two members of the Czortkow Gestapo-the247At the Trials of the Nazi Murderers in Germanymurderers Albert Brettschneider and Richard Pauhl. Of these two,the first, Brettschneider, had a bloody account to settle with Skala,because he killed Leibele Schechter, as well as the wife of MatiaGruenman, may G-d avenge their blood. Both murders wereindividual murders Brettschneider committed on his own initiative,rather than within the context of an organized aktion, or massacreordered by the higher officers.We knew the second murderer, Pauhl, very well, because of hisrole in shooting thirty-three victims during the Sukkot massacreduring that Jewish holiday in 1942. Pauhl also administered theproperty of Skala Jews who had been shot, deported, or left alive.He worked in this capacity for the entire Czortkow district.The investigation of Pauhl originated in the trial of Kelner, mayhis name be blotted out, the “Jewish Referent” of the CzortkowGestapo, and also from Paul Toman ek’s trial. Tomanek had beenone of the commandants at Kaminka Camp, and later, in 1943, atCzortkow. Their trials had been very large. Hundreds of witnessesfrom the whole region testified. The trial was more complex thanthe earlier one had been. Several Skala witnesses went to the trialfrom Israel and America. Avraham Bilgoraj and Gedalia Lachmandid not go to the trial in Mannheim, but gave testimony fromIsrael. Leibele Schwartzbach, Max Mermelstein, and I were theSkala witnesses from America, Schwartzbach made his deposition atthe German consulate in Philadelphia. He did not attend the trial.I arrived in Mannheim on 3 March, 1972. I entered the court at9 that morning. Before me sat the accused murderer, this old grayGentile, Brettschneider, who had suddenly become a Volks-deutscher3 from Russia. The other defendant, Pauhl, was also aYolksdeutscher, but from Bukovina.I testified for an entire day that Friday from nine until five, apartfrom a thirty minute lunch break. I continued on Monday, March6, from 9:00 a.m. until 1:00 p.m. Their lawyers used every means3 Volksdeutscher: an ethnic German from one of the East European countries whose familyhad lived among Slavs for generations. Many of them became Nazis when the German armiesoccupied the areas where they lived248Skala on the River Zbruczto refute the charges, first by denying the accusations, and, whenthat failed, they presented the excuse that their clients, themurderers, had merely been “following orders”. These lawyerscross-examined me, quoting declarations other witnesses had made,and having no consideration, neither for the circumstances underwhich the witnesses saw a specific murder, nor for the fact thatmore than thirty years had passed. The murderers themselves, whohad killed so many people, either could not or would not remembereach murder they had committed.Max Mermelstein spent a half a day before the judges. Thedefense attorneys used the same methods to break him down thatthey had employed with me, but he did not yield.My impression of the murderers was that Brettschneider, astereotypical peasant, sat silently during the entire trial and lefteverything to his lawyers. Pauhl, in contrast, was like quicksilver.He searched his files to find ways to ambush witnesses or even hisown lawyer with an error. He himself began to ask questions. Irefused to answer him, and the presiding judge upheld my right todecline direct conversation with my former tormentor. Pauhlremained the cold blooded murderer we knew. The trial was longand painful, and I do not know if it has ended even yet. When Iwas in Israel in the summer of 1975, Dr. Yosef Kermish of YadVashem told me that Brettschneider’s trial ended when thatmurderer died. I do not know about Pauhl’s trial.There is another murderer with whom Skala Jews have a bloodyaccount to settle, although he was not in Skala. This mancommanded Stopki Camp. His name was Paul Siler. He ran thatcamp with a high hand. Many Skala Jews were murdered there.Because of the initiative of the Center for Documentation inVienna and its director, the well-known Nazi hunter SimonWiesenthal, Siler was arrested in 1964 and sentenced to seven yearsin jail for his war crimes. Although such a sentence might be viewedas significant according to Austrian “conceptions”, for us Jews whowere his victims, it was a meager consolation. There is no sentence,no matter how harsh and severe, that would be able to undo even a249At the Trials of the Nazi Murderers in Germanyfew of his murders. His seven-year sentence was merely symbolic.Our accounting with the murderers is not yet over.German Press Reports about the TrialsArticles in the German press about Artur Engel’s murder trial werenot merely neutral. Between the lines, one could detect a sort of“compassion” or even “sympathy” for the accused. The headline ofthe Hamburg newspaper “Hamburger Abendblatt” (in large letters)shouted out that Engel had fired a “warning shot” in order to stopChune Schwartzbach from escaping. We witnesses were quotedonly briefly and perfunctorily, in order to fulfill an obligation. Thearticle announcing the innocent verdict that released the murderoussadist Artur Engel was accompanied by a large article claiming hehad merely administered a hard blow, implying that he had notintentionally killed Chune Schwartzbach, and that he was thereforeinnocent of first degree murder. That the prosecution demandedthat the verdict be appealed was mentioned only incidentally at theend of the article.Irony? The Hamburger Abendblatt stated in large type that Engelthe murderer behaved like a courteous “knight” toward the victim’smother. He offered the gray-haired, weeping mother, Rywa Schwarz-bach, a chair for her to sit on at his own trial for murdering her son.The German press devoted more space to, and quoted moreoften, the murderer’s and their defenders than they did thewitnesses who had survived. Very often, articles referred to the trialsas “the Jewish trials” to help Germans form their opinion on thesubject: that Jews will neither forget nor forgive, but will foreverdemand their “pound of flesh”.What follows are Articles in a Hamburg (West German) news¬paper on the trial of the Nazi murderer Engel (1970). [Translator’snote: the newspaper is Hamburger Abendblatt. Date is Wednesday,February 4, 1970. The article on second page includes photos ofArtur Engel and Chune Schwartzbach.]250Skala on the River ZbruczHANSESTADT HAMBURGMiltwotll. 4. FebiUJf 1970Ehemaliger Zollsekretar wegen ErmorJung fines laden ror Gericht„Ich wollte ihn mit einemWarnschuB zum Stehen bringen“In dar Scric der Prointe urn nalintlioiUliitiadw Ge-waltverbrechcD in den besetsten Gcbieten wahrend degzwelten Weltkrieges stcbt Mit gestern dcr 62 jihrige frtlheraZolbekretlr Artur Engel vor dem Hamburger Schwur-gerkbt Er toll am 19. Juni 1943 ala AngehSriger dea ZoU-kommiaaariata Skala in Ottgalizien deu lSjthrigen JudenChune Scbwartbacb, der Mine Arbeitmatitte aua Furchtverlaaaea batte, mit einer Pistole von hinten eracboesenhaben. Fflr den ProzeB aind drei Wochen vorgesehen.22 Zeugen, darunter JOdiadbe Tataeugen, aind geladen.Eln mlttelgroOer Angeklagter miteinem biuerllchen Gesicht. Geboren InPosen, spa ter sogenannter Zwolfenderbet der Reichswehr; vor dem Krlegevom Zoll Uberoommen. Nach demKrlege kam er nach Hamburg undwurde beim Zoll Im Frelhafen einge-steUt Verhaftet vor drel Jahren. AchtMonate Untersuchungshaft. Heute be-flndet slch der des Mordes angeklagteArtur Engel auf frelem Fufl. Familien-stand: Verhelratet, zwei Kinder.Beretts elne halbe Stunde nach '>r-handlungsbegirm erlltt der Angeklagteeinen Weinkrampf Nlcht wegen dersc h were n Beschuldlgung. son dem aladie Rede auf seine Frau kam. Die Ver-handlung muflte unterbrocben werden.Sp4ter wurde Artur Engel wesentllchruhlger.Der Vorsltzende fragt: .Haben Slewahrend Ihrer Ausblldung such Zel-tungen bekommen? Den .Vdlklachen Be-obachter' oder den .Stilrmer4"?Der Angeklcgte: .Nein. nur die .Ber¬liner Bdrsenzeitung*. Den .Sttlnner*kannte ich gar nlcht."Einsatz in SkalaWahrend des Krieges wurde Engelmit seiner Elnhelt in die KlelnsladtSkala versetzt: .Wir hatten kelne mlll-tarischen Aufgaben. sondem sollten dieGrenze vom damaligen Generalgouver-nement zur Ukraine kontrolllerenWegen Spionage und der Pendler. dievon einer Grenze zur anderen iiber-wechseltm Mit polltischen Dingenhabe ich mlch nie beschiftigt. Auch binich kein Judenhasser Ich bin ja inPosen mil jiidischen Kindem aufge-Wachsen und war mit ihnen im Sport-vereln."Der Vorsltzende: „ Ha ben Sle vorhereinmal etwas von der sogenanntenKristallnacht gehort?"Der Angeklagte. .Gehort habe tcherst spater davon. Id. habe dlese SachenmiObllllgt*Blenden wir zurtidc nach der galizi-schen Kleinstadt Skala — 4000 Einwoh-ner. davon etwa 2000 Juden. Der An-gcklagle war Zollbeamter z. b. V. KeingroBer Mann — aber auch kein kleincr.Denn schon bald regierte die Furcht inganz Polen — die Furcht vor jedemMenschen. der elne deu tie he Uniformtmg.Der Vorsltzende: .Wie viele von den'2000 Juden blieben zuletzt noth Ubrlg?"Der Angeklagte: .Das kann Ich nlchtso genau sagen. Viele hielten Ah ver-steckt. viele wurden von der Gestaponach irgendwohln abtransportiert"Der Vorsltzende: .Haben Sle nie vonVemichtungslagem gehdrt?"Der Angeklagte: .Netn. das habe Icha Ues erst nach her erfahren. Ich habeeinmal erschoasene Juden auf denStraBen gesehen."Wertsacben requiriertDer Vorsltzende: .Was haben Sledenn dazu gesagt? Fanden Sie das Rech-tens?"Der Angeklagte: „Um Gottes wil-len . .■Der Vorsltzende: .Zeugen werdenhler aussagen. Sie hitten Ihren Schifer-hund auf jOdlsche Menschen gehetzt."Der Angeklagte: .Das stimmt nlcht.Mein Hund lief htnter allem her. wasskh schnell bewegte. AuOerdem war erzwolf Jahre alt und kam schon nachzwanztg Metem auBer Puste .. •Der Vorsltzende .Zeugen werden hleraussagen. Sie selen in die Wohnungenjudischer Familien gegangen und hit-ten dort Wertsachen requiriert. Mit dte-sen Dingen hatten Sie unzihlige Paketenach Haus geschidct."Der Angeklagte: .Das atimmtnlcht “ Er spricht von Verwechslun-gen mit Kameraden. Der elne Kamerad1st tot — der andere lebt in der „DDR“und hat Engel in seiner dortlgen Aus-sage schwer belastetZur Tat fragt der Vorsltzende: .War-urn haben Sie den jOdischen Jungen Inden Kopf geschossen?"Der Angeklagte: „Es sollte etn Wam-schuQ setn und war eine relne Reaktionvon mlr. Ich stellte eben fest. daB ervon der Arbeit weglaufen wollte. undIch wollte ihn zum Stehen bringen “Der Vorsitzende: .Bel einem Wam-schuB schleOt man doch in die Luft oderin den Boden. Wir wlssen ubrigens ge¬nau, wo Chunc Schwarcb.tch gearbeltethat. Beim Ausbau lines Rciutallc, des-sen Bortcn mil Grab^tclnen vuiw >udl-schen Frtecthof ouspctegl war WennSle den armen Kcrl hiitten rn»ivi*chenlasM.it — ware Ihnen claim cm* pas*siert?"Dcr Angeklagte .WiihrAhcinlkinlcht"Der Vor*Hzrt»dc: .Su* sol It n nach derErschicCung des Jungen /.u sclncmValor gesancen win. dcr auch tmPlcnlcst.ill nriKilctc. uad /u il.ni <:c»agihaben: .Los. hoi demen Jungen ab.*“Der Angeklagte: .Das kann Ich nlchtausschlieBcn."Der Vorsltzende: ..Fine SCwih willgcschc-n hal>rn. wlc rmc Uat-nncrindrm sterbenden Jungen Va*«ereinfloOcn wollte Sle rollon d:i* verhin-dirt haben *■Dcr Angeklagte: .Dui irl unv.J.hr.-Er vers* rick t sfdi in WSd-T*rr->ct'e.Fmher h.it er bel dcr Polizci oo-gcagIt„kh glauutc. m Noiwthr gcltonuell zuhaben. Dcr Junge lief auf ir.uh zu. dohub ich die Tuiolc."„Ks lul mir ItWDer Vor-it/cink* Iras: nu.i einmal:.M’oruni haben Sie ubrrhaiipt g-.*schos-sen?"Der Angeklagte. .Da.v kann *ch heuten*rM r.ehr 4.*ia*n. Ii h. n.rhttoten. und cs lut mir »ihr kid. uad esi»t.fctiwr dcr Gc«chworrncti. ..Das Gc-scu dcr Alenschlichkeit 1st Ihnen andiesem Tagc wohl vdlllg abhanden ge-kommen."Der Angeklafte: .Tscha — vtel-lelcht..Der ProzeB wird heute fortgesetzt.Am 8 Februar werden zwei Richter,der Staatsanwal und der Verteidigernach Tel Aviv fliegen. um dort zwelZeugen zu vernehmen, die wegenKrankheit nlcht reisefahig sind,Msrl-Heinz Christiansen4cS«(i«*urseiictit. Vomuender Uandserlctila-dirvktor Wolf-Dieifich Chrhardl OMtiiiiii-inwili Rolf Henning. Verteidiger Dr. HajoWandechnelder.Fig. 31251At the Trials of the Nazi Murderers in GermanyMte 4 - Nr. 29 - Hamburger Abendblatt„Wir sollen nach der Arbeitalle erschossen werden!“Im JudenmordprozeB sagt die Mutter des Opfers ausDie alte Dame mit dem silbcrgrauen Haar hatte Tranen in den Augen.27 Jahre habe sie auf diesen Tag gewartet, sagte sie und bedankte sichbei den Richtern, daB sie kommcn durfte und aussagen. Aussagen iiberden Mord an ihrem altesten Sohn Chune, der damals. vor 27 Jahrcn, indem kleinen Stadtchcn Skala (Ostgalizien) vor ihrem Haus hinterriickserschossen worden war.Der Morder ihres Sohnes, der chcma-je Zollackrctar Artur Engel (62). derhmter ihr auf der Anklagcbank desHamburger Schwurgeridits saQ schobihr einen Stuhl hin. Fur w-enige Sekun-den traf der Blick der iWjdhngen JudinRiwa Schwarzbach diesen kleinen, un-schembaren. untersetzten Mann. Derganze Schmerz emer Mutter, die ganzeTragik einer gnadenlosen Zcit lag indiesem Blidc. Vier Sohne und ihr Mannwurden damab von den Deutschen cr-moraeLDie heute In New York lebende Zeu-gin schilderte dem Gcricht jenenschwarzen 19. Juni 1943 in Skala: „MeinSohn Chune arbeitete fur den Zoll-grenzschutz. Am Vormittag des 19. Juni.es war ein Sabbat, kam er ganz aufge-regt nach Hause. ,Wlr soilen nach derArbeit all* erschossen werden’. sagte cr..Ich bin geflohen *Nach einer lAngcren Pause bench tc todie alte Dame mil stockcndcr Stimmeweiter. ..Sekunden spater klopfte esauch schon an unserer Tur. Ein Mannbrullte: .Hicr ist Engel. Machen Sic auf.Wir suchen lhren Sohn!’ Chune fiohdurch em Loch in der Wand nach oben,auf den Boden. Alle Hauser waren durchsolchc Locher miteinander verbunden’Riwa Schwarzbach brauchtc einc gan¬ze Weilc. ehe sic wcitersprechcn konn-tc. „Die Deutschen fanden meinenSohn nicht und gingen wieder ausdem Haus. Kurz darauf aah ich — ldistand am Wohnzimmerfenstcr — wieEngel und em andercr Zollbeamtermeinen Sohn abfuhrtcn. Er muB ihnendirekt auf der StraBe in die Arme ge-laufen sc in. Da krachtcn auch schonzwei Schusse Mem Junge sturzte zuBoden."Wie die Zcugtn weiter berichtete. sciEngel zu ihrem Mann, der auth bcimZoll arbeiten muBte. gegangen und habegesagt: ..Geh und beerdige demon Sohn,den Hund. Ich habe »hn soeben erschos¬sen.* Engel habe in Skala kemen gulcnBuf gehabL Zeugin: ..Ich hortc, daB eroft Juden gcschlagcn und semenSchiferhund ..Betty" auf Juden gehctzihat." Richter: „ln Skala war keine Ge¬stapo. nur der Zollgrenzachutz. Wie gingos den Juden dort* *Zeugm: „Die moisten wurden ab-transportiert. Wir hatlen immer AngatAngst vor den Zollnern. vor der uki.u-nischen Polizei, vor alien (hnstlichenBurgern." Dennoch habe aie mcmalierwartet. daB Engel lhren Jungen er-Fig. 32schieBen wurdc. ..Er hat doch nichJLsverbrochen. der Junge!"Wie benchtet. vcrtcidigt sich Engeldamit, dafl es nur ein WamschuB seinaollle Er habe den Jungen an der Fluchthmdem woilen. Er soilte stehenbletbcnNoth emmal danktc die alte Dan edem Genchl. daB ex sich mit der fur sieso traurigen Sache befasse Richter: ..Siebrauchcn uns nicht zu danken. FrauSdiwarzbach Es ist unsere Pflicht.Der ProzcB w'ird heute mil dor Vcf-nchmung weiterer judischer Zcugenfortgesetzt. frkArtur Ingel252III. MEMOIRS AND LIFE STORIESFlG. 33: Motie—the “senior ” water carrier in townwith his horse and water barrel in 1927.In Memoriam Chaim (Munio) Fidererz'VGedalia LachmanFlG. 34: Chaim (Munioj FidererWith grief and sorrow we eulogize and remember the noblefigure of a dear and admired friend whose life wasdedicated to public service with integrity, dedication and devotion.It is sevenfold more difficult to accept the demise of our fellowtownsman who inherited from his noble-spirited father, BenzionFiderer of blessed memory, the chairmanship of the Skala Society inIsrael. The years he served in that position, he saw as his main taskthe perpetuation of the memory of the Skala victims of theHolocaust. The bitter and merciless fate took away from us within ashort period of time, two members of our Society in Israel: ShlomoBilgoraj and Munio Fiderer, It was as if a mysterious hand wantedto perpetuate the memory of the two together with the memory oftheir Skala brothers-the Holocaust victims, as “beloved in their lifeand not separated in their death”.2In my minds’ eye floats a scene from those distant days, when Iwas a student in Skala and Munio Fiderder was an officer in the*z”l means zichrono l’vracha (may his memory be for a blessing).“II Samuel 1:23, referring to the deaths of Saul and Jonathan.Skala on the River ZbruczPolish artillery corps; we were walking in a crowd of Skala youth upthe lovely alley, known in Yiddish as “oyven toyer” and in front ofus was walking a young couple, impressive in their beauty andsplendor.Zishka Freifelder with her fiancee Munio Fiderer; she in herelegant clothes and dignified gait, as behooves the daughter ofIsrael- Leib Freifelder, leader of Skala Zionists; he, in his armyuniform and boots with attached spurs that emitted rings of amilitary march. We, the children of an oppressed people, hated andslandered as cowards, were proud of him, even though we knewthat he didn’t volunteer and was drafted into the ranks of the anti-Semitic, Polish army. We also knew that this strong, young manwas representing us with dignity and pride.Years went by and in 1931 Munio Fiderer completed his studiesas an architect at the Technical School in Prague and thenimmigrated in 1933 to the Land of Israel. Flere he worked as anarchitect and joined the public service as a senior official. In thisposition he earned the respect and esteem of all, because of hisintegrity, decisiveness impartiality and thoroughness in solvingcomplicated municipal problems. At the same time he was alsoinvolved in voluntary work on behalf of the “fledgling State”,A letter of appreciation sent to Munio Fiderer by the Presidiumof the “Mobilization and Rescue Fund” at the termination of itsactivities in August 1950, read as follows: “We consider it ourpersonal duty to honor you and to express to you our deepappreciation for your great help in executing with total dedicationand diligence, the tasks we undertook. Therefore, please accept thisexpression of our deep gratitude and honor for your essentialcontribution to our efforts”.For many years we worked with Munio and under his guidance,as members of the Skala Society in Israel, organizing andconducting our annual memorial meetings-and participating in thejoint efforts with our American counterparts, to publish the SkalaMemorial book. Munio’s single greatest idea was the erection of amonument on the cemetery of Holon, Israel, to commemorate255In Memoriam Chaim (Munio) Fiderer Z”Lthe Skala victims of the Holocaust.He toiled endlessly and with great diligence, typical of him, forthe execution of this project, which eventually came into being, butregretfully, he didn’t live to see its dedication and unveiling.Standing on that day in front of the monument, we lowered ourheads in memory of the souls of our loved ones, including the soulof Munio Fiderer-friend, colleague and mentor, whose memorywill forever remain in our hearts.256Vignettes From a Notebook of MemoriesChaim (Munio) FidererI. The Clear SpringA river flows through the city of Skala. However, it was the springflowing down the hill that was the true blessing for the locals.The spring’s water was clear, very tasty, clean and especially coldduring the summer months. It was a real source of restoration forthe thirsty spirits of many of the local Jews. They would leave forthe spring on Saturdays after sleep, at the hot hours of the searingsummer, to quench their thirst, which arose from eating the tasty,spiced “cholent” (meat stew), and the “kugel” (noodle pie) filledwith pieces of fried chicken skin.The water for the Jewish residents of the city was supplied by the“vasser-firerss” (water leaders), who made a living this way. Totransport the water they used wagons, on two wheels, and on thema large wooden basin, with a single horse harnessed to each wagon.They looked poor, skinny and exhausted. The Jews who toiled atthis hard line of work-Itzik, Motti, Yerachmiel and others-were,usually, strong men, with thick beards and calloused hands. Despitetheir great efforts, they barely managed to make a meagerlivelihood. Especially difficult was their work during the cold, longPodolska winter, when the weak, skinny horse found it difficult topull the wagon from the spring, up the frozen hill, and to themiddle of the city. When this happened, the haulers had no choicebut to “lend a shoulder,” and help the horse by pushing the wagonforward, so it wouldn’t slip and roll backwards, together with thehorse. They couldn’t afford a sled. The water they would bring toapartments in two large, capacious wooden buckets called “one timewater” (a mol vasser), and the price was set according to theVignettes From a Notebook of Memories“times.” In the apartments, the water was emptied into tin barrelsand was drawn for use with metal pitchers, usually made of darkcopper.Self-respecting housewives usually had month- or week-longsubscriptions, according to which they got their portions regularly,every day, winter and summer, without concern as to whether ornot the hauler would come, as payment was settled at the end of themonth or week. This arrangement also guaranteed a sure supply onFridays or holiday evenings, when consumption was much higher.As opposed to this guaranteed arrangement, grim and bitter was thecondition of housewives who bought their water on a daily basis.They were left more than once, on days of bitter frost, or onholiday evenings, without a drop of fluid because the haulers didn’tmanage to bring a big enough quantity of water. And, then, theyhad to borrow from their neighbor a pot of water. There existed anice custom: just before the major holidays, and especially beforePassover, when the water haulers were given special bonuses, somegave more and some gave less, according to their ability to pay. ForPassover, the haulers would “make Kosher” the basins and buckets,to the satisfaction of even the most meticulous customers and, ofcourse, the town Rabbi.The haulers would announce their presence on the street withthe typical monotonous, call: “viv... viv... viv... haita... haita...haita,” over and over again.Despite the abundance of water in the town, the inhabitantswere accustomed from a young age not to use a lot of water. Thereason for this was that there was no sewer system in town, and notall houses had a proper toilet. What did they do? They did whatthey had to! In the rainy and snowy seasons, there wasn’t aproblem, as everything disappeared on its own, washed away by therain or under the snow. During the dry half of the year, theproblem really was serious and complicated: some of the town’spopulation used the public restroom, which was not exemplarywhen it came to excessive cleanliness and a pleasant fragrance. Theothers in the town had a primitive bathroom and that’s how they258Skala on the River Zbruczlived their lives.As for the foul water, the sewage, after repeated uses to savewater, was simply poured out, throughout the year, straight into thestreet, whether from the ground floor or from a higher floor, fromthe balcony. And woe to whomever happened to pass by at thatsame moment: his end was like that of “Haman”-he left“mourning, with his head covered”...II. The Boys and Their TeachersWho amongst us —in old or even in middle age- won’t remember theold “Cheder” and the sequence of his studies in it? I wouldn’t belying if I said that there were cases, and not a few, where this“Cheder” -supposedly a house of teaching- was also the only room,the humble abode, of a teacher of children and his family. Often,this room was also used by the Rabbanit, the Rabbi’s wife, as a sortof “workshop” to earn a secondary, meager living, such as pluckingfeathers for other women, baking sweets for Purim, or roastingpotatoes for the children and other similar things. There’s no needto emphasize that the “Chederim” weren’t located in the center ofthe city nor were they in luxurious houses, that there were norestrooms in them and the children relieved themselves outside,between the houses, which were about 3 feet apart.There were a few teachers of very young children in town.However, the names of only two have remained in my memory,those with whom I did my first year of “Cheder” and with whom Iacquired the foundations of my education: the first, Zusia“Melamed” [literally: the one who teaches”], and the second, Yudel“Melamed.” The first had a tiny wife, with a large hump. The nextstep in my education was studying Chumash at the age of 4-5 withteachers of a higher rank. Of them I remember Shlomo“Ha’Cheresh” [literally: “the Deaf’] and Aharon from Kutziobint-zik. The event of beginning to study Chumash was accompanied bycelebration. At the age of 6-7 there was another step forward in thechild’s education: he was seen as old enough to study Rashi’s259Vignettes From a Notebook of Memoriesinterpretation of the Chumash.Fig. 35: Four classes of students at the Skala Hebrew, Safa Brura, between1920-1930 with teachers Chaim Roiz and Avraham LedermanSkala on the River ZbruczAt the age of 7-8 came the first studies of the Talmud. Withprogress in studying the Talmud, the child already being a “GemaraBokher” (a Gemara youngster), and it was time to give him over tomore experienced hands, that is to say, a teacher of fine reputationand knowledge, such as Yosef Leib or Shlomo Aharon “Ha’Soma”[literally: “the blind”). The parents of talented and perceptive boys,tried to eventually hand their children over to a well learned Jew, R.Avraham the “Bizinober” to complete their knowledge of theTalmud, the Prophets and the Writings.Almost all the teachers had their own idiosyncrasies. Theteachers of the very young students hung their whips (moralityswitches) on the wall as sort of scarecrow to frighten these youngones. Aharon the “Kutziobintzikite” didn’t just drink a cup of tea,but rather quenched his thirst from a deep mug containing fourcups at once, but with only one cube of sugar. Shlomo the “Deaf’would visit on Fridays the parents of his “home-owning” students,as he would call them. He always did this on purpose, at lunchtime,when “kugel” (the noodle pie) was being eaten. He was especiallykeen for sweet “kugel,” but didn’t mind spicy kugel with stuffedentrails, either.Yosef-Leib-Melamed and his associate Shlomo Aharon the“Blind” especially enjoyed jabbing the students between the ribswith bony fingertips, a very painful jab, which left black-and-bluemarks. Such “treatment” would later lead to an argument with theparents over the reason that led to their child receiving such an“honor” from the teacher.The studies at the “Cheder” started at 8:00 AM and, for lunch,the children went home. From around 3:00 PM, studies went onuntil 6:00 PM in the summer, and until 8:00 PM in the winter,with a break for “varemes” (supper), which each child would bringfrom home. In the winter, each child came equipped with a lamp,to light his way home in the evening.Things were different for the children who attended the Polishpublic school in the morning: These students came to the “cheder”only in the afternoon, except for Sundays, during which time they261Vignettes From a Notebook of Memorieswere diligently to be found in the “cheder” the entire day. Shabbatwas a day of vacation from study.FlG. 36: The “Port Arthur”synagogue in SkalaWe should remember a tradition that was wide spread amongstthe “melamdim” on Shabbat. In the afternoon they would visit theimportant “home-owners” (the rich), the parents of the students,and quiz their children in Chumash that they had learned duringthe week. The student would recite by heart the lesson in Chumashor in Talmud, in accordance with his age, and the parents wouldmelt from such great pride. The “melamed” also had someexpectations: a glass of hot tea, or cold beer, a plate of lentils or ofnuts, in addition to Shabbat fruit and all sorts of desserts.III. The Modern Hebrew SchoolThe foundations for the modern school were established in 1906 bypublic activists, who, at the beginning, served also as teachers.262Skala on the River ZbruczDespite the many obstacles the Chasidim put in the way of itsdevelopment, in 1908, it had 89 students, both boys and girls. Inthe same year, the first two outsider teachers were hired, M. A.Tenenblat and Ben-Zion Sibak. This school moved to its newabode at the home of Herschel Ashkenazi.In the same year, this school in Skala was accepted to be part ofthe network of schools in Galitzia known as the “Safah Brura”[literally: “Comprehensible Language”), at whose head stoodShlomo Schiller. He was also the district supervisor. Managementof the school in our town was given to M. A. Tenenblat.The choice of teachers was very successful and this affected thedevelopment of this educational institution. M. A. Tenenblat wasthe student of several Yeshivas, acquired a general education inVienna and became one of the outstanding educators. At the sametime, he was also nurturing his tendencies for journalism and hisarticles were published in “Ha’Mitspe” [literally: “the Obser¬vatory”], “Ha’Olam” [literally: “the World”], “Ha’Zman” [literally:“the Time”] and others. After a while, he devoted himself tojournalism alone. He was the European reporter for the NewYorker “Forverts” (Forward). From 1921 he managed the Viennabranch of “I.T.A.” (The Jewish Telegraph Agency) and from 1935he managed the “I.T.A.” in Eretz Israel, in Jerusalem, and, togetherwith this, he continued to write.In his last years he devoted himself to doing Talmudic researchand was the author of several studies, which received very goodreviews and positive esteem in the world of Talmudic literature. M.A. Tenenblat was honored by the municipality of Jerusalem as a“Yakir Yerushala’im” [literally: “Precious to Jerusalem”], a sign ofappreciation, earned by a select few, for their contribution to thecultural level of the eternal city.The second teacher, Ben-Zion Sibak, was a pupil of theFithuanian Yeshivas, his country of origin. He was well roundedand overflowing with knowledge, an expert both in Torah studyand also in general studies. He was an excellent educator andreached significant achievements among the founders of Hebrew263Vignettes From a Notebook of Memorieseducation and the Zionist movement in Galicia.IV. The Faithful Witness of an Ancient CemeteryAn ancient cemetery was in the city of Skala, as old as the commu¬nity, itself. Cemeteries are, as is known, a faithful witness to thehistory of the Jewish population wherever they are, and so too inSkala. The tombstones in the ancient cemetery in Skala stood as ahundred witnesses for the existence of the community for hundredsof years. The ancient tombstones were different from thetombstones of later years-the differences were noticeable both intheir shape and also in the way the stone was processed and theprotrusion of the letters. Due to the great age of most of them, itwas no longer possible to decipher the content of their engravings,except for a few tombstones on which the writing wasn’t blurred. Itwas determined with absolute certainty that one of them waserected in 1581 [5331 in the Hebrew calendar]. However, it isn’timpossible that this tombstone was not even the most ancient.Among the Jews of Skala grew various legends and stories aboutthe deceased buried in this ancient cemetery-stories of Talmudicscholars, rabbis, great Jewish leaders, Tsadikim [literally, “righteouspeople”], holy people, miracle workers, who found their eternalresting place within this fenced perimeter.V. Shtreimel-Wearing “Demons”In the spacious building of the “Port-Arthur” synagogue (Port Arthurshul) there were also side rooms, used as a shelter for thehospitalization of refugees, wayfarers, poor, or just for those withouta roof over their heads. In the building there was also a soupkitchen, cafeteria, meeting hall, rooms for Torah studies, a restroomand the like.One of the permanent residents in a small room in the buildingwas an odd, slightly eccentric type named Hirsch “Ketzele” (“thekitten”). He was a scrawny fellow, slim, the color of his face dark,264Skala on the River Zbruczand his face elongated, with his thin, beard pointed on its edge. Hischin was black as tar, his sunken eyes were like blackberries, oftenthoughtful and sparkling... lonely was this man. His hobby, orlunacy, was telling about his encounters in dark nights withshrouded, shawl-baring dead who came to pray at midnight.Moreover, Hirsch “Ketzele” insisted that in the nights he’d alsomeet demons and ghosts and speak with them as one would to afriend, and, furthermore, the demons wore shtreimels from blackanimal tails, just like his own shtreimel, which he would wear onhis head. The form, appearance and motions of the demons Hirsch“Ketzele” would describe in meticulous detail.His stories, figments of his imagination, charmed his younglisteners, who’d listen as if they were in trances, as they followed hislithe and nimble motions... It’s no wonder he was sought after andwe were attracted to him as butterflies are to the light.VI. A Sugar Cube and One “Kreutzer”Entirely different was another character: the famous She’aya Moshe.When I first met him, he was already aged, old, with a long beard.She’aya Moshe was “personality,” a concept, perhaps a livingsymbol of idiocy and naivety.The entire city remembered him, his smiling eyes, with his faceexpressing kind-heartedness and contentment. He never botheredanyone and, surprisingly-even the children never bothered him;everyone simply left him alone. Moreover, people made an effort tohonor him at every opportunity with a sugar cube, which he saw asthe pinnacle of happiness and life’s joy. It was characteristic of aman whose mind never progressed beyond childhood.Only one thing in the world could upset him, namely, ifsomeone handed to him more than an acceptable handout-morethan a “Kreutzer.” He rejected the handout and lashed out at thegiver that he was being rude. He would assert in his brokenpronunciation: “bisht alain a keptsin” (“you yourself are a beggar”).He knew how to pray and would join in prayer at the synagogue,265Vignettes From a Notebook of Memoriesalthough it’s doubtful he knew when and what was being prayed.She’aya Moshe was very sensitive about maintaining personalhygiene. Every Friday he would visit the bathhouse of the city andits steam bath (sauna). He was alone and childless, without relativesor a benefactor. Out of compassion, the old Rabbi, Yosef YoelSchwartzbach, took him in and tended to all his needs. He fed andclothed him, housed him in his apartment and took care of him, ashe would a child. I remember, while visiting my grandfather, RabbiYosef Yoel, when I was still a young boy, and seeing how he caredfor him. I couldn’t possibly understand the nature of theirrelationship. I understood She’aya Moshe was not his son, sinceShe’aya Moshe had a thick beard like that of my grandfather andhis appearance was like my grandfather’s. All the explanations I gotdid not set my mind at ease. I would ask why he lived with mygrandfather, but slept in the big room upon the “Bank-Betel”(“bed-bench,” during the day a bench, during the night a bed), apiece of furniture, that could be found in almost any Jewish home.Despite the concern for his welfare and the faithful care given bymy grandfather, She’aya Moshe would (apparently out of habit)occasionally disappear from home and go out asking for handoutsfor pocket money, for shrouds and for a tombstone which he waspreparing for himself while still alive. As he didn’t actually need themoney, he refused on principle to accept any handout greater thanone “Kreutzer,” though he would gladly forgo money and settle forone or two sugar cubes, at most. His pockets were always full ofsugar, and to sweeten a cup of tea he would drop in no fewer thansix cubes.If someone offered him more than two sugar cubes, he wouldrefuse to accept them. He, apparently, was afflicted with cholera inBorschov in 1915, at the time of expulsion, and died in a foreignland. The beautiful tombstone, which waited for him many years infront of the house of the torah, tefillin and mezuzah scribe, RabbiYaakov Lifa the Elder, remained orphaned, without achieving itspurpose of marking the grave of this innocent and kind man.266Skala on the River ZbruczVII. The Partnership of Beggars, “Limited”In Skala, there was also a place for unusual female characters whosereputation preceded them. These were Treindel “Kepele” and heraccomplice “Di Gadiecke.” The first, Treindel “Kepele,” why wasshe so named? Because of her tiny, shriveled head. She was a smallwoman, who barely reached the height of a ten year old girl, andmaybe even less than that. Her voice was high-pitched andscreechy. Her friend and associate in “business,” nicknamed “DiGadiecke” was the opposite of her. A woman built like a telephonepole, with a masculine, deep, and annoying voice.This was the Limited Partnership of a pair of beggars, a “match”made in heaven. One completed the other, and one didn’t budgewithout the other. This lovely pair had an original method ofextorting greater handouts than usual. They started by going doorto door, as was the accepted custom, simply collecting handouts ofsmall change on Thursday, or slices of Hallah on Friday. Theregular and accepted fee of a simple handout was half a “Kreutzer”or perhaps a whole one. They didn’t settle for that, and to receive agreater handout, they took a certain tried and tested approach,which was as follows:They would go out, every day, to the train station and spy asthey watched who got off the train, and for whom they got off.From the locals, who were returning home from their travels, theyimmediately asked for a “contribution,” on the spot. Fromunfamiliar people, they asked for nothing, but took note of whothey were and which family they were staying with.Precisely at lunchtime, when the guests and the hosts were seatedaround the table, the two beggars appeared, according to apremeditated plan, a clever ruse. The guest or guests they greetedwith “welcome” and an outstretched hand to receive a “present.”At the same time, they also blessed the hosts that they should“enjoy the guests,” and they stayed rooted in their places withoutmoving.Of course, the hosts drew out their wallets and opened their267Vignettes From a Notebook of Memorieshand, and, in order to make a good impression on the guest, theywould give a generous handout and even something “extra” in thename of the guest to show honor to him. If the handout put thetwo irritating beggars’ minds at ease, they left peacefully. But pityhim who would give a mere coin, which didn’t satisfy them, that isto say less than a “Zeckserel” (ten Kreutzer). They may havethanked them with a smile, but, on the doorstep, as they wereleaving, one would “whisper” to the other, in a way that could beheard on the other side of the street, “apparently this guest isn’tworth more to the host” (the home owner). It’s easy to understandthe confusion that rose amongst those seated due to that wittyremark.Not once did it happen that the guest was a fiance (groom) orgroom-to-be, there to meet the bride, or a matchmaker there tosuggest a match to a girl or boy-if so, who would dare disrupt andrisk a match because of one “Zeckserel”?This ruse of the two beggars was clear to most of the towns¬people and they were quick to pay the “ransom” and get rid of thesenuisances. They would rather hear from them blessings and flatteryon account of the guest than to suffer their insults.268In Memoriam Dora Sandberg z'^lGedalia LachmanFIG. 37: Dora SandbergShe was born in Skala on December 1, 1922 to her parents Sarah(nee Reles) and Yitzhak Sandberg. First, she was enrolled in thelocal Pulaski Public School until the 7th grade, where she was anoutstanding student. Then she studied for two years in a privategymnasium and at the same time was enrolled in the Hebrew“Tarbut” school, where according to her teachers, she won muchrecognition and praise. Dora had also outstanding talent in dramaand at school sponsored plays would recite Hebrew poems withmuch skill and understanding. Her essays would also appear in thenewspapers of both schools, the Polish and Hebrew.For two years Dora studied in the Polish high school in thenearby town of Borshchov and also there was singled out for praiseas an outstanding student and an organizer of social events at whichshe would recite poems, sing and play music. After the Sovietoccupation of the region in the fall of 1939, Dvora enrolled in thehighest class of the high school in preparation for her matriculationexams. The school principal, Zayontz, a Polish nationalist withliberal views and friendly toward Jews, was imprisoned by theSoviet authorities and was about to be deported to Siberia, alongIn Memoriam Dora Sandberg z”lwith others, among them Jews.Dora organized a protest of all school students and on theirbehalf submitted a petition to the local secretary of the Communistparty, to free the imprisoned principal. The image of this daring,young girl, pleading with tears in her eyes, for the freedom of herteacher, made apparently such an impression on the local commu¬nist leadership, that they relented and became satisfied with sternlyrebuking the school principal and warning her young “interceder”,never to do this type of thing again. Dora completed hermatriculation exams with distinction and received good grades in allthe subjects.The Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union in June of 1941, foundDora in her parents’ home in Skala. A unit of the German borderguards stationed in Skala, took over for its own benefit a localagricultural farm that included a pigpen, cows, horses, chickencoops etc. Then the officers brought over from Germany theirfamilies who needed maids and servants for them and Dora wasdrafted to become one of the servants in their houses. For almost ayear and a half Dora was carrying the burden of heavy and harshhousehold work, all the while, standing tall and keeping her self-respect vis-a-vis the Germans to the extent that they would warnher of planned roundups and hide her from the hands of theGestapo and other predators.Dora and her family (her parents and two younger sisters)survived the roundups and executions until October 19, 1943, atwhich time the Gestapo arrested even those Jews who worked forthe German border guards, including Dora’s family, and sent themto their death. Dora managed to hide in the attic of the Germanquarters, went into hiding and since it was no longer possible to liveopenly, she worked nights for a Ukrainian family and like a huntedanimal was always hungry and cold. Sometimes, she would he sickand feverish in the cowshed of one or another of the“compassionate” gentiles. Thus, she spent the winter of 1943-44until the liberation of Skala by the Red Army at the end of March1944.270Skala on the River ZbruczAfter the liberation, Dora met and married the pharmacist,Favunio Seidman, a survivor from the nearby town of Borshchov.'When the Holocaust survivors, who were former Polish citizens,started to move westward, Dora and her husband also moved toPoland and settled in the town of Bytom in Silesia. The coupleremained childless. The terrible past weighed heavily on Dora’s life.Her broken heart never recuperated from the terrifying images andmemories that filled her days and nights. In the course of thoseyears, we managed to exchange letters in which I tried to convinceher to come to Israel and leave the bloody land of the past. Eventhough she expressed a strong desire to follow my advice, she couldnot fulfill her dream for many reasons. However, when she heardthat the Skala survivors in the United States and Israel, wereplanning to publish a Skala memorial book, she started to write herown memoir at a fast pace, as if suspecting that her end was near.On July 8, 1964, she died suddenly of a heart attack and was laid torest in a foreign land. She was only 42 at her death.271Skala-My Shtetl SkalaDvora (Dora) ZandbergSkala lay on a rocky hill, surrounded by the bends of the windingZbrucz River. Birches, acacias, tamarisks, poplars, elm trees andwhite oaks lined the road of access to the town, as a continuation ofthe neighboring woods, groves and the tended mansion of CountGoluchowski. The oldest site of Skala was the fortress whose ruins-vestigial witnesses of the wars with the Turks-with gapingprotuberances, crevices, deep cavities and underground tunnels,were terrifying. At the feet of the fortress on one side, immersed invegetable gardens and bushes of wild berries, there were small,modest houses, mostly whitewashed with thatched roofs. This is theStara Skala (Old Skala) village.Few Jewish families lived in this suburban village: Jegendorf,Lachman, Herscher, Bitterman, Brandes, Julis, and Kermin. On theother side of the fortress the town of Skala spread out; its center hadbeen established and inhabited for many years only by Jews. Itsrocky soil gave the town a pleasant, clear facade that made itdifferent from most other typical villages of Eastern Poland, that inthe rainy days of autumn were so furrowed by horseshoes andwagon wheels that you could sink up to your knees in mud. Thesmall houses of the town of Skala, closely adjoining each other, hadtin or dark-red tiled roofs. On the uptown crossroads at the centerof town, rose the three-story house of the Frankel brothers. Most ofthe houses had only a ground floor with some two-story housesinterspersed.Shops and stalls with a variety of wares and dry goods occupiedall the front rooms along the main road. The latches are moved,keys screech in the locks, the doors open and here and there aJewess emerges, her hair covered by a kerchief or still by theSkala on the River Zbrucznightcap. She retreats, sprinkles some water on the shop’s floor,sweeps and scans the surroundings. Beila Kassirer, ChaimJegendorf s wife, the wives of Pecker and Mann already invite theirfirst customers in. The wives of Schnitzer, Frankel, Sobel andWeintraub are expecting the peasant women to rush in with freshproduce for the market.In most houses behind the store, there is a small, windowlessroom, a kind of dark alcove or a recess separated from the shop by acurtain, where in fact the family life takes place. That is where theycook, eat and sometimes also sleep. There, by a sooty kerosenelamp, the father teaches his son ChumasIR and Rashi4, adolescentgirls tire their eyes at a randomly acquired romance novel; eyesshimmer and concealed emotions of first loves blossom in thosedark cubicles.It is time for the Shacharit5 prayers.... streets and alleys fill withfigures wrapped in black kappotas, cloaks fastened with a sash.These hurrying early risers start their workday with the Lord’swork. Their images come to my memory today and stand beforemy eyes: Nachman Brettler, a tall,lean Jew wrapped in a long, darkcoat enters the synagogue while hislips mutter the first lines of prayer.Round-faced Benjamin Gottesman,with his reddish beard and slightlybulging belly, walks steadily andfrom time to time goes faster movedby the importance of the holymission to which he is headed. Herecomes Yerachmiel Kassirer, the richwholesaler who provides goods andgroceries to almost all the town’s FlG. 38: Two town notables:retailers. His lips move while he HerschelAuerbach andZalman Hausner’ Torah: The five books of the Bible.Rashi: Rabbi Schlomo ben Itzhak, commentator of the Holy Scriptures.’ Early morning prayer.273Skala-My Shtetl Skalahurries, sprints in, kisses the mezuzab and disappears into the darkhallway. One of his customers, Chaskel-Shimon, follows hisfootsteps, an old Jew with a waxy, yellow complexion and apatriarchal long beard. Another moment, and there is JoelEdelman, bent, with a somewhat sparse yellow-white long beardand reddish eyes. This morning his son Aharon Edelman will notmiss his prayers-also bearded but carefully trimmed, strongly built,an expert of renown in the cattle trade. From the steps of theirhouse his wife Golda follows him with warm eyes, always prim andneat, a model housewife. (I always admired her sparkling, shininghigh shoes. We lived on opposite sides of the street).Chaim Engelbach, owner of a beer store, humble andunassuming, short and shy, hastens into the synagogue. He prayswith great devotion. He probably asks the Creator for good matchesfor his two daughters, Pessia and Sheindel. They, too, are small,very skilled and diligent and good friends with most of the town’sgirls. Almost running, not to be late, the two “kings” of iron andmetal trade cross the street-the old Herschel Weintraub, a short,stout and swift Jew and his son-in-law Mendel Brandes, sensible,with a red face and a bluish nose. In their wake is the good bakerEh Herscher, their neighbor from across the street, whose bread’squality is well known in town. He actually smells of fresh bread.Herschel Edelstein, particular and always well groomed, prays withpurpose and enthusiasm. His heartfelt prayer is understandable-hetoo has daughters.. .Leaning on his cane, Baruch MosheWeidenfeld, a very tiny man, almost a dwarf with a very intelligentexpression, limps slowly. He is very respected in town for hisintellect and insight. Feibush Wiesenthal, purplish, with a pleasant,clear voice, generally pleased with himself, joins those going to theBeth Hamidrasb6. He will not refrain from boasting about theachievements of his son Shlomo-the student. At the entrance to thesynagogue, Eliezer Weingast manages to exchange a few words withEh Herscher about today’s prices of grain and flour. They arejoined by Meyer Kreutner-tall, broad-shouldered, with a long,6 House of religious learning and prayer.274Skala on the River Zbruczthick beard, and always white from the flour; even his coat iscovered with flour. Moshe Mosner, the other baker, will obviouslynot be missing from this group. Tobacco-monopoly representativein Skala, Baruch Olinger, paces slowly with his hands crossedbehind his back. Black-bearded Alter Sommer, who provides bootsfor the peasants all year round, hurriedly fastens his sash on thestreet. This Jew made money and added a floor to his parents’house, planned for him by Nachman Stoliar, also known asNachman Relies, the wall of whose house abuts the synagogue andcan thus step out at the last minute.Among the last to come, though not late, we can see AharonBanner and his neighbor, Abraham Blutstein nicknamed “Pontik”who always boasts about his son-in-law, the lawyer Kligler, whomhe “acquired” for his only daughter Leah’ka. The tall, erect figure ofbrown-bearded Kalman Bilgoraj, respectable, strict with himselfand with others, catches the eye. Short Mendel Schnitzer, smart andreserved, moves next to him. And the “'farbittiner,” harsh andstubborn, isn’t he here? Of course he is. And Berl “kappota has alsomuch to say.Do you think, my dear ones, that these nicknames are meant tooffend? There were many nicknames: “kappusta7, roiter8, golem,tabeke, Petlyura, Bil’am,” and many more. Who can enumerate orremember all? Offensive? God forbid. They were passed on fromfathers to sons like property and belongings, like misfortunes andconcerns, from generation to generation, yet without a hint ofdisrespect and without intention to offend.A wedding is an exciting event in town, especially when thegroom comes from another town. There is so much to do, so manypreparations! During the entire week before the wedding, eitherChana-Sara or Pessia take the helm. They are the ones who bakethe famous honey cakes and apple cakes and cook and fry the stew.Pessia is thriftier whereas small, humpback Chana’le likes to show7 Cabbage.s The red one.275Skala-My Shtetl Skalaoff; no wonder the honey cakes and sponge cakes are served on largetrays to show the guests that the in-laws are not-God forbid-tight-fisted. On the day of the wedding, from the early hours, theneighbors and other “yiddenes”9 await the arrival of the guests. Theappearance of the carriage that brings the groom followed by a lineof carriages and carts that bring the rest of the family is the climaxfor the curious, the gossips, and just folks and a source ofamusement for the children.It is market day today. Let us also go early in the morning to themain street and let us see the carts loaded with all kinds of productsand merchandise. There is Zisio Feinsilber (diabetic and in aprecarious condition) and Mottel Goldstein, married to LeahWasserman (parents of a red-haired, sweet brat named Yumek);these two are the kings of footwear, assisted by their gentle andhonest salesman, Shaye, the son of Bassie who sells deliciouspumpkin seeds in the market. Sometimes he stays at the store andthey travel to the market alone. The two Schwarzbach brothers areknown not only as leather and boot sellers; they are also famous fortheir spouses, Ruchtche and Tchiptche, the portliest women inSkala. Heschels sells ready-made clothes; his assistant and salesman,Yankel Schwarzbach, invariably goes with him. He dresses thepeasants, promptly and diligently, in the garment they favor andpersuades them that it is nice and fitting and makes sure it will besold. Obviously, the Edelman brothers, noted cattle traders, will notmiss any market. Regardless of weather, heat or cold, rain or snow,they attend all fairs. Sometimes the revenue must sustain them for awhole week!Other people push themselves onto the market carts: sometimesMayer-Chaim, a weird, eccentric Jew; even the bathhouse keeper(the Tikkerin), or a pauper leaving at dawn to beg at the market; onmarket day the merchants are more generous and throw a coin forthe needy. Each town (Korolovka, Ozeryany, Borshchov) has aspecial day for the beggars. There is a tacit agreement: on9 Jewish women, Jewesses.276Skala on the River ZbruczWednesdays, the fair day, Skala opens its gates to all beggars, whileon Fridays only to its own local paupers. From early in the week,people set aside small coins of 5, 10, and 20 grosken, because onFriday the door does not close. And charity is not only money.Pious women will give the needy some fat, a slice of cbalab10 forShabbath and so on. When I was a small girl, I would stare at the“feast” of the dirty, ragged tots, clinging to the apron of theirbeggarly mother who, sometimes, carries another sleepy baby in herarms. They swallowed the fresh cbalab with so much appetite!Some poor women, on reaching old age, would go into“retirement.” Food and hot meals would be brought home to them.For years I took care of old Katta. She lived in a gloomy hut nearthe bathhouse. Blind on both eyes, she would identify me from afarby the sound of my steps; or perhaps it was instinct or a guess,because she was also deaf. Every time I went in, my heart throbbed:would I still find her alive?With the background of these small huts that seem about tocollapse with the burden of years, towers prominently the “BethHa’am.” Its immediate neighbors are Noote Steiner, the butcher,who boasts a broad, curly beard, swift and active despite hisadvanced age, and Flersch, the “hoarse” (der beizeriker) who couldcount a goat among his scarce belongings; not far was the house ofMoshe “P’gere”n (a short, dreadfully thin tailor who suffers fromasthma and a chronic and annoying cough-the source of hisnickname).On the ground floor of the Beth Ha’am are three ample rooms;one holds the library whose caretakers were two intelligent youngmen, Shlomo Schwarzbach and Avrum’tzie Bilgoraj. The two otherrooms housed in the morning the kindergarten and in theafternoon the Hebrew school. The upper floor had a large hall witha stage and curtains. In this hall the elections and weddings tookplace, as well as performances of the amateur drama group whose10 Jewish braided bread.11 Carcass.277Skala-My Shtetl Skalaoutstanding actors were Leba Edelman, Motel Hausner, MotelFisch and others. There were also parties and performancesorganized by the teachers of the Hebrew school and the parentscommittee. We were always especially thrilled by the preparationsfor artistic presentations in which some of my friends excelled: therecitations of Hinda’le Weidenfeld and Genia Sandberg, and thecharacter acting of Eliezer Weidberg.The Hebrew “Tarbut” school, between the two World Wars,attracted almost all the Jewish youth. Its teachers were: Royz,Lederman, Krentzler, Temer, Chaya Feuerstein, Tzipora Jager,Baruch Ginsberg and Shraga Ochshorn. The kindergarten teacherswere: Ms. Lederman, Ms. Blumenthal, Ms. Weingast and others.Especially interesting were the lectures of the teacher Ochshorn, athin, ashy, almost waxen-faced young man, who opened for us andexposed us to the troves of the Hebrew language and its richliterature.278Skala on the River ZbruczFig. 39: Classes at the Tarbutb School in Skala duringthe 1930’s with teachers Ginsberg and Roller, and theprincipal, Shraga OchsbornThe Jewish children were thus compelled to attend two schools:the public state school and the Hebrew school; only in the lateevening and night could they do their double homework. And yet,the afternoon Hebrew school was not taxing to us at all.279Skala-My Shtetl SkalaLet us go for a moment into the kindergarten. It’s the time of themidmorning meal. Each child sits in his place, spreads on his smalltable a napkin with his initials and on top of it a sandwich and anapple that were held in a small basket. When guests come in, thechildren rise prodded by the teacher and welcome the guests inHebrew: Shalom.In my mind’s eyes appear the trustees of the Hebrew school:Freifelder, Herzl’s “double”; all his gesticulations reflect Jewishpride and dignity. His trimmed Assyrian beard attests to hispleasure in resembling the great leader. After him, swinging on hisslightly flat feet but with a great deal of self respect and a graveexpression, is Motya Weidberg in a black suit; behind his thickspectacles, his intelligent, piercing eyes look with a sparkle of subtleirony. Skala owes this man the establishment of importantinstitutions like the Hebrew school and kindergarten, and he is theone who chose the teachers and educators.Each season and its events. We derived a veritable pleasure fromthe summer excursions, especially the full-day outing of “Lag Ba-Omer”u. Let me evoke the names of my friends who shared thosewonderful outings: Tonya and Peppa Herscher, Hinda Weidenfeld,FlG. 40: Kindergarten of the Tarbnth School in Skala (1936)12 The 33rd day of Omer-the time between Passover and Shavuot-a day of celebration.280Skala on the River ZbruczNussia Weinfeld, Rocha’le Mann, Rozia, Ruptsio and AndziaKassirer, Kuba Feuerstein, Yosse’le Meiselman, Simsha’le Bosyk,Bumtsio Brandes, Edzia Jagendorf, Chaya Feuerstein, PeppaKassirer, Buzio Lachman, Braksmajer, Rosenbaum and EliezerWeidberg, may he live long.In the winter there was no greater pleasure than sled riding.Several pairs of long sleds would start out from the house of Moshe“P’geire,” the tailor, downhill to the bathhouse, or from the pointnear Shimsha’le to the flourmill. (Here I must mention the mill’slessees, the Seidman brothers-Markus from the Gushtin estate whowas sensitive to the needs of the orphans and widows and alwayssought to aid, and Pinchas Seidman from Borshchov, as well astheir nephews Mordechai-Noote and Faiva’le13).Let us walk into the house of the Master of the Estate, old RabbiDrimmer. I remember the Rabbi’s most faithful students from thelate 1920’s: Chaim Yaget, Isaak Melzer, Yeed’l Drimmer andChaim Meir Relies. On the passing of his father, Yeed’l Drimmertook over his Rabbinical position and Chaim Meir Relies continuedhis studies and emigrated to Italy where he completed his studies atthe Rabbinical and Philosophical Seminar14.The house of Shmariyahu Melzer, the estate owner, is a truehaven for the poor. The noble and pious old man, after theSbacbarit prayers, would invite for breakfast every person thatlooked hungry. He was sensitive to poverty and suffering and hewas willing to support, ease and assist the needy.The traffic on the street increases. Shmuel “der Roiter” (the Red)is already driving some VIP to the train station. This coach drivercroaks unceasingly in his hoarse voice: “macbt eicb leicbd5” (makeyourself light); this requisite is anyway conveyed by each of the13 The author’s husband. They married at the end of World War II.14Rabbi Dr. Chaim Relies (Dora Zandberg's uncle) was saved during the Holocaust from theItalian Fascists and from the Nazis and spent some time in a closed refugee camp inSwitzerland. After the war he served as Rabbi in Ancoma and Chief Rabbi of Trieste. In the1950s he emigrated to the U.S. and officiated as Rabbi of the Conservative Congregration inSuperior, Wis. In summer 1971 he returned to Italy and was appointed Chief Rabbi of Trieste.15 In Yiddish.281Skala-My Shtetl Skalasprings that pokes out of the shabby seats of his “faker. ’’And yet noone relinquishes the Roiter s services.Hirsch “Kabban” (pig in Ukrainian), with a broad, sly smile onhis face, fetches his regular passengers from their homes. His coachcovers the Skala-Borshchov route back and forth. His patrons arethose who participate in the public life of town: Jaeger, MosheJagendorf and his sons, Max and Wladzio, Moshe Feuerstein,Fiderer, Fisch, Hausner and the youngsters who study at theGymnasia16 in Borshchov. “Kabban”‘s coach never lacks room forsuitcases and packages, while the “tsfir” (the high seat next to thecoachman) is always available to unexpected passengers. Indeed, anunscheduled “passenger” is a true find. Now and then twopassengers occupy the “tsfir,” leaving no room for the coachman; hethen drives standing, bent, sometimes leaning on the passengers’knees. Before climbing a gradient, he gets off the coach to ease thehorses’ load. The Grinberg brothers bought exclusive rights on theSkala-Czortkow line. For those rides there is a fixed timetable.Between the “Stara Skala” village and the town on the hill thereare water springs. The water is carried uphill to town by waterbearers “wasserfirer, ” each to his own customers. Ours was oldMotya, then Yankel and in the end, Moishe. The emaciated horsespull the huge barrels full of water, and their owners support them,repeating constantly: “Hayta, Vista, Vyo” (“right, left, forward,” thepeasants’ jargon for their horses), and prod the subdued beasts tomake a further effort. Above the street’s clamor rose their melodiousand persistent call: “Fresh Water, Good Water.” These were uniqueJewish types, especially striking during the winter when the freezingcold went below -20°C. Who can forget the wrapped up“wasserfirer” in the tall fur cap, his neck covered by a sweater andsometimes swathed in a rag lined with ice drops and the frost covershis nose and lips? Their hands show from wet, fingerless gloves andhuge, straw-woven overshoes shield their felt boots. The woodenbarrel and pails are covered by an ice sheet and decorated by icicles,resembling a crystal artistic creation that reflects the winter sunrays.16 High school.282Skala on the River ZbruczAnd the poor little horses in their ragged saddlecloths shared theirowners’ fates with patience, endurance and devotion.From one moment to the other the street becomes livelier. Thebaker’s apprentice runs with “bagels” and bowls of caraway seedsand Rachel Moishe’s with meat cuts and slaughtered chickensordered in advance. Bracha Sanya’s calls on her regular customerswith glazed bowls of her famous dish, “Granshl” (minced giblets).Chaya-Branne and Mirka “Kappusta” scurry from one to anotherbringing dairy products and selected live chickens of superiorquality. Their large aprons are smartly folded and tied to storeinside all the good stuff your heart desires.The way back uphill was much less comfortable and pleasant.But, what better purpose could the farmers’ sleighs serve whenreturning from the flourmill? Our jolly group was sometimes luckyto find a solution when these sleighs were coming back empty afterthe farmers delivered the grain to the mill. Having no choice, thefarmer would agree to take along the “free riders” on his sleigh.However, if his horses had to drag sacks of flour it was morecomplicated because the farmer would only agree that we tie oursleds to his sleigh and we would have to run along. On this road wewould very often run into old Meir-Hersch, a porter-coachman wellknown in town. A dwarfish, broad-shouldered Jew, with a long,floured beard (too much flour was sprinkled on it), who probablycarried thousands of sacks on his bony back in his lifetime. Meir-Hersch knew us well. Spotting us from far away, he would start toswear, curse and whip his horses. Eventually he would calm downand relent. In appreciation of the toiling Jew and his pitiful mares,we would try to make it easier on them. We just loved to drive himmad because his outbursts and anger were as funny as they werebizarre. One other sight was always moving: Shalom Milmut livedby the side of the track; he himself was an interesting Jew, anamateur, talented theater director whose youngest son Koubus(Yakov) was a poor, paralytic boy, sitting always by the window andlooking sadly and enviously at the amusement and inexhaustible joy283Skala-My Shtetl Skalaof a bunch of impish, playful kids, taking pleasure in the blessingsof winter and snow before the melting time of the spring.Shimsha’le is a different story. Who in Skala does not knowShimsha’le? He was a short, slight-looking Jew, who sold lemons. Itwas a hard livelihood; as the saying went: “A Jew buys a lemon oran orange either when he is rotting or when the fruit is rotten.”Subtropical fruit were a precious commodity in our remote area andtheir price was exorbitant by the standards of the poor people intown. Shimshale’s “palace” was a shabby hut consisting of one smallroom. Its roof almost touched the ground. A few shaky stairs leddown to its interior. No wonder that during heavy downpours thewater inexorably made its way into the hut and flooded the clayfloor. Shimshale’s wife, Brantze, and their three children had apermanent job: to sweep and scoop up the water from the floor andtake it outside.Today I see you, Skala, like in a mist. Did you really onceexist?...284Skala on the River Zbrucz'T5 r- attij*r«J _ 0,fc / Bet:*., «iy sila.-fa.~il*. ~aa/€*"~<\ <>/”•f> a ; kro* s*r '/«•y ' ”->*■ ** 7~* r~~n '*■*-*'«*-*«',««, -^,4 ^<^.7 ■fir-x.y/ac^t ~ /»’«■l Liz. 1' »»>a>y ynant Jio/nfe^a,.. ...- Oy'ez.i4-eUa. fif‘x,ea/*£/i€jo-t rzajuIcai^Aamtey ■yn txfen'll 7 e7c&y*-A,j ^V,?0 5‘f7 7<j,r7^4^ , S 7 o s 17*-z, y 7>7a fettlet’eAj7 /* ^2-Jbafij * ^ota. * it <7 ^2*nai olLtx. ftc^tyt <61+-zyft ony, £> f*~o/*-f* e.y k svtZy^ — /S+s*«c^&t tA;£ it £ •fv t oil. <z f (**-<*.*€fee f /2te/etfOL J*-L " on*/S a &t*f se+> x.f'yxoo/n-ra.fey X*4. ^Sf t asg-nce brzorrrce *rjj, £ sS+fcx j/y 1 Z*lo *~1+S2^.£-C^X. b 1 &2-e.m X* ^ 4 j ft on ymZ fc o s <x. /C ^ V o ®v 7 t t /■ a.» .»•X *7 Qc K Qt.y «<cc Z*~tr Ck. r* h> v © 7ry7>j —ott-y ; * <z±t*! fCt^*svy«i^«.V, f>o*A^Ut-U - ^la^Hva &+«/<x, .•k 'i*~k y*e~r, y 7'uf>*rUJ x,a.*>»\e£osei t *y m *b.*of~y /^(frae/A/a^ /**f &yol f»a ft zcxyjm ff tz.Afe.6* o/fm olt-tieA***-*c * *4c y>osn VU/y yeatsf to Sparryf ^<3 <va *Sy<] t si* Cf.~-i ^*--75 <y>a.le *»^fe -ft**iVyt h U4.,i»;n biaf^/■ •Jom.1 /* t.iiMf'j •• fciiti C«f J 4/Vi *, ^*®Cfc.Emf <J C .**s**'^jr^ ry>te »«4/'.J CL L L f »««}* ^«n •na.us-fa.ya.c.y yff7»e«iV»jijr«.4, {7~\r% t <t- bof%<, f & **Z-y &. f *.£z. y* c.ra.*y zy , /e^0 « ay «/a f s 2r* " > * 41' <2v s/y r£<z. .<^Q>77*n/” Vye?"t z aAo'-r* -?~a. wo oA^Xdjy<£ / «7 o /e & a* c Ao. m t m/FlG. 41: Z /wot *« Polish by Dora Zandberg in her original script285My Father Motie Weidberg-Last Leaderof the Skala Community z'VBruria SchwartzbachMy father was a symbol of that time period, between the twoWorld Wars, whose main imprint were the programs ofPetlyura1 2 and Machno3.1 z”l means zichrono l’vracha (may his memory be for a blessing).“ Simon Petlyura (1878-1926) was chairman of the short-lived Ukrainian national governmentafter WWI. In 1919, the Soviet army ousted the Ukrainian government, and the retreatingUkrainian soldiers perpetrated mass killings of Jews throughout Ukraine. It is estimated that asmany as 50,000 Jews may have been murdered and that Petlyura did little to stop the mobviolence, instead fleeing to Poland and maintaining a government and army in exile. In 1926,Petlyura was assassinated in Paris by a Jew, Shalom Shwarzbard. At the trial, the Jewishtragedy in the Ukraine was amply documented, and Shwarzbard was acquitted of the murder.3 Nestor Makhno (1888-1934) was a Ukrainian leader during the Russian Civil War. He led15,000 armed troops in the independent Revolutionary Insurrectionary Army of Ukraine (alsoknown as the Anarchist Black Army). Makhno’s forces won victories against the Germans,Austrians, Ukrainian Nationalists (the army of Petlyura) and the White Army. They alsoconfiscated land belonging to pacifist Mennonites. Makhno’s forces were accused ofconducting pogroms against Jews in Ukraine; however, some have disputed these claims,noting that a considerable number of Jews served in his army. In 1921, Mahkno was driven byTrotsky’s Red Army into exile. He died in Paris in 1934.Skala on the River ZbruczIn his youth, he studied in a traditional “heder” [religious studyroom] and, at a young age, because of his sharp mind, excelledalready in his studies. During those days, the spirit ofenlightenment that was sweeping across the world had alsoreached our Jewish streets of Skala. My father, like others, wasimpressed with this new spirit; he “gazed and was wounded”4. Hebegan to read more at night, first in secret, so that the adokim[religious zealots] wouldn’t accuse him of being an “apikoros”[heathen] or “mitnagged” [anti-Hassidic]. He continued readingwith diligence and persistence, even though it caused him greatpersonal anguish and many other problems because of theenvironment that was not conducive to such behavior. With greatthirst he absorbed Bialik, Mendele and Peretz [Jewish writers], and,also, Schiller and Goethe, in German. Thus, he gained entranceinto the spiritual treasures of the elite.My father was among the founders and pillars of the Zionistmovement in Skala, and it was through their initiative that the firstHebrew speaking school in our town was established. At first, it wasdifficult to find a home for this school because the adokim[religious zealots] were opposed to it. Eventually, as a result of theurging and influence of my father, my grandfather agreed to housethe school for a certain period of time in one of the apartments inhis house. My grandfather agreed to do this even though itsaddened him that his sons had left the “Tent of Israel” [becomesecular], and he continued to be staunch in his observance of thecommandments.During the years of the First World War, the Jewish residentswere expelled and exiled from the Skala border region. We went toRussia and my father was exiled to Siberia.Despite the difficult circumstances and conditions, my father4 This Talmudic expression is found in Tosefta Hagigah 2:3, “Four Who Entered the Garden.”According to this story, Ben Zoma, Ben Azzai, Elisha Ben Abuye and Rabbi Akiva were,evidently, seeking greater understanding of the mysteries of the world. With the exception ofRabbi Akiva, they were all adversely affected by this encounter, including Ben Zoma, who“gazed and was wounded." This Talmudic story is elaborated upon in Milton Steinberg’s “Asa Driven Leaf,” (New York: Behram House, 1939).287My Father Motie Weidberg ...was not only able to keep his composure, but, in fact, he was ashining example for others similarly exiled in Siberia. He kept hisvalues pure and his pride in being Jewish until the day he wasreleased, which happened during the “Svoboda” [Russian word for“freedom”], the Revolution. With the rise of the Bolsheviks topower, my father made a solemn oath to return to Skala, come whatmay. Upon our return, we were refugees, like so many othersduring those days, and it wasn’t easy getting along and strikingroots in that same place all over again.Once again, my father invested himself, quietly, but with greatdevotion, to the affairs of the community. He reestablished theHebrew school with the help of Chaim Roz5, one of the Russianrefugees, an outstanding teacher and a Jew of great stature andinfluence. My father involved himself in community affairswhich promoted the establishment of a communal bathhouse andseveral mutual aid societies. He was also one of the first people toinitiate the establishment of the Betb-Am—the Jewish CommunityCenter. In this endeavor, his brother, my uncle Moshe z”l, alsoparticipated.My father attended synagogue on Shabbat and on Holidays.Even though, on a certain level, he was a free-thinker, given theatmosphere of the town, where most of the residents weretraditional in their observance, it would have been impossible, aswell as uncomfortable, for him to separate himself entirely. Inaddition, my father loved the melodies and tunes of the prayers. Hewould lead services and also blow the shofar on Rosh Hashanah.However, in the little synagogue he attended the service, hestruggled with those who were boastful of their “yichus-avof [familylineage], and he even made fun of them. He rebelled against thestatus-quo. Because of my father, the most prestigious ’’aliyot” tothe Torah [being called to the Torah], were given instead to“amcha”-the common people. Those with power and influencecomplained against this, but my father prevailed.My father was, by nature, kind and patient with others; he was5 z”l means zichrono l’vracha (may his memory be a blessing).288Skala on the River Zbruczalso tolerant of people’s opinions that were different from his ownor his world outlook. Young people gravitated towards him, andloved to talk with him, wherever he would be found. One of thesepeople was Herschele Schwartzbach [a young communist].Returning home for Shabbat from the flower mill, where he workedthe night-shift, he would walk over to our house to have discussionswith my father. For hours and hours they would have heateddiscussions. With brilliant mind and a witty, sharp intellect, myfather would contradict and negate all of Herschele’s arguments.But, at the same time, he knew how to validate these arguments,and my father related to Herschele respectfully and sincerely. At thetime of the Russian-Soviet occupation, Herschele was the mayor ofthe town.His personal life was not, by any means, a bed of roses. Despitethis, however, he tried to hide and disguise these terrible situations,and he did this by singing an old melody from a “better” time, butwith words that were changed. These new words became engravedin my memory, most probably by way of my mother.As I have said, father had a very sharp intellect and a creativemind. He knew how to give good advice to others concerningdifferent issues. Sometimes, he also knew how to circumvent theoppressive laws of the Polish republic that affected the lives of theJews. He invented all kinds of schemes in that area. But, concerninghimself, he never used any tricks or schemes, as there was nobodywho possessed higher morals or a more clearly defined conscience.Behaviors that were, in his eyes, acceptable when it came to thedepressed Jewish community or in order to urgently assist a fellowJew in dire need-these behaviors were not considered to beacceptable when it came to his own personal affairs.He used to hum a tune for the “Vanity of Vanities” psalm, amelody show whose words I still remember: “What is the length ofa man’s days? He lives 70 years, but not longer.. ,”66 “Vanity of Vanities” refers to the biblical book of Kohellet (Ecclesiastes). However, thequote that follows is not to be found there. Instead, there is a similar quote in Tehillim(Psalms) 90:10.289My Father Motie Weidberg ...He didn’t know at that time the trials and tribulations that werein store for him or that he wouldn’t even live to the age of 60. Priorto the Soviet-Russian occupation of Skala, Dr. [Avraham] Stop,z”l7, who later became a member of the Israeli Knesset, offered hisassistance to my father by securing a “certificate” (British permit) tomigrate to the land of Israel. However, this never materialized, andfather found himself under the murderous Nazi occupation.Did anyone suspect that a terrible Holocaust was yet to come?During that darkest and terrible period father never lost his spirit.Facing one of those depraved and vicious Nazis, he expressed hopeand confidence that they would eventually be defeated, and that amyisrael [the people of Israel], tortured and fallen from grace, wouldone day return to their glorious past.This was his revenge over the Nazis, and he hoped for a betterand brighter future. It was with this vision that he went to hisdeath! May his memory be blessed forever!7 Dr. Avraham Stop (1897-1968) was a member of the 2nd Israeli Knesset from 1951-1955. Hereceived a doctorate at the University of Poland in history and philosophy in 1932, andmigrated to Palestine in 1939. As a member of the Knesset from the General Zionist party, heserved on the House, Finance and Labor committees. Dr. Stoop was involved in many publicactivities in Europe and in Israel, and he published many articles on Judaism and Zionism.290Reflections on the Personality of Israel-_Leib Freifelder z'VJacob HerzogIt was in 1906 or the winter of 1906-07. I was a young man of 15or 16. The Zionist Youth organization “Hashahar” (the Dawn)decided to set up an evening school for young people who wantedto study. We rented a room from Berl Moshe, called the“shtrikdreyer” (rope maker from flax); we borrowed school benchesfrom Wolf Itzik Freifelder (an uncle of Israel Leib) and the eveningschool became a reality. I was one of the students. The subjects wewere studying were German with Feivish Karmin the teacher;Hebrew with Yehuda Weidenfeld; Mathematics with YitzhakLandman, and Humash (Torah) with Israel-Leib Freifelder.One episode from those days is deeply engraved in my mind.It was during the week, we were learning “Vayetzeh”-the weeklyportion of the Torah reading in Genesis (28-10). Reading aloud theopening verse “Jacob departed from Beersheba and went towardHaran,” Israel Leib raised the following question: why is the textredundant? Wasn’t it obvious that if Jacob departed Beersheba, hewent toward . . . He then continued to explain and to demonstratehis own answer to the question in a most animated and magicalway. “You have to understand-he said- that Jacob our forefatherwhen he departed from his land and place of birth , was not anordinary Jew, like the Diaspora Jews of our time; Jacob was a strongand proud Jew and when he departed from one place and wenttoward another, he walked like a proud Jew should walk. . .”To demonstrate his point, Israel-Leib showed us then, how in hisopinion, Jacob our forefather walked. As we all remember, Israel-Leib Freifelder was a tall man, strong, erect and handsome, in fact,1 z”l means zichrono Tvracha (may his memory be a blessing).Reflections on the Personality of Yisrael-Leib Freifelder z”lhe looked astoundingly similar to Herzl, the founder of the Zionistmovement. We will always remember this image of Israel-LeibFreifelder, marching before our very eyes, back and forth in theclassroom, erect with his head held high and with a puffed-up senseof pride. It was an image that made a great and lasting impressionon us.May the above reflections of adoration help preserve the memoryof this unforgettable friend and wonderful Jew.292Chaim Roiz-Brenman (z'V)-_The Celebrated TeacherEster Banner-GelbartIt would be impossible to remember our city of Skala withoutremembering the Hebrew Day School and its wonderful teacher,Rabbi Chaim Roiz (z”l). A distinguished educator, in the periodafter the First World War, Roiz was a prominent figure in Skala, animportant part of the cultural life of the town, as well as the ZionistHebrew movement. Not only was he a scholar and proficient inmany subject areas, Roiz was also an experienced and accomplishedleader, filled with energy, and able to influence people with hischarming personality, his politeness and his spirituality.Indeed, the modern Hebrew Day School existed in Skala prior tothe arrival of Chaim Roiz. However, it was only after Roiz’s arrivaland his integration into the Hebrew education system, that theschool, “Safah Berurab ” developed an exemplary curriculum, with awell thought out scope and sequence of study for its students.Rabbi Chaim Roiz was born in the town of Felshtin[Gvardeiskoye], in eastern Ukraine, across the border. There, hisfather, Rabbi Moshe Zelig, was the recognized balacbic authority.As would be expected, Roiz received a traditional education, withan emphasis on the study of the Talmud and on the Rabbinic LawCodes. Gradually, however, Roiz turned to books of theenlightenment and to the new Hebrew literature, and he eventaught himself secular studies. He was also amongst the firstactivists in the Tzeiri Tzion [Young Zionists] in Felshtin.At the beginning of the 1920s-the years of the Russianrevolution and the chaos on the bloody Ukrainian soil, Roiz1 z”l means zichrono Tvracha (may his memory be a blessing).Chaim Roiz-Brenman (z”l)-The Celebrated Teacherescaped with his life and crossed over the border together with twosisters. He managed to arrive in Skala, which was, already, at thattime, under Polish authority. Roiz’s brother was murdered inFelshtin by the followers of Petlyora2, as they took vengeance uponthe Jews and caused the destruction of many Jewish communities.Rabbi Chaim Roiz desire was, infact, to migrate to the Land of Israel,but something went awry. The“Certificate” (the entry document toPalestine that was given by theBritish Mandate government) thatwas promised to him, was delayed inits delivery, and this caused him tostay in Skala, where he remained forthe next seven years. In addition, hehad a relative in Skala, MosheShapira, the director of Padfilipie,the estate that belonged to VelvelStock.The intellectuals of the town, thepublic servants and the devotedZionists immediately recognized thetalents of Roiz. They urged him tostay in Skala, at least “for a while,” and to put down roots in the lifeof the community and its people. Roiz agreed to their request.Among his accomplishments, Roiz was very influential inestablishing the Bet-Am [community center], and improving theHebrew Day School, where he elevated studies to a higher level. Heeducated many students, both boys and girls. These students“ Petlyura (1879-1926) was chairman of the Ukrainian government after WWI. In 1919, theSoviet army ousted the Ukrainian government, and the retreating Ukrainian soldiersperpetrated mass killings of Jews throughout Ukraine. An estimated 50,000 Jews may havebeen murdered, including 600 in Felstein. It is believed Petlyura did little to stop the violence,instead fleeing to Poland and maintaining a government and army in exile. In 1926, Petlyurawas assassinated in Paris by a Jew, Shalom Shwarzbard. At the trial, the Jewish tragedy in theUkraine was documented, and Shwarzbard was acquitted of the murder.294Skala on the River Zbruczadmired and adored him, and emulated his love for the Hebrewlanguage, the Jewish people and the Land of Israel. Consequently,as a direct result of Roiz’s influence, many of these studentsimmigrated to the Land of Israel and became balutzim [pioneers].Truly, because of his kind personality and lofty values, RabbiChaim Roiz was adored and honored by all the people in Skala,regardless of their social status.After being in Skala for seven years, when Roiz finally realizedthat he would never receive the immigration “Certificate” to theLand of Israel, he emigrated to Montreal, Canada, where he hadsome relatives. In Montreal, he received employment as a Hebrewteacher in the “Talmud Torah” school. For three years Roiz toiledvirtually without any salary, as the school consistently lackedfinances. He barely managed to survive by giving private lessons.In 1935, Roiz returned for a short visit to Skala. When hearrived, he was greeted by the entire community, and there wasjoyous celebration. Roiz’s visit to the school, which was then underthe directorship of Shraga Ochshorn, was a particularly festiveoccasion. Roiz gave a lecture to the students and the other invitedguests, and he even taught some Hebrew songs that he learned inthe Land of Israel, where he had visited before arriving in Skala.FlG. 44: Former students and admirers of Chaim Roizwelcoming him back to Skala on Aug. 10, 1935, when hevisited the town en-route from a World Zionist Congress inEurope, which he attended as a delegate from Canada.295Chaim Roiz-Brenman (z”l)-The Celebrated TeacherUpon returning to Canada, Roiz again devoted himself toteaching and giving private lessons, as he was accustomed to do.From 1952 until health problems caused him to retire in 1960, hewas the Principal of the “Talmud Torah.” There, too, he had anadmiring and adoring community, both because of his devotion tohis profession and because of his exceptional personality.After a difficult and prolonged illness, Roiz died in 1966. Hisstudents and friends in Montreal established a library in hismemory at Kibbutz Gesher Haziv in the Western Galilee in orderto perpetuate his name. May his memory be for a blessing!296Rabbis and Other Membersof the Clergy in SkalaBenjamin ResslerRabbisThere is no doubt that the religious community of Skala hadrabbis and rabbinical judges almost from the beginning of theJewish community. Most likely the names of those functionaries,their activities and deeds in those long-forgotten, fog-enshroudedtimes were inscribed in ledgers. But to our very painful and sadregret, those ledgers have disappeared, together with the Jews ofSkala whom the Nazi killers destroyed.However, the two families of Skala who held rabbinical seats inthe town continue to live in memory: the Drimmer and Lauferfamilies. How and why Skala had two rabbis-from the Vizhnitzer orCzortkower chasidim is told in articles by Bentsion Fiderer and,may he live long, Gedalia Lachman.The oldest and most multi-branched of the two was theDrimmer family. They were widely known throughout the entiredistrict and in many Galician cities through Rabbi ShlomoDrimmer, a great gaon, halachic decisor and author of the book“Beit ShlomoRabbi Shlomo Drimmer was, indeed, called by thename of his book “Beit Shlomo.”Rabbi Shlomo Drimmer occupied the rabbinical chair alreadyduring the times of the Kossower and Vizhnitzer rebbes. RabbiShlomo Drimmer was also a relative of the Rizhnitser tsaddik RabbiYisroel (the story of a meeting of the Rizhnitser with Rabbi ShlomoDrimmer will be told later).During Reb Shlomo Drimmer’s tenure in the rabbinate thereRabbis and Other Members of the Clergy in Skalawas also in Skala the old dayan Rabbi Leibish (Reb Leibish dayanwas close with Rabbi Chaim Kossower).After the death of Reb Shlomo the chair of the rabbinate (fromthe Vizhnitzer Hassidic side) was taken over by his son, RebAvraham, also a great expert and distinguished scholar. In his lateryears Reb Avraham became weak with a lung ailment. Therefore, aminyan (prayer quorum) of those close with him would gather inhis home to worship on the Sabbath.After Reb Avraham, his son Reb Natan-Nuteh inherited therabbinate. He was also a distinguished scholar. He was an affableperson. He began to take note of the “new” times and even tried toattract the “moderns” and the worldly folk-especially the Zionistswho worked for the settlement of the Land of Israel. He was alsodrew near to the Chalutsim (Zionist pioneers) who were preparingto make aliya, but he pleaded with them to follow the injunctionsof the Torah and perform the mitzvot (command-mentsj.FlG. 45: Funeral procession of Rabbi Noote Drimmer, scion offamous rabbinic family, that served the Community since 1848. Hewas the father of Shlomo and Yehuda Drimmer,the last Rabbis of Skala.298Skala on the River ZbruczReb Natan-Nuteh had two sons. The older one, Shlomo was amilitary rabbi in the Polish army with the rank of Captain and diedin Russia. When and how is not known.Reb Natan-Nuteh’s second son was Reb Yehuda. He inheritedthe rabbinate and it was his bitter destiny to serve as Skala’s lastrabbi. He, along with many other Jews of Skala, was dragged off tothe Janowska Camp in Lemberg, where he perished at the hands ofthe wicked Nazis and their Ukrainian helpers.Teachers (Melamdim)A teacher in his cbeder— the teachers of young children were veryimportant institutions in every holy community, and likewise, inSkala. Not always, and not everywhere was the cbeder, theclassroom, at an appropriate level. Economic reasons andimmovable traditions ensured the continuance of ancient practices.Not every Jew who undertook to teach was a pedagogue with thenecessary training. Nevertheless, there were among them certainexceptional people from whose cbeders there emerged pupils withconsiderable knowledge.The custom in Skala and in the larger and smaller communitiesin the district was the same as it was in countless Eastern EuropeanJewish communities. Here, let us mention the various Skalateachers.Elementary teachers, who taught the children the alef-beis andHebrew reading: Reb Michael (After the First World War he settledin Korolowka), Reb Zusye (Menczel), Reb Abba (Adler), Reb Itzikl(from Losiacz) Lewenkron, Reb Bentsion Jawitz, Reb ChaimHoffer.Cbumasb and Rashi Teachers: Reb Shlomo Sheffer (the DeafOne), Reb Aharon Griinfeld (the Katsyubintshiker), Reb YosefWercznianski (who later settled latterly in Borszczow), Reb YosefLeib Melamed, Reb Sholom Zimmerman (Deaf Shlomo’s son-in-law). Reb Avraham Bitterman (died in Israel), Reb Alter Weinraub.Gemara Teachers: Reb Moshe Kremnitzer (Lissawoder), Reb299Rabbis and Other Members of the Clergy in SkalaYosef Blumenthal (the “little Yellow One”), Reb Shlomo AharonWeinfeld, , Reb Moshe Grolower, Reb Shlomo Weinraub (Alter’s),Reb Issachar Ber Schechter, Reb Avraham Morgenstern (theBudzanower), Reb Zayde Bitterman, and Reb Leibish Feuerstein(Noteh’s).Ritual Slaughterers (Shochtim)Skala always had more shochtim than perhaps it needed. However,since Skala had two large Hassidic groups (Vizhnitz and Czortkow),there were, of course, first and foremost, Vizhnitz shochtim andCzortkow shochtim. There were also a few Hassidim from the sectsof other Rebbes; however, since they were a minority without theirown rabbi (like the Vizhnitzers and the Czortkowers had) theyyearned to have at least their own shochet.Their shochtim were: Reb Alter (the father-in-law of Reb YankelBroynstein), Reb Herschel(the son-in-law of Reb Eliezer EliahuWeidberg, later a shochet in Bukovina)., the “Vienna” shochet, RebShlomo Shochet, Reb Feibish Liber Stock, Reb Issachar Ber(Schechter); Reb Yankel Shochet (Broynstein) and Reb YisraelFeder of Tluste. (His arrival in Skala produced a sharp quarrelaround 1925).In the years when Hassidism was at its height and the Hassidicsects were engaged in heated quarrels as regarding their Rebbes,shechita became a sharp weapon in the hands of the two sides. Oneparty would not eat food whose shechita was conducted by the otherside. They did not “mix.” They even avoided marrying each other.300The Verdict of Rabbi Shlomoof Blessed Memory1Yitzhak EvenThe Sadigora Rebbe, Rabbi Avraham Yaakov, once told thefollowing story about his father the Rizhiner Tzadik RabbiYisrael. The Rizhiner once spent some time in Skala after fleeingfrom Russia, where there was a libel against him.When in Skala, the Rizhiner went around in his room withdiscomfort one Friday. He smoked and smoked, not removing thepipe from his mouth. Suddenly, he told his assistant, “Go alreadyand summon the Skala rabbi. If not, I cannot attend the Sabbathevening service.” This was very difficult for the assistant, but if theTzadik requests, one goes.The Skala Rabbi, Rabbi Shlomo, did not ask a lot of questions.Already dressed in his satin frock and streimel in honor of theSabbath, he went to the Tzadik. The Rizhiner greeted him with,“Welcome Skala Rabbi, please forgive me.” When the rabbi satdown, the Rizhiner said, “Do not be in a rush, Skala Rabbi, for Itoo must go to the services. However, a Torah judgment is takingplace here.” The Rizhiner told the following: “There was a great,warm Hassid-G-d fearing and also very wealthy. He nevertransgressed even the smallest prohibition.”That Hassid once obtained a business venture from the regime,from which he was set to earn a large fortune. Since he did not havesufficient money on hand to give the required guarantee deposit tothe government, he permitted himself to borrow the money to fundthe guarantee from the fund for which he served as the trustee for1 Excerpt from Yitzhak Even’s Yiddish book, “From the Rabbis’ Court,” pages 115-117.The Verdict of Rabbi Shlomo of Blessed Memorythe security deposits of widows and orphans. He knew that themoney was safe, for the business would be a source of great wealth.The minister with whom the contract was signed was a greatanti-Semite. Knowing that the signer was an Orthodox Jew, hedesignated Saturday as the day that the contract was to be signed inorder to vex him.The Hassidic merchant’s eyes darkened when he saw the letterfrom the landowner. He quickly concluded the business and gaveover the guarantee deposit, completely forgetting that the contractwas to be written on the Sabbath. Then the landowner warned himthat if he did not come on the designated day, the agreement wouldbe null and void, and the money on deposit would be forfeited.The Hassid utilized all means in order to defer the signing toanother day. However it was to no avail. What should he do? If hewere not to sign the contract, the entire guarantee deposit would beforfeited. It was not his own money. With that money, thedrudgery of poor widows and the toil of wretched orphans wouldbe lost. Should he sign? G-d should not punish him for evencontemplating such a sin. For so many years he had avoided eventhe thought of sin, he had passed through difficult tests many times,and now suddenly he was to become a Sabbath violator. And forwhat? For money? No, he would not violate the Sabbath.Suddenly it seemed to him that he had arrived home and foundthe entire city in a terrible turmoil. He saw in his imagination howthe poor widows fell upon him on the street from all sides, shoutingwith bitter wailing: “Thief, robber, give us our hard-earned money!”His ears heard the weeping of the hungry, torn and helplessorphans.His mercy overcame him. He desecrated the Sabbath and signedthe contract.Now I ask you, rabbi of Skala, decide for me if this can beconsidered a case of coercion, and we can make use of the principlethat “The Merciful One forgives in cases of coercion” (that is: thereis no punishment if the sin was performed out of compulsion), andthe Hassid is not to be punished for violating the Sabbath; or if this302Skala on the River Zbruczis to be considered as a monetary affair rather than a case of threatto life, and, therefore, he cannot be considered as someone who wasacting under coercion and is therefore liable to punishment.After a lengthy debate, Rabbi Shlomo decided that this is indeeda case of “coercion,” since he did not do this for his own needs, butrather for the widows and orphans. Therefore, he is exempt frompunishment.The face of the Rizhiner lit up with great joy. “You are the typeof judge about whom the Gemara says, ‘Anyone who judges a casehonestly becomes a partner with the Holy One Blessed Be He’ (Ajudge who judges a case honestly, meaning not with dead words,but rather uses clear thinking and takes into account thecircumstances, is considered as G-d’s partner). The Heavenly courtagrees with your decision.”Later it became known that the Sabbath violator was indeed aHassid of the Rizhiner who had already passed on to the world oftruth. When he was in the mikva (ritual bath) in Skala that Friday,the Rizhiner felt that the soul of that Hassid had no peace, andcould only come to rectification through a rabbinical decision froma great rabbi.303The Nucleus1 of“Hechalutz”2 in SkalaMoshe BeitanFlG. 46: Moshe BeitanThe seeds of Zionism that were planted in me by my Hebrewteacher, Avraham Lederman and his daughter, Henyah,sprouted in my heart and began to blossom. The yearningto Zionist deeds removed every obstacle to my goal. During thatsummer (in 1924), the first group of Zionist pioneers arrived in thenearby village of Tzygany to attend an agricultural training farmknown as “hachshara.” I was one of their permanent visitors, whocame every Shabbat to listen attentively to their discussionsabout building and restoring the land of Israel, the spiritual revivalof the Jewish people, the ingathering of the exiles and the1 This is a literal translation of the Hebrew term “gcirin,” referring specifically to the originalmembers of a Zionist group.2 An association of pioneering Zionist youth organizations, whose aim was to prepare andtrain its members to settle in Palestine and to establish there agricultural collectives known as“kibbutzim” and “moshavot.” Established in 1918 by Joseph Trumpeldor, it spread all overthe Jewish Diaspora and, at its peak, between 1930-1939, the Association counted 100,000adherents, with 16,000 of them attending hakhsharot (agricultural training farms) inpreparation for pioneering life in Palestine.Skala on the River Zbruczestablishment of a workers’ society, based on the principles ofequality and justice. A large and vibrant movement was beingcreated for that purpose and even in our town “things began tomove.”A stream of Jewish immigrants from Bolshevik Russia brought,at the time, many young people to Skala, among them enthusiasticZionists eager for action. A spiritual and ideological bond wasquickly formed between them and local Zionists, and together theybegan to organize the local youth that became the nucleus of“Hechalutz” in Skala. I was among the first to join thisorganization, even though I was the youngest. I eagerly participatedin all their activities that became an outlet for my aspirations andthe fulfillment of my dreams.Among the founders of “Hechalutz” in Skala were my friendsMordechai Fingerman and Yitzchak Buchhalter (Bahat), who, lateron, became a member of my family. Our “Hechalutz” branch wasestablished with great enthusiasm and energy. A spacious apartmentwas rented and decorated with appropriate pictures and slogans.Diverse social and educational activities were launched. We alsoreceived considerable help and encouragement from the localcommunity and Zionist leaders, especially the highly esteemedMotia Weidberg, Israel-Leib Freifelder and Moshe Feuerstein-all ofblessed memory. They helped and encouraged us with whateverthey could, and, within a few months, they provided for us, on theground level of the “Beit Am” (Community Center), spaciousrooms and some furniture. We thus took possession of our perma¬nent home that became known as the “Beit Hechalutz” (House ofthe Pioneers).The best of Skala’s youth joined our chapter, both teenagers andyoung adults. A turbulent, dynamic period in our lives had started.We established a few groups of “wood-choppers”-the only kind ofwork that we were able to adjust to and to succeed in. During thewinter days, there was plenty of work available, although the localgentiles, who usually performed this kind of work, complained a bitabout the unexpected “competitors.” In spite of this, we managed305The Nucleus of “Hechalutz” in Skalaquite well. We were equipped with saws and axes and we had in ourgroup a young friend, a locksmith by profession, who wouldsharpen our tools. We thus acquired a true taste for productivelabor that earned us a fair amount of money, although thedifficulties in adjusting to physical labor were numerous, includingthe opposition of our parents, which weighed heavily upon us.However, the joy of working together as a group enabled us toovercome them and we persevered through the winter months of1924-25.FlG. 47: Young men and women from Skala and other communitiesin Galicia, at an “Hachshara” (Zionist training farm) in IwaniePuste (late 1920’s) to prepare for agricultural settlement in Palestine,including the author (Moishe Beitan).With the arrival of spring, we began to look around for a suitablesite in the surrounding villages for a “hachshara”-an agriculturaltraining farm. We contacted the central committee of “Hechalutz”in Lvov, and they provided us with proper advice on how toproceed. The most active and senior members of our group were306Skala on the River ZbruczMichael Nachman, Berish Stock, Moshe Fisch, and FeivelGottesfeld. In the meantime, Fingermen and Buchhalter (Bahat)left Skala on their way to the Land of Israel, accompanied by theirgirlfriends they acquired in the town, one of them being my oldestsister, Malkah.FlG. 48: Members of Hanoar Hatzioni, a General Zionistyouth group dancing the “hora ” at the entrance to the estategardens of Count Goluchowski (local landowner).By directive of the central committee of “Hechalutz” we werepaired up with a group of young pioneers from the neighboringtown of Mielnitsa, and after the Passover holiday, we left for anagricultural training farm in Iwanie Puste, a village in our part ofGalicia. For me, this was a very unique period of time, a life¬forming continuation of my personal and spiritual developmentand one of my informal “universities,” with no grades or degrees.307Theater in Skala and theEstablishment of the Jewish LibraryJacob HerzogWhat I am about to describe took place in 1909. In truth therewere earlier attempts to organize some sort of theatricalperformance during dance evenings.In 1909, I came home after a prolonged absence from the city.After the High Holidays I became aware that the Hebrew Schoolwas in need of financial help.One Saturday, Moti Weidberg, Chaim Weidberg, MosheWeidberg, Moshe Weinraub, Avraham Bosyk, Chaim Gottesfeld,and I gathered in Zayde Sobel’s house.Both of the teachers of the school, M. A. Tennenblatt and B.Z.Szywek, were there. We considered various projects for raising somemoney for the school. My suggestion to organize a theatricalperformance was accepted.A few days later we met at the teacher Tennenblatt’s house. Ibrought along some scripts and we agreed to perform JacobGordon’s “God, Man and Devil.” We assigned roles right on thespot.The voice of G-d and the prologue: Avraham Bosyk Satan (theDevil): Ariel Mazik-EichHershele Dubrover: Benzion SzywekPessenyu, his wife: Mrs. TennenblattLeizer Badchan: his father: Moshe WeinraubFreidenyu and Tsipenyu, their wives: Mrs. Szywek and Miss AryeChatskell Drachma: Moshe WeidbergDobe, his wife: Chaim GottesfeldMottele, their son: M A. TennenblattSkala on the River ZbruczThe role of Dobe was played by Chaim Gottesfeld because wecould not find another woman.The roles of the four angels were played by little girls.In those days a sick young man, Meir Berger, lived in Skala. Hewas a Skala native who came from New York to recover in his hometown. I used to visit him often and he was very delighted when Itold him about our plan to perform Gordon’s play. He wasknowledgeable and experienced in Yiddish theater. Right on thespot he performed the whole play and sang the melody of “MizmorLeDavicT the way the famous actor David Kessler of New Yorkused to sing it. We went right to work on the rehearsals, rented theUkrainian reading hall (the Czytalnye) and prepared the necessitiesfor the performance.We had a great success with the performance. The hall waspacked and many people were left outside because of a lack of seats.The impact on the town was great. It was a success also from afinancial perspective. From the profits, the school received eightyreinish (a significant sum of money for those days).It was decided to repeat the performance in the city to satisfythose who had been unable to see it the first time.We met once again at Zayde Sobel’s home to consider thematter. One of the group requested that half of the proceeds of thesecond performance should be designated for a library in Skala.After considerable debate the suggestion was acted upon.We organized the second performance and the response to it wasno less than for the first. The income of 76 reinisb was divided intwo-that is, 36 refinisb for the school and 36 for purposes of thelibrary. We ordered books from Warsaw. That is how we createdthe first Jewish library in the town.There are now only two left of all those who participated in theperformances: M. A. Tennenblatt in Israel, and myself, Y. Herzogin New York.Before I went to America, I participated in one moreperformance in our theater in Skala-”The Zvi Family” by DavidPinski.309Theater in Skala and the Establishment of the Jewish LibraryAccording to the news that I used to receive, the amateur groupcontinued with its activity. When I came to Skala in 1929 as aguest, Dimov’s “Sbma YisraeY was being performed. The stage thenwas a better one (in “Dem Polski”) as well as the public hall. Ibelieve that the performance was very successful.Of those who participated in Sbma Yisrael still alive are Mina(Komblit) Frenkel and Yisrael M. L Herzog in Israel, and MosheWeisenthal in New York.Postscript: In New York, two Jewish actors who came from Skalaperformed for many years, Isadore Keshire (Kasirer) and Ch.Gertler. Keshire was linked to the Morris Schwartz Art Theater.Both of them, Keshire and Gertler, were friends of the author anddramatist Chone Gottesfeld, a native of Skala.310Folklore and Humorin the Life of Skala YouthGedalia LachmanThe cultural life of the Jewish community in Skala was charac¬teristically diverse and multicolored. The generation of thegrandfathers and fathers was traditionally religious, but with notrace of fanaticism. Of course there were Hassidim1 andMisnagdim2 each with their spiritual leaders, devoted worshipers,separate Synagogues and houses of study. They both prayed piouslyand fervently three times a day and the holy spirit of the Sabbathand Holidays reigned in the streets and alleys of the center of town,where the gentiles had no presence whatsoever; no houses, noapartments and no stores. Everything there was purely Jewish.The young folk, even the free thinkers and agnostics amongthem, did not dare to openly show their true views and feelings.Who among them would have dared in public to smoke a cigaretteon the Sabbath? And if someone actually did commit such a sin, itwas only done behind closed doors and behind lock and key. Eventhe young men and bachelors among the free thinkers andprogressives, out of respect for their elders and for the sake ofappearance, were accompanying their fathers to Saturday andholiday prayers in the synagogues, although they did not pray theremuch. As soon as they heard the worshippers reciting the “vayehebinsoa ha’aron vayomer Moshe” (wherever the Ark would journey,Moses said) that preceded the removal of the Torah from the Ark tobe read in the synagogue, most of the young men surged toward thedoor out into the street to stroll. Only the old folks remained inside'Members of a sect in Judaism characterized by emphasis on mysticism, joyful prayer andreligious zeal.2 Opponents of Hasidism.Folklore and Humor in the Life of Skala Youthfor the Torah reading.The young folk also avoided travel on the Sabbath, not becauseof their piety, but because rail travel from Skala was primarily usedfor business purposes or, G-d forbid, if someone was ill and neededthe services of a specialist-doctor in Tarnopol, Stanislawow or Lvov.Moreover, since Sunday was a strictly observed legal holiday inCatholic Poland, there was no reason for anyone to travel on theSabbath. On the other hand, short distance travel between Skalaand Borszczow (a distance of 15 kilometers) or Skala and Czortkow(a distance of 35 kilometers) was the monopoly of Skala fiacre3drivers, all of them simple Jews, but none who violated the Sabbath.Of course, you may ask, what about automobiles? The answer isthat such a machine was a great rarity in Skala and nobody ownedone. However, if once in a blue moon, such a device appeared onthe street, young and old ran from all sides to gape at it as a flamingwonder.From that, you will perhaps understand, that even if a stubbornoutrager wanted to commit a little sin, he had to look high and lowfor such an opportunity and had to suffer the punishment of thedamned in this world. One rarely even bathed in the river Zbruczon the Sabbath. Before noon-time the water was too cold even forthe would-be violators and in the afternoon, people typically took anap. Toward evening people appeared on the streets for thetraditional long walk that extended from the Polish church all theway up to the edge of town; from the lovely promenade that begannear Hershl Ashkenazy’s house along the tree-lined road toward thevillage of Ivankow. That Saturday afternoon walk was a traditionalpart of the life of Skala youth, even on warm summer evenings inthe middle of the week. The main street resounded with theechoing voices of maidens and youths and when Pessye Yousemexploded in loud laughter near Itsye Sandberg’s store, one couldhear it echoing all the way up at the post office.3 Horse-drawn carriage312Skala on the River ZbruczStrolling was always done on the left side of the street, beginningat Azriel Gottesfeld’s house. At the barracks of the border guards,some couples turned toward the “new street” leading to CountGoluchowski’s chapel, opposite Leyzer Wasserman’s lumber yard.The strollers were never alone; they were flanked on both sides ofthe road by enormous trees whose crowns reached high up in thesky from where the strollers compared to them appeared like ants.While the young strollers “ruled” the left side of the street, olderJews usually walked slowly on the opposite side, speaking slowlyand with deliberation, pausing from time to time or sitting downon one of the benches en-route. However, the true “parliament”resided at the “great rock” near Shlomo Lemberger’s house. Longand intense debates took place there, some laced with humor and agood deal of politics. One of the principal speakers there wasAharon Banner, but at 10o’clock in the evening, the Skalastreets emptied. The reason forthat was that in the decade priorto World War II, the relationsbetween Soviet Russia andPoland became very strained andantagonistic and on the borderzone between the two countries,which included Skala and exten¬ded for 15 kilometers in depth,strict rules and regulations wereimposed. Whoever was suspectedof being hostile to the Polish regime or was involved in smugglinggoods across the border, was subject to expulsion from our borderarea or incarceration for months and years.In 1931 the Ukrainians in our region started an organizedresistance to the Polish Government. Their underground nationalis¬tic movement conducted acts of sabotage; they ignited and torchedhaystacks of grain that belonged to Polish landowners or colonists.In response, the Polish government introduced new repressiveFlG. 49: The Roman CatholicChurch—dominant landmarkin Skala313Folklore and Humor in the Life of Skala Youthmeasures, among them a 10:00 PM curfew hour. Elie Meiselman(one of two town guards, who were Jewish) was instructed to turnoff every night all the three large gas lamps that lighted the mainstreet. This was the signal that everyone must at once leave thestreets and it was enforced by the military border guards. Anyonecaught on the street after 10:00 PM, and the sergeant in charge wasan anti-Semite, the offender was thrown into the city jail for thenight.I, too, spent once, a night in jail for this offence. It was just mygood luck that I was with a band of young people who made merrythroughout the night. Together with me there were EphraimGoldhirsch, Chaim Brettler, Laybele Schwarzbach, ShabtaiWasserman, Fishele Fish, Edzie Wasserman and even two gentiles.Chaim Brettler was always a great clown and he drove the twogentiles crazy, teaching them twisted Yiddish expressions, cursesand tales from “Tevye the Milkman.” By dawn, the two werecapable of repeating “gseese lemise, lechayim aruchim vetovim, kissall the relatives in the ass, and if I am a relative, kiss me too.”FlG. 50: On the promenade “Oib’n Toier” by the park of Count Goluchovuski314Skala on the River ZbruczIn the morning we were all released and decided to take revengeon sergeant Shcheblewski who had imprisoned us. The commanderof the border guards, Major Kokoshka, was presented by us with along list of complaints against the sergeant for imprisoning us. Weclaimed that he illegally imprisoned us and our evidence was thatElie Meiselman had not turned off yet the three gas lamps on themain street-the best proof it was not yet 10:00 PM . It was laterrumored in town, that sergeant Shcheblewski was reprimanded bythe major . . .That same year, in the summer, we arranged a festival in the parknear the railroad station to raise funds among Jews and gentiles forone of the charitable funds in the community. Accompanied byBrurya Weidberg and Laybele Schwarzbach, we went from house tohouse. When we came to Shcheblewski’s house, it was clear to usthat none of us would dare to knock at his door, as he would tear usapart like a hearing . . . Yet, I said to the others, “Let’s go in, Jewishchutzpah is well known, what’s the worst that can happen to us?”Can you imagine what our countenances were like when thesergeant gave us a contribution of five zlotys? Not even ShmaryeMelzer (one of the wealthiest Jews in Skala) would have given usthat much. So go, form a judgment about a gentile . . .There was another “problem” the young people of Skala had toface-though not all of them. It was called “soaping in for thebasin.” You need to know that in Old Skala (Stara Skala), beyondthe Turkish fortress and the stream, lived eight Jewish families,surrounded entirely by Ukrainians. Among them was Elye Yollesand his two daughters-quite good looking girls-Sylvia and Marie.They too used to stroll with us all the way up the promenade untilthe edge of town and before the curfew hour neared, they had to beescorted back to their home. On a nice, warm summer evening, itwas just another stroll, but in the mud of fall and in the winterwhen it snowed and stormed, it was not much of a pleasure. So theyoung men in our group, resorted to all sorts of tricks to avoid thisgentlemanly duty; they feigned a sudden toothache, a stomach ache,a sick grandmother, a twisted ankle and all sorts of other excuses.315Folklore and Humor in the Life of Skala YouthEventually, there remained one or two fellows who had toaccompany the girls home. Since nearby, where they lived, stood alarge hexagonal fountain with a fresh water basin, the “victim” wasreferred to as the one “soaped-in for the basin.” At one time it wasSimcha Edelman, another time it was Mendel Schwarzbach orFishele Fish. Even the cunning Chaim Brettler fell once into thetrap, when the other fellows ganged up on him and “soaped him316The Rock of Shlomo LembergEsther Banner-GelbartWhen I recall my parent’s home, especially my dear father,Aharon Banner z”F, I also remember my father’s group offriends, and how they would regulady assemble to sit on the bigrock by the house of Shlomo Lemberg z”l. It seems to me that mylate father spent half of his life sitting on that rock. He was a“Shomer Mitzvot” (an observant Jew), and well-versed in the Bible,Talmud and other Holy Books; yet, he was also a progressive man,well read in secular literature. It was his custom to ardently read allthe newspapers that were delivered to the town; moreover, hewould look through the books that I brought home from ourlibrary, whether they be in Polish or Hebrew. When my ultra¬orthodox grandmother, Faige Marmorosh, scolded him and bitterlyremarked that he was reading the books of heretics and heathens,my father calmly responded with a cutting answer that has becomeengraved in my memory: “since my daughter will not study theTalmud, I need to read the books she reads in order we should havea common language. Is that clear?”Indeed, my father had a common language not only with peoplehis own age, but also with those younger than him. I rememberhow he used to stroll around, for hours at a time, with YaekelAurbach, Hayim Hirsch, Nisan Olinger and Louvish Stock, andthey always had something to talk and argue about. Every evening,my father would tarry until late into the night on that same rock byLemberg’s house. Who was not to be found at the rock during thesehours? Herschel Auerbach, Meir-Zisie Tabak, Nachman Brettler,Zecharye Wiesenthal and Herschel Weintraub. Also Motie1 z”l means zichrono Tvracha (may his memory be a blessing).The Rock of Shlomo LembergWeidberg2 would sometime pass by to join the group andparticipate in the discussions, with the characteristic, quiveringsmile on his face. Was there any topic that these spontaneousdiscussions did not touch upon? Was there any subject that was notdebated? General politics and issues concerning Eretz Yisrael,problems in the Community and even the deplorable conspiraciesthat were being plotted there in secrecy. Moreover, they were noteven oblivious to the “insolent” young couples who dared, “Heavenhelp us” walk around with arms around each other, hugging andbeing in close physical contact. . .Yosef Morgenstern-Shachar (now in Israel) told me that heremembers my father expressing doubts about the prospects,existence and future of agriculture in the Land of Israel. “Behold,who will milk the cows on Shabbat? who will plow the fields, plantand sow? Jews, by nature, don’t know how to work and areassumed to shun away from hard, physical labor, preferring cleanand easy work” he argued. Interjecting, Meir-Zisie Tabak wouldremark, that “If there were in Eretz Yisrael gentiles from villages likeIvankow and Burdiakovitz3) it would be possible to sell themsecond-hand goods, which cannot be sold to smart Jews . . .”There, on that same rock-as if it was at the ancient “rock ofclaimants” in Jerusalem from which announcements of propertylost and found were made-they would try to predict the results ofpresidential elections to the Jewish Community Council. Duringthose heated, but amicable discussions and arguments, there wouldbe lots of guessing and predictions, clarifications and estimates aswell as revealed and hidden influences, concerning the elections tothe Polish Sejm (Parliament), the Zionist Congress and other publicinstitutions.I am convinced that significant issues and problems in the life ofthe Skala Community, were decided or solved there, on that rockystone. The rock is certainly still to be found in the same place onthe street, while those-who once visited it, leaned or rested on it,2 Leading Zionist and last chairman of the Skala Jewish Community Council.3 Ukrainian villages around Skala.318Skala on the River Zbruczshared on it the concerns of their hearts, dreams and hopes forredemption-are no more than extinct spirits, but never to beforgotten.319At the MillFradl StockFlG. 51: Fradl StockRachel took the basket that mother brought back from theLashkevitz fair, placed in it her red bathing suit, a bar ofaromatic soap, took her parasol and said, “Mother, I’m going tobathe at the mill.”“Who are you going with? Don’t you dare go there by yourself,do you hear? At the mill the water pulls strongly... I’d rather you gobathing in the Zbrucz.“I’m going with Hannah, the whole town is going today...”“Don’t go too deep into the water, do you hear? Hold on to thepoles...”Mother gave her two slices of bread and butter along with twocoins for cherries and called after her not to be late in cominghome. Hannah was already waiting for her in front of the house.They passed on their way through the market, bought cherries andmerrily continued on the long walk to the mill. The road wascovered with a deep dust, thin and fine like flour, and the shoesSkala on the River Zbruczturned white from the summery dust. All along the way they metpeople, either going to or from the mill.Rachel was wondering, “It looks as though the whole shtetl isgoing to bathe today... yes the whole shtetl...”“My mother wants me to go only to the Zbrucz, along with allthe misfits. At the mill the waves break against your back and it’s areal pleasure... I don’t like it at the Zbrucz, the water there seems tobe standing in one place.”After passing by the Greek-Catholic cemetery and the headmillers’ house, they caught the knocking sound of the mill. Whenthey came to the small bridge under which the water was rushingonto the wheel of the mill, Rachel felt a slight pinch in her heart,the kind of a pinch one feels prior to a long journey, a kind ofpinch you don’t know what it wants from you.The water under the bridge was boiling, foaming as Rachelwatched from behind the railing. A green, quiet stream of water, the“Zbrucz,” was flowing from the other side, turning under the wheelinto the water of the mill. She looked into the mill where in thedarkness the grain was merrily being ground into flour. It smelledof rye, barley and corn.They passed by the shack of the customs’ officers watching theborder. Sitting in front of the shack was Burko, the Post Officeofficial, wearing a light trench coat, watching the Jewish girls goingto bathe and whistling “The Lost Happiness.” With a passingglance Rachel noticed that his hair was light, although she hadthought it was black... light as the color of his trench coat. WhenBurko saw Rachel, he called after her: “gorgeous.” Rachel didn’tturn her back, but was fired with pride. Hannah was choking withlaughter.There were many people already at the water’s edge and the lawnwith the trees in front was covered with bundles of clothing. Girlsin bathing suits and women wrapped in sheets holding naked babiesin their arms were standing at the shore and in the water.Rachel noticed their neighbor Etty with her baby Yoselle, nakedin her arms, who was screaming because soap got into his eyes. Etty321At the Milltried to calm him down, but the child was frightened by the noiseof the mill and was screaming his head off.Women standing nearby were wondering, “How can you takesuch an infant into the water?’“The doctor recommended,” Etty retorted while calming thebaby.Asher’s wife and her baby were happy, “Ah, what a pleasure...mine, he should live and be well, enjoys bathing...” She hugged thechild’s naked body, pressing her face to the child’s wet, drippingface and hair, mumbling through her clenched teeth, “he, he, he...”When the child was babbling cutely, showing its new teeth,clapping hands against its breasts and yelling “Boo, boo, boo,” themother lifted it high with enjoyment, “Good boy, and good boy,long may you live!”That’s how, time and again, children were carried into the coldwater, while they were wiggling, screaming, shivering with theirtongues out and crying while being dipped in the water.On the other hand, children that got used to the water and werefrolicking in it were crying when taken out, because they were coldand their blue bodies were shivering. So they stretched their handsand torsos towards the water while water mixed with suds from thearomatic soaps was still dripping from their heads.Rachel folded her clothes, placed them next to a tree, took hersoap and went into the water. Girls in pairs and in clusters of threeand four were bathing, repeatedly dipping in the water, amidexclamations of “ah, ah” that mingled with the noise of rushingwater. With arms folded and wading deeper into the water withevery step, Rachel felt as though her heart was rising higher andhigher into her mouth. Hannah was bathing already and beckoningRachel to join her, but Rachel wanted to go further where the waterwas deep.Sanie Kelman’s wife was arrogantly stretching out at the furthestpole as usual, while the waves were inflating the sheet she coveredup with. Everyone else was afraid to go where she was. The wavesfrom the wheel of the mill were hitting her fat back with force.322Skala on the River ZbruczWhen she noticed Rachel wading deep into the water, beyond her,she yelled, “Rachel, don’t go so far! I’ll tell your mother, I’ll tellyour mother.But Rachel didn’t hear and went further behind bushes, whereshe knew of a hidden rock, half submerged in the water. She satdown on the rock, held on to the pole with one hand and stretchedout. The mill was clattering and its deafening noise mingled withthe screams of young girls and naked children.Rachel pulled up one of her legs to look at it. Water wasdripping from the white limb. She suddenly glanced at the darkwindows of the mill and a thought crossed her mind: “Who knows,perhaps Burko is observing her from there?”... She pulled back herleg into the water and took a deep dip up to her neck, so that hertied-up braids got wet. “He is probably bathing now... in his lighttrench coat... swimming around, whistling... the vagabond...”She frolicked in the water, pushing it back and forth, enjoying itsheavy smoothness. “Such a smoothness,” she thought. “The cloudsmust also be so smooth. Round and smooth, round and smooth.They rest on your band, round and smooth and suddenly disappearinto nothingness... Gorgeous.”When she came out of the water, Hannah was already waitingfor her and was about to leave, afraid her mother would worry. Thesun was slowly setting behind the trees. Almost all the women wereout of the water already. The noise and screams were dying down.Some were eating their bread and butter sandwiches and everythinglooked so fresh. The women were all smiles and smelled of thewater, the mill and their faces were tranquil. They were in a goodmood, ready to embrace the whole world. The quarrel one had onlyyesterday with a neighbor was forgotten, and both wanted to makeup. The tasty corn bread with cumin and the sweet cherries weredevoured with appetite and shared with strangers.They started on their way home, some walking along the mainroad, others taking shortcuts through the Greek-Catholic cemetery.When men were approaching, they modestly pulled down thekerchiefs over their brows. The men walked by briskly, fresh,323At the Millstrong, arguing good-naturedly about Zionism, and heading homefor the evening meal.The entire shtetl had bathed. The entire shtetl smelled of water,the mill, fresh corn bread and cherries and everyone was friendly.Rachel was going home with Nekhe and the wife of Mendel. Justbefore leaving, she took a last glance at the mill. From the small,darkened windows, the night was beckoning. Something waswhistling, something was moving between the waves racing aheadof the wheel.... “At night, they say, the water is boiling hot, butpeople are afraid to bathe at night.They stopped halfway and looked back. Nekhe was saying thather strength is coming back. The trees at the nearby cemetery wererustling uh-ha, uh-ha.... and it appeared to Rachel that thereturning strength was pulsating "uh-ha, uh-ha.... gorgeous.”Nekhe was quietly telling Mendel’s wife that she was going tocook young potatoes and dumplings for the evening meal, while hercompanion was saying she would cook young peas.They are healthy...Rachel thought that Burko was following her in his light trenchcoat, yet she didn’t look back for fear it wasn’t true, but her walkbecame restless. She turned around the parasol, handle-down,arrogantly swinging the folds.The returning strength was pulsating in the tips of her fingers,"Uh-ha, uh-ha.”324FRADEL STOCK (1890-1942)Fradel Sbtok (also spelled Stock) was born in the East Galician town ofSkalle (German and Polish Skala, then part of the Austro-HungarianEmpire and later part of interwar Poland).She was one of the few Yiddish women authors in the early twentiethcentury. Arriving in the United States at seventeen, she began writingpoems and stories. Indeed, she was one of the first poets to develop thesonnet form in Yiddish. When her book of stories, published in 1919and titled simply '' Gezamelte Ertsaylungen (Collected Stories), ” wasbadly received, she switched to English, but with no greater success. Ehelexicon of modern Yiddish literature (Leksikon Fun der Nayer YidisherLiteratur) claims that she died in a mental hospital around 1930.However, the Abe Cahan Archive at the YIVO Institute for JewishResearch, New York, contains a letter she sent Cahan on October 20,1942, along with a new story, which was then published in the JewishDaily Forward on November 19, 1942. No further information aboutFradel Shtok has come to light.Ehe settings in her sole book of Yiddish genre stories alternatebetween her native shtetl and New York—a typical dichotomy inYiddish literature.The Archbishop (1919)'While the townsfolk knew that the archbishop was coming, noone in Skalle made a big fuss about the news. It was onlywhen pine gates were set up at the entrance that people begantalking about it in the street.Motkele the Redhead, whose brother was a big cheese at thetown hall explained: “Do they really have a clue? They thinkarchbishops are a dime a dozen! Imagine how long it takes to climbthat high! First you gotta study for the priesthood-you’re not borna priest. Then you become a canon, then a supreme canon, then anelder, which he knows and which he’s already forgotten - Ah, ablessed man. And then you become a bishop. And it’s not till along, long time later that you become an archbishop.“Why was an archbishop coming to Skalle? Nobody knew forcertain. One person said that an archbishop visited Skalle only onceevery fifty years. Another person said that an archbishop came byonly when the Christians were about to build a church. Henekh theMarriage Broker, who was standing nearby, glanced at the oldCatholic church. He figured it wouldn’t be such a bad idea: thetown really needed a new church. He spit superstitiously, but hesecretly mused: “A new church.The town’ll become more genteel, more civilized.” For Henekhknew how many matches had been nipped in the bud purelybecause Skalle was uncivilized.In short, the idea kept growing on Henekh, and so he tried toconvince everyone that it was a fact, that it couldn’t be truer. And'The following story by Fradl Stock is from the Yizkor book but also was published in ananthology "No Star Too Beautiful” and translated by Neugroshel is copyright and cannotbe reprinted.Skala on the River Zbruczthe Jews started believing him, because if Henekh wanted to talkyou into something, he did so hands down.Alter asked: “Well, so what’s gonna happen with the town clock?What’s the town gonna look at?”The fact of the matter was that Alter wanted to get rid of thetown clock. His home was next to the Polish church, and being ausurer, he had nothing to do. So he spent all day looking at thetown clock, but by now was totally sick of looking at it. He felt thatif it hadn’t been for the clock he could have eaten one meal afteranother-only the clock didn’t allow it. For instance, when he drankhis cup of cocoa in the morning and the dial face said eight, itseemed to him that the hands would be approaching twelve, whichwas the reason he wasn’t hungry and couldn’t finish his lunch sosoon.Meanwhile a few other people were worried, because their owntimepieces kept pace with the town clock, and if it were removed,their timepieces would have nothing to keep pace with. And if allthe clocks in town stopped working, how would they know?Without a clock, you can kick the bucket and not know when.Now Shloyme the Deaf Man pointed out that it would bringgood luck and prosperity for Skalle if a new church was“construcked.”“Prosperity from a church, Shloyme? Please explain.”Avrom the Chatterbox was delighted that he had tripped upShloyme.The deaf man didn’t like getting tripped up, especially byAvrom. So he snapped: “Goo aargue with yourseelf.” (Shloymedrawled because he came from a different region). He looked atHenekh and addressed him but he actually meant Avrom. “Whyyin the world didn’t hee geet itt-goyish miind! Wheen youconstruck a chuurch, you doo need engineers-aarchitecks, that isPlus woorkers. They’ll bring in the woorkers from other towns;peasants from the four corners of the world’ll come to our fairs.Doo youu geet it noow-goyish mind?”327The Archbishop (1919)He meant Avrom, but he said all that stuff to Henekh, whocaught his drift and held his tongue. In short, the Jews lookedforward to the arrival of the archbishop as they did to the coming ofthe Messiah (if you’ll forgive my mentioning them in the samebreath). Borekh promised Sluk the dowry after the archbishop’svisit. And when Henekh had to pay tuition for his son, he beggedShloyme to wait until after the visit.-God bless us!A bit later it was rumored that the town rabbi would welcomethe archbishop with a Torah scroll. A few curious men pounced onthe beadle. Shloyme Perets, in the street and asked him whether itwas true. Shloyme winked his blind eye (which could spot a badcoin faster than a seeing eye) and he snuffled: “How should Iknow?”“They’re putting up a gate at the beginning of the street andanother one right by the pharmacy, and Dvoyre is standing there.”Alter’s daughter Godel asked him: “What’s Dvoyre doing by thepharmacy? Tell her to come home for lunch.”Godel explained that Dvoyre was standing there with her friendShayndl; they were watching the construction of the gate.“If she’s with Shayndl, that’s fine. Shayndl is a decent girl.” Andhe went home.By now, though, Dvoyre was standing without Shayndl, as shewas watching the construction. And she didn’t even give Lutsuk asecond thought. Well, when Lutsuk came out alone, he came outalone-was it her fault? Was it her fault that the gate was beingconstructed by the pharmacy? And if he greeted her and doffed hishat, shouldn’t she respond?“It’s too bad,” said Lutsuk. “So many young pine treesshattered!”“Yes, too bad.” Shouldn’t she have responded?When Lutsuk looked at her, she looked away.She stood there for a minute, then fled. She felt as if the entiremarketplace could see that she yearned for the Christian.She then had an urge to go to the wineshops. There she countedthe young trees, one, two, three, four, five. “So many young pine328Skala on the River Zbrucztrees shattered!”A Gentile was walking home in a new straw hat with a peacockfeather. He was strumming a mandolin and singing a Ukrainianfolk song: “Hey there under the mountain.” And the feather’sgreenish-blue eye sang along.Dvoyre felt alien among the trees, with the Gentile who waswalking home all alone to his village, but she wasn’t afraid. She hadan urge to go back to the marketplace, to the shops, with theirJewish merchandise.The days wore by and the weeks wore by, and Dvoyre lived throughher days and nights with the words: “So many young pine treesshattered!”She felt it was sinful to think about the Gentile. In herdepression she helped her mother, Brayne, darn socks. Her motherdidn’t have a clue but she wouldn’t let Godel do anything spitefulto Dvoyre.Alter, as usual, stood at the window, gazing at the town clock,intent on what he wanted from life. At eleven, for instance, theroast wasn’t ready as yet, but it was ready by twelve noon. Heargued that with God’s help couldn’t he live to see the roast done abit earlier today?His wife Brayne replied that everything required a little effort,otherwise...Alter caught the hint and he broke in: You couldn’t see anysteam on her; the fat wasn’t oozing from her double chin. And ascorpses ate, that’s what they looked like-was she listening or not?Of course she was listening, and she replied that he ought to sethis mind on more important things, there was a marriageable girl inthe house-the mother groaned that her world was so dark andwretched.Alter was at a loss to reply, but he didn’t want to be tripped up.So he exclaimed: “What can I do? She’s turned down Mayer Zisi.How come, girl, how come? Who can we talk to, who?”329The Archbishop (1919)Dvoyre was used to all this, she was used to hearing Mayer Zisi’sname no matter where she happened to be. He was a good man, afine man, Mayer Zisi with his big Adam’s apple and his hammeredshoulders.She was used to seeing her mother shake her head:She didn’t want to? Didn’t want to? She had something to boastabout-a girl was a precious thing. Mayer Zisi had a problem, a boyhad a problem-oh, sure! It was a reasonable thing, it couldn’t bemore reasonable! ... A reasonable dowry here, a reasonable dowrythere, a reasonable legacy at death-God forbid! Our own cousins-what could be more reasonable?But Dvoyre was already used to it.It was harvest time. The reaped wheat and rye lay in stacks in thefield and people walked across the hayfields to go swimming in theriver, the swimming and the summer sunsets gave Dvoyre a tan.Lutsuk’s voice haunted her everywhere -on the paths, among thestacks of wheat and rye, far, far, reaching all the way to the mill.And she was ashamed to undress in front of his voice, whichfollowed her, burning her back, echoing her footsteps - wasn’t hergait beautiful, wasn’t it graceful! Peered into her eyes, from allmirrors, beautiful eyes, Dvoyre? Undo her braid, long hair, Dvoyre?No, short hair, a short braid wasn’t beautiful, smear salves in herhair, soak it in the juice of yellow flowers, then the braid will grow,grow, grow. And can you sing, Dvoyre? Sing, softer, softer, don’tsqueal, it’s not appropriate for a Jewish girl. Just a sigh, very soft,shh, keep it to yourself.So many young pine trees shattered! ...The Gentile was walking home all alone to his village,strumming his mandolin so beautifully and singing: “Hey thereunder the mountain.”Become a Christian and die!Next Tuesday morning Moyshe-Yoyne beat the drum, telling themerchants to close their shops. Anyone who failed to do so wouldbe fined. The Jews realized that he was coming today.That morning, Alter had yelled at Godye, warning him not to go330Skala on the River Zbruczand look, for it was rumored that military personnel would bepresent, and he might get crushed. Later on, during the bigcommotion, Alter ran into him and he shouted: “Go home! A Jewmustn’t look at him! I’m going to synagogue.”But later on, they bumped into one another where a Jew mustn’tlook.The marketplace was mobbed. Well, now everyone had seen thatit was no simple matter. Yugan, the school principal, hadn’t gone tospend the day getting drunk in Moyshele’s tavern. At the crack ofdawn, when the rooster had crowed, Yugan had sneaked in for nomore than one drink.The peasants, who had driven in from the surroundingcountryside, were all in their Sunday best, and you could have saidthat their heads had swelled because of the great honor done totheir town.Dvoyre was standing near Hanzel’s shop, gazing at the ring ofspectators formed by the policemen. They were under thecommand of Commissioner Prakavitsh, who was riding his horse,with his fearful police mustache flying apart and with a pine sprigin his lapel. And Moyshe-Yoyne the Drunkard, who had hung uphis drum, reeled after him, shouting: “Keep back! Keep back!”Dvoyre, upon seeing the throng of Christian strangers in herJewish marketplace, felt like a householder visited by unknownguests, who turn everything upside down, who bring along alienthings and linger for a while.She was looking forward to their returning to their lairs, theircottages, their fields. This was not their place.Nobody knew why the police had formed the spectators into aring. A jokester swore that the ring was meant to keep the pigs fromgoing through.It was getting late, and Yugan the school principal was stillhurrying around, drenched in sweat.Everyone was now looking at the priests, fat and skinny, tall andshort, their bodies indicating the kinds of brains they had, fat orskinny.331The Archbishop (1919)But noisiest of all was the canon, who was the local priest andwho had the face of a yearling heifer. His own cook said that he wasan honest priest.Suddenly, the crowd began to stir and mill, to hustle and bustle.Someone announced that he was arriving.Who was arriving? Apparently the archbishop-no, it was thetown rabbi. They were going out to receive the archbishop rightthere, there. “Cut it out, stop shoving, you-I mean, Alter.”“Who is it, who is it, Mottye, can you see him? The archbishop-I mean the rabbi?’“Ah, ah, if you’ll forgive my mentioning them in the samebreath. What crap! An ox has a long tongue, but he can’t blow aram’s horn!”“What business is it of yours?”“Shush! There you have it! Jews have found a time to fight.Shush, quiet, they’re singing. Who’s singing, what’s singing? Areyou deaf or something? The beadle’s singing. There’s the rabbi, he’swalking with a minyan and he’s got a Torah scroll. Itsik and Velvelare holding him by his arms. The beadle is singing: “Shloyme Peretswith his Blind Eye”? What is the beadle singing? The imperialanthem, he’s singing the imperial anthem.”“Alter, now then! Lemme have a look!”Alter didn’t retreat from the box he was standing on. He stayedthere and even though he recognized Shloyme’s voice, he pretendednot to hear, then he answered deliberately, harried, dazed by thenoise:” What’s the big deal? Huh? An archbishop? Ain’t you neverseen no archbishop before?”A minute later, however, Alter himself was so dumbfounded thathe gave Shloyme a tiny space on the box. “Stand there, slowly,don’t tread on my foot. Wow! Wow! The rabbi’s coming”Dvoyre came running over. “Papa, let me stand on your box!”He let her climb up, and she watched.The rabbi with the beautiful beard was walking under a canopy,escorted by two fine congregants. He was carrying a Torah scroll.Four young men in silk caftans bore the four poles of the canopy332Skala on the River Zbruczover the Torah.The archbishop stood facing them - an old, gray priest sportinga high, square hat and escorted by priests who were holding crossesand wearing lace robes with expensive silver embroidery. Twopriests in strange high, angular hats and white stoles were carryingthe statue of Jesus.As the rabbi approached the archbishop, both groups halted.The Torah versus Jesus.The marketplace grew so still you could have heard a fly soaringpast. There were as many people as grains of sand on the earth, andthey all suddenly hushed up.Shh.The archbishop bowed his head to the Torah.“O b, jews! I can’t stand it\ The Messiah is coming!”“Did you get a load of that? He bowed his head!”“Of course, how could he not? The Torah is older, we’re older.”Dvoyre stood there as if in a dream.If they walk across an iron bridge, they’ll fall in, and if we walkacross a cobweb, we won’t fall in.She peered at the old, bent rabbi holding the Torah. Its oldvelvet mantle was embroidered with gold, and both the velvet andthe gold had faded long since. But noble and respectable like anold, rich woman, with a silk cloth, her genteel and aristocraticnature lying in the creases in her face, lying in the dust of the velvetfolds.“Dvoyre, why don’t you want Mayer Zisi, why don’t you?”Tbe glad tidings spread throughout the town; He had bowed hishead, he had bowed his head.And, as she hurried home, those words hurried after her: “Ofcourse, how could he not? The Torah is older, we’re older.”333At the Post Office in Skala1Chone GottesfeldFlG. 52: Chone GottesfeldOn the first day I spent in my “shtetl” I was burning withcuriosity to go to the post office at the time when the mailmancomes out carrying the letters. The scene of the long time ago,when people used to gather in front of the post office to wait for themailman, was never erased from my memory! I see it as if it werehappening now. People used to come there an hour before themailman emerged in order to have time to chat.Everybody came there: oil manufacturers, owners of dry-goodstores, merchants, young married men living with their in-laws whohad plenty of time and were certain they would not return empty-handed, because they subscribed to a daily German newspaper:“The New Vienna Free Press” or the “Vienna Daily”; youngbachelors, Zionists who were expecting Zionist journals or Hebrewpamphlets, as well as Socialists, waiting for a Socialist newspaper.Even I, who was at the time a very young boy, also used to receivemail. I subscribed to book catalogues and free sample issues ofGerman and Hebrew newspapers offered by the publishers.1 A chapter from the author’s Yiddish book “My Journey Through Galicia,” New York, 1937.Skala on the River ZbruczHowever, all of them did not come to the post office only to pickup their newspapers or letters; they came, because that was thegathering place of people from the various parties and groups intown. For the merchants, the place was a sort of bourse and for theyoung Zionists, progressives and free thinkers, it was a place ofcontention where one struggled for ideas and opinions.One of the Zionist opponents was a young man who lived withhis in-laws, battled them with wit. He could make clever remarksand tell a joke about Zionists who sang “od lo avdo” (a line in theZionists’ Hebrew anthem asserting that, "we didn’t lose yet ourhope to be a free people in our land”) that would produce greatlaughter, that for a while rendered the young Zionists speechless.There was not one of them who was capable of answering wittilyand on the spot. On a second occasion, they came already betterprepared to face their opponent. They brought along a young man,son of the “shoykhet” (the ritual slaughterer), who was writingarticles for Hebrew journals. He was not as witty as the Zionistopponent, but was quick and sharp. Before the other man couldproduce a joke, he let him have it to the solar plexus. And when itcame to speaking seriously, the “shoykhet’s” son was much better.In those days people did not quarrel yet about Socialism. Therewere only a few socialists, but they themselves didn’t precisely knowwhat that meant. They were looking at the time for a Socialistspeaker who could clearly explain the idea to them. The Zionistseven offered them the use of their meeting hall for the speaker. Inother towns, Zionists and Socialists were already at odds as to thedifferences between them, but here there was still peace andtranquility between them. The Zionists themselves were curious tohear a Socialist speaker, but in my time, it was difficult to arrange.One had to be brought from Lemberg and provided with travelexpenses, something the few local Socialists could not afford. Twicea day, in the morning and at noontime, did such party meetingstake place in front of the post office, until the mailman appearedinterrupting their debates.The mailman, often a Jew, and sometimes a Pole, was on good335At the Post Office in Skafaterms with everyone. He would emerge with a sack full of lettersthat was hard for him to carry and was grateful when half of hisload was taken off his hands right there outside of the post office.He even allowed the people to look through the bundles and pickout what belonged to them. All that I remembered very well and forthat reason I was drawn to the post office to see how it looks likethere now.On that first morning in Skala, I did not manage to get to thepost office, because many of my friends came to greet me and keptme from going there. In the course of the day however, I toremyself away by force and went to the post office. I wasaccompanied by my cousin Kalman and a couple of friends but Idid not tell them what it was that attracted me there. They thoughtI wanted to see the post office building and assured me that there isnothing worthwhile seeing.Finally, I am at the post office. The building of course did notinterest me. It was pretty much as I remembered it, but it appearedto me to be much smaller, just as all the houses seemed to me nowto be smaller than before. I looked about on all sides and expectedto see people, but none were there. “What are you looking for?’they asked me. “I am looking for the people who come to pick uptheir mail from the post office.” They looked at me astonished andasked: “Why would people come rushing here for the mail?” ' 'Whynot?” I replied. “It’s still early”-someone said-the mailmanwouldn’t come out for another fifteen minutes.”Another bystander asked me if I wanted to go inside the postoffice to see what it looks like there. “No”—I replied;—”IT1 waitoutside to see how it looks when the mailman emerges from thepost office.”“I tell you there is nothing to see,” my friend assured me, but Ithought he must be wrong. As far as I was concerned, there wassomething to see. Then several Jews appeared, all wearing old,shabby clothes. They introduced themselves to me and when Irealized who they were, my heart ached.One of them, a man with a gray beard, ran right up to me. “I336Skala on the River Zbruczwas told you went to the post office, so I came running here,” hesaid. I looked at him and his gray beard, and had no idea who hewas. “It’s me, Nachman Moshe,” he said. I immediately remem¬bered him. This was the man who had once been slapped at thepost office for insulting another Jew who was an opponent of theZionists. “I remember you quite well,” I said to him: “I evenremember when you were slapped at the post office.”“Why do you use the polite (Yiddish) form of “you” speaking tome?” he inquired. “How can I use the word “du” (in Yiddish)addressing a gray-bearded man?” I replied. “If you would haveremained here as I did, you too would have had a gray beard,” hetold me.“And what about the slaps? Does one get slapped even now atthe post office?” I asked. “Those times are now gone,” he said, “andthere is no one left to deliver those slaps any more, nor is there anyreason. We are all Zionists now and at the first opportunity wewould all go there (referring to the land of Israel).”“And what about the Arab pogroms?” I asked. He laughed.“What are you laughing at?”“A Galician Jew is afraid of pogroms?” he retorted. “On thecontrary. If Arabs make pogroms, we need to go there to fightthem.”As I was thinking about his response, the mailman came out ofthe post office. He held several letters in his hand and did not stop,but hurried away. The Jews followed him. I stood there observingthe scene. The first thing I noticed was that the mailman had only ahandful of letters for the entire town; secondly, the rudeness of thePolish mailman, who didn’t stop even for a minute to tell the Jewswhether he had some mail, for them or not. In my time, if amailman would have behaved in that fashion, he would have beentorn apart and would have never risked it, to begin with, Breathless,the Jews returned from the mailman without letters. “There was nopoint in my running-one of them said-I was expecting a letterfrom a relative in America, but if one doesn’t write, nothing arrives337At the Post Office in Skafa“I knew I wouldn’t get any mail,” said another man to me. “Myrelatives in America haven’t written me in years. They have entirelyforgotten about me. Nevertheless, I go to the post office every day,perhaps someone had remembered me; perhaps, I have no otherhope ...”“And I tell you,” a third one spoke up. "If they knew overthere, how important one of their letters is to us, they would writeus more often. They just don’t knowFlG. 53: Three senior citizens waiting for mail at the SkalaPost office (1930). Clockwise are seen: Gedalie Tabachnik,Srul Feuerstein (Yosis) and Moshke Gottesfeld338Skala on the River Zbrucz“What would you get from letters?” I asked. "If they would sendmoney, I would understand, but what good is a letter?”“A letter is also good,” said my friend, who had once beenslapped at the post office. "What good is it without money?” Iasked. “One gets credit from it,” said my friend. "Once I received aletter from a relative, I got money to get a start in business and whatnot, but over there they don’t know what a letter from Americameans,” chimed in someone else.I walked along with those Jews from the post office and everyoneof them stirred me up in his own way, telling myself that upon myreturn to America I’ll explain to them back home, just what a letterfrom them means here.Our conversation was interrupted by a women dressed in ragswho was coming toward me. She introduced herself and told methat her husband was in America and that she had not heard fromhim in years. She also told she has three children who suffer fromhunger and cold. She begged me to contact her husband andpersuade him to have pity on her. She wept bitterly and asked mewhy her husband is so heartless. How can a father forget his ownchildren? In order to comfort her, I wrote down her name in mynotebook, although I knew there is nothing I can do for her. I knewher husband. He was mentally ill and was in an insane asylum.Before that woman left, a second one appeared, also dressed inrags and crying bitterly. She has a son in America who doesn’t evenwrite her a letter. “I worked myself to the bone to raise him; Ibegged and borrowed and pawned everything in order to send himto America, so that he could become somebody, and now hedoesn’t even write. Why is he like that? What sins did I committhat my child, my own flesh and blood, should forget me? Whatharm would it do to him if he would write me a letter? He doesn’thave to send me money, I forgive him, I’m already used to gohungry, At least let him write me to save me from theembarrassment before people that I have a son who doesn’t write339Skala Characters of YesteryearBy Chaim BrettlerAs is known, every Jewish city had its specific types and person-ages-serious or comical-stories of who were transmitted fromgeneration to generation. Only people from the specific city wouldespecially enjoy these stories. I will try here to present a series ofpersonalities from almost all strata of Jews from the near and distantpast when Skala pulsated with life and had a pleasant appearance.I hope that in reading these lines, youthful memories and aforgotten yearning toward our hometown will be awakened amongthe youth. They will also lead the reader out of the vale of tears-from the ruined town with its murdered Jews to the Skala ofyesteryear.Baruch Leib, the Vizhnitz “Patriot”The following tale is not merely a tale, but a fact that was known inall the circles of Vizhnitz Hassidim outside of Skala.Baruch Leib, an idler but a fervent Vizhnitser Hassid, feelinghimself not altogether whole, went off to Vienna to be healed.Counting on staying for a long while in Vienna he did not forget,when packing, to take everything that a Jew needs when he embarkson a journey-A2/7m and tefillin, a streimel, a silken kapote, and ... alarge supply of toilet paper. After he was there for a considerablewhile, Baruch Leib realized that his toilet paper was used up. Hedid not think long about it; he went to a paper store. The Yekke(German Jew), though a Jew, did not understand anything but theword “paper.” He displayed all sorts of paper before him: writingpaper, packing paper, flower paper, and wallpaper. Baruch Leib wasnot satisfied and shook his head broadly. The Yekke (German Jew)Skala on the River Zbruczlooked at the “eastern Jew” and could not think of what to do.Then he asked Baruch Leib where he came from and Baruch Leibreplied, “Skala on the Zbrucz” Hearing that, the German Jew stoodtrembling. Skala was known in Vienna because of the Skala CountGoluchowski who was the Interior Minister of Austria-Hungary.Skala, after all, was on the Russian border and this “eastern Jew”wanted some kind of incomprehensible paper. Very perplexed hethought that the man was no doubt a Russian spy. Ah ... the beard,the peyos, the plush hat and the kapote? Well, a spy disguises himself.That was it!The German Jew immediately called the police. The police didnot have much success. During the investigation, Baruch Leib heldto his story: He was from Skala and he wanted to buy toilet paperand nothing else.At this point the investigator had a thought (a police thought).He would pose a question to Baruch Leib. If he was really fromSkala, then let him say to whom Skala belonged. What theinvestigator had in mind was this: if the “Jew” knew that Skalabelonged to Count Goluchowski, then he is not a spy, but justsome kind of confused fool and he would free him. However, if hedid not know the right answer then he must certainly be adangerous spy. At this point the investigator took him to task. “Youclaim that you are from Skala. Then tell me clearly to whom doesSkala belong?” And Baruch Leib promptly answered, “In thebeginning Skala belonged to Vizhnitz until there was an uprising ofseveral libertines who split off to Czortkow”-clear as the day.The end of the story: After remaining for a while underinvestigation arrest, Baruch Leib was brought back to Skala underpolice escort.“But He is Singing Titborach”As everyone knows, until the great schism between Vizhnitz andCzortkow, all the Hassidim were from Vizhnitz, It goes withoutsaying that the Vizhnitz prayer rite was the only one. When the341Skala Characters of Yesteryearquarrel broke out the new Czortkower Hassidim instituted theCzortkower prayer rite. But the trouble was that, having wor¬shipped all their lives in one particular order it was very difficult tochange over to the new rite. It came to blows on more than oneoccasion. In order to avoid desecrating the Holy Name, apoliceman was posted there, especially on holidays, to maintainorder.Among the Vizhnitser it was the custom to sing Titboracb on theThree Festivals1, The Czortkowers did not do so until a misfortunetook place. On one of the days of Passover, the leader of theSbacbarit service forgot himself and began to sing the Titboracb.When a tumult ensued, one of the householders, wishing to avoidviolation of the holiday went out to the policeman (the policemanused to stand outside, not daring to go into a holy place), crying“Panye, Panye!” pointing to the prayer leader. The astonished gentiledid not understand the situation at all. He said to the excited Jew inPolish, “But he’s doing nothing bad,” at which the excited Jewshouted, “He’s singing TitborachP“Good Morning Nutmeg Chimney”Reb Mosbe Dudi Meltzer (May he rest in peace) the wealthy man ofthe city, and Reb Leibish Nota’s (Feuerstein may he rest in peace),were approximately the same age, and in their youth studied in thesame cbeder. Leibish had a much better comprehension than MosheDudi. As luck would have it, however, Moshe Dudi was alandowner, one of the largest Jewish landowners in Galicia. On theother hand, Leibish was a poor man throughout his life. Later onwith intercession of his relative, the head of the town council,Moshe Feuerstein, he lived in the bathhouse. It goes without sayingthat no one paid the slightest attention to him.1 The Three Festivals (or Three Pilgrim Festivals) refer to Passover. Shavuot, and Sukkot.Titborach is a section of the prayer service that is optionally recited at one point.342Skala on the River ZbruczOne day, Leibish was passing by Moshe Dudi’s house, just as therich man was standing outside. Seeing Leibish he called out acheerful, “Good morning, Head Turner,” (Leibish used to hold hishead to one side). The expression “Head Turner”2 was not meant asan insult, G-d forbid; but rather as an expression of youthfulcamaraderie. But the poverty stricken Leibish immediately replied,“Good morning Nutmeg Chimney” (having in mind the tallchimney of his distillery). He continued on saying “You know,Moshe Dudi, that I am a better scholar than you, and my pedigreeis no less than yours. So what is it? I am a poor man, living in thebathhouse, so I am called Head Turner. As for you on the otherhand, everyone greets you with a respectful ‘Good morning’. Beaware that they do not mean you. They mean the nutmeg chimney.They are telling a lie, but I am telling the truth.”“He Prophesied and did not Know what heProphesied”; A Story About a TrainOne day, Leibisb’s Nota’s came to Moshe Dudi on a particularmatter. This time, Moshe Dudi admonished him seriously andintimately, saying “Leibish, you are a scholarly Jew. If you putyourself together and become a person, you would not have to livein the bathhouse.” At that, Leibish replied as follows: “Our life onour lowly earth is compared to going to a train. CountGoluchowski rides to the station in an expensive chariot. You,Moshe Dudi, ride there in a fine coach. A prosperous Jew goesthere in Yisroel Yoel’s Fiaker3. A simple Jew rides there in a horseand wagon while I, Leibish, take up the sack over my shoulders andgo on foot. It is true, all of you come to the train more quickly andbetter rested than I do while I arrive last, weary, and soaked insweat. Once in the train, however, we are all alike. When alive, weall live in different manners; however, once we are in the earth, we' The Yiddish Dreikop literally means Head Turner, but is often used as an insulting term forsomeone who drives people crazy.3 A Viennese horse-drawn carriage.343Skala Characters of Yesteryearwill all lie there alike.”Baruch Feuerstein, the DirectorIn our town, a good many years ago, there was a Jew, Reb BaruchFeuerstein, whom the town Jews called Baruch the Director. Thename fit him perfectly. He was an influential Jew, respected by thelandowners, and Jews trembled before him with deathly fear.That which I am about to recount happened to my grandfather,Reb Baruch Tabak, of blessed memory, who, when he was 16 yearsold, came to Skala as a scholar-boarder at the home of his father-in-law, Reb Zayde Drimmer of blessed memory. Having been only ashort while in town and barely knowing anyone, he passed by RebBaruch the Director’s house just as he was majestically sittingoutside in a chair. Seeing my grandfather, he called out, “Younglad! Come over here!” (At that time, my grandfather did not yethave the beginnings of a beard, so he thought he was still abachelor). When my grandfather approached him, he commandedhim, “Go carry out the tub.” When my astonished grandfather didnot move from the spot, the strongman shouted, “Do you hearwhat I said you?”My grandfather, though still a young man, was not frightenedand replied to the Director: “Was it appropriate for you to ask meto carry the tub. You are not sick, and you can carry it yourself.”The Director jumped to his feet in anger and asked thebystanders, “Who is this impudent fellow?” Someone from thecrowd replied, “He is Reb Zayde Drimmer’s youngest son-in-law.”At that, the Director promptly calmed down, saying, “Young man,you will remain a local resident, since you knew how to reply tome.” Since then he never bothered him again.A Village Jew Becomes a Halachic DecisorIn Orach Chaim1, the section of Passover, section 429, it is stated4 The name of one of the four sections of the Code of Jewish Law (Shulchan Aruch).3 44Skala on the River Zbrucz“We asked about and expound for 30 days prior to Passover.” Thatmeans that, for 30 days before Passover one elucidates and discussesthe rules governing Passover. In his Mapa glosses on the SbulcbanArucb (Code of Jewish Law) the Rema (Reb Moshe Isserlis) remarksthat it was the custom to purchase wheat and to distribute it amongpoor people. As one sees from the words of the Rema it was only acustom. Nevertheless maot chinin' became a hallowed responsibilityto provide poor people with Passover necessities, so that they couldtruly feel themselves as freemen. Thus, was it establishedthroughout the Diaspora, from earliest times to the present day as anoble, humane injunction that is fitting for Passover, the festival offreedom.We in Skala also carried out the annual maot cbittin collection.Here, I want to talk about one of those Passover eves.The rabbi of Skala, Rabbi Avraham Drimmer of blessedmemory, used to occupy himself greatly with maot cbittin. He was,along with my uncle, Reb Yisroel Drimmer of blessed memorywent around the city collecting money every year. They also usedalso to ride to the surrounding villages, particularly to Cygany andLosiocz, where a considerable number of Jewish families lived.Aside from money, they would collect potatoes, beets, and the likefrom them.In Cygany, they used to stop at Yisroel Cyganyer’s house, whichalso used to serve as the village synagogue in which communalservices were held. In the meanwhile, Yisroel let it be known to thevillage Jews that they had honorable guests among them. Thepeople came and donated generously. Once, one of the Jews cameto the rabbi with a question: saying, “Rabbi, I beg you, please testmy son.” When the rabbi asked what the boy was studying, theproud Jew replied “He is already studying “lesbaym” meaning nodoubt the devotion recited prior to the putting on of tefillin. Therabbi said, “Call him in!” The youth came in. The rabbi, seeingbefore him a nearly grown man asked the father, “How old is the5 Money for the purchase of wheat for the needy for Passover, and more generally, moneyraised for the purchase of all needs of the needy on Passover.345Skala Characters of Yesteryearlad?” The father replied, “He is in his eighteenth year.” The rabbi,irritated, shouted, “You mean to say that he will only now begin tolay tefillinV’ “Yes, rabbi,” the Jew innocently replied, “You see rabbi,until now, he was the youngest in the village so that he carried thetallises of the Jews to the synagogue on the Sabbath. I would not lethim become Bar Mitzvah because after the Bar Mitzvab one is notpermitted to carry on the Sabbath. Now, since Sender has anotherboy who has grown up, that boy will be able to carry the tallises.Now do you understand?”The Remains of the Sabbath LoafChaim Yisroel Buga was known in Skala as a quoter of sayings, ajoke maker, a prankster, and a merry fellow. This was especially truein the years before the First World War when he was wealthy.Sometimes he would engage in mockery, particularly with beggars.As is known, every Sabbath morning poor women went fromhouse to house gathering Sabbath loaves. Each woman had either atied apron or simply carried a sack into which to throw thecollected pieces of the loaves.Chaim Yisroel, the prankster, who used to take pleasure from hisown tricks, on one Saturday made a wave to an entering woman,“Excuse me, but let me have change of a loaf.” When the confusedwoman, carrying her sack, did not understand, he clarified what hewas saying as follows: “When in the course of the week you gatheralms and someone wants change from a whole silver reinish you giveit to him, is that not so? Today is the Sabbath, and if you gather upchala loaves, give me the change of a loaf.”Teacher-Merchant-President and the Water CarrierShlomo Weinrauh, known as Shlomo, Alter’s was a Torah scholar.Before the First World War, he was known in Skala as a Gemarateacher and indeed a very good one, as the parents of the studentssaid of him. He was a stern Jew, meticulous about everything and346Skala on the River Zbruczdemanding obedience. If one of his students did not follow or didnot understand the portion of the Gemara, then Shlomo used todrill it into him. He was unsparing_At the outbreak of the First World War, Shlomo left Skala as arefugee. Upon returning to Skala after the war, he abandoned histeaching and became a merchant, opening a grocery store. He didnot abandon his sternness or his punctuality; he simply carriedthese over from the students to the worshippers in the Port ArthurSynagogue, where he reigned as president-”dictator.” You will nodoubt ask “How is it that a holy place should be called Port Arthur,with the name itself reminiscent of barracks and of a ‘Russianthief?”’ There is a story about that. Since the place was built justafter a great fire, it was built of the finest materials: stone, bricksand a tin roof-practically a fortress. Skala “politickers” whofollowed the Russo-Japanese War and the battle of Port Arthurnamed the place “Port Arthur” on account of its massiveness. Thename endured for generations. Here one needs to add: Shlomo wasworth everything. He was the first to give money; he was the prayerleader and Torah reader, and on Rosh Hasbanab he blew the sbofar—all without remuneration. Because of him the Port Arthursynagogue could exist, because almost all of the worshippers werenot people of means. The congregation understood this and notonly respected Shlomo, but also simply feared him. His word was acommand.On Simcbat Torab, Shlomo, the president, used to invite theentire congregation to his home for Kiddusb. His wife would serveall sorts of holiday foods as well as brandy. The enthusiasticcongregants sang and danced until almost time for Mincba service.One of Shlomo’s “underlings” was Matia Rechter, a watercarrier. One Simcbat Torab Matia sat for a long time at Kiddusb.His wife, Veli, went about worried, not knowing where her Matiamight be. Meanwhile, the day was passing, the holiday meal wasgetting cold, and Matia had disappeared as if he had fallen into thewater. Suddenly, Matia appeared, drunk, and humming a holidaymelody, uttering a hearty, “Happy holiday, Velinyu.” She replied347Skala Characters of Yesteryearangrily, “A bleak holiday at your head. To where did you disappear?I was beginning to wonder who knows what.” But Matia paid noattention to her anger, and cheerfully he quoted a passage from Atabareita.6 “Sing, Velinyu, vaybiyu na omreynu leratzon lifnay adonkol. ” Hearing Matia pouring out quotations almost like a rabbi,Yeli said quietly, “I did not know what to think. And the food isgetting cold.” Matia replied, again with a quotation, “Recite,Velinyu, Malcbutko malcbut kol olamim, umemsbaltecbo bekol dorvador. ” At this Veli said prettily, “Tell me, Matia darling, that youwere at Shlomo’s and swallowed Torah along with stuffed cabbage.May they sit well with you. Wash and come to the table.”Smacks for the Kaiser’s BreadDuring the time of the Russo-Japanese War in 1905, every Jew ofthe kloiz became an impressive political analyst and militarystrategist, especially when Reb Moshe Brauer, an “open-mindedperson,” used to read and analyze the news from a paper in theCzortkower Kloiz. The listeners would become aroused and engagein debates. Almost all of them had the opinion that the Japanese,with one crossed eye in the forehead, would make rubble out of theRussian thief. The Russians would suffer a defeat.However, Reb Shlomo Aharon, a teacher and an irascible personwho came from Russia, was not at all convinced of a Japanesevictory. On the contrary, he was certain that the Cossacks withswords would chop up the Japanese like cabbage, would grind theirbones, and throw them to the kutsbmes7Hearing such things, Reb Meir Yoshe’s (Kopeliusz), a retiredAustrian soldier, honored Reb Shlomo Aharon with a few smacks.A commotion ensued and they shouted at Meir, “Is it possible, does6 A medley of verses recited prior to removing the Torah scrolls from the ark for the SimchatTorah processions. The verse quoted in the next sentence is “And may our utterances bepleasing before the Master of all.” The verse quoted a few lines down is “Your kingdom is akingdom for all eternity, and Your rule is from generation to generation.”7 This sentence uses several words which do not seem to be standard Yiddish, and are likelyslang. Not translated literally.348Skala on the River Zbruczit make sense? Does one lay a hand on a Jew, a scholar, is itpossible?” Meir was prepared with an answer: “Yes, it is a mitzvabfor him. He (Shlomo Aharon) gorges himself on the Kaiser’s bread,so he should not talk against him and be his enemy.Nothing is New Under the SunWben tbe railway line was built in Skala in the 1880s, Jews waitedin suspense, speculated, and gestured with their fingers in order tounderstand the “wisdom” behind the thing... Those who had notseen this innovation previously especially broke their “minds”-as itis called a train, an iron destroyer with burning eyes, running like awind, blowing smoke-a mortal danger. Can one conceive of thenoise and the turmoil that ensues when the train comes for the firsttime? Kith and kin were at the station. Even bearded Jews, scholarswho were careful about wasting time from Torah study, came. Is ita small thing, a trivial matter, a train!Yossel the Yellow (Blumenthal) was also among the crowdgathered at the station. He was born in Borszczow, and, therefore,was somewhat worldly, and nevertheless faithful to the Torah.The train finally arrived at the train station with a whistle and apuff of smoke, pulling a full column of wagons. Then the amazedJews saw a wagon with horses in the middle of the column ofwagons. When Yossel Blumenthal saw the horses, he waved hishand authoritatively and said, “Nothing is new under the sun; thehorses drag an ordinary wagon from the front; the horses drag atrain from the middle...”“Taller” and “Shorter” FeuersteinsBarucb Rozenbaum, Reb Mendel Moshe Leib’s son-in-law’s son,worked in Reb Yisrael’s Zajdman’s warehouse. Once, he wasconversing with a gentile about the family pedigree of theFeuerstein family (he, Baruch, was a grandson of Reb Moshe FeibFeuerstein). He claimed that the name Feuerstein came to them349Skala Characters of Yesteryearfrom Kaiser Josef II. How did so many Feuersteins end up in such asmall town as Skala? The answer is that Reb Aharon MeshulamFeuerstein, who was the director of the registry, would, for a setprice, register in the roster as ‘Feuerstein’ Jews who arrived fromRussia or other places and needed a fictitious name. No familyrelationship exists between them.When the gentile asked Baruch if Yisrael Yosi’s, who was alsonamed Feuerstein, is from his family, Baruch replied in thenegative. Seeing that the uncircumcised person with a gentile minddid not understand the situation, he attempted to explain withreason, in Ukrainian, “You understand, Ivan, we are taller and theyare shorter?” The confused gentile asked, “In what way are youtaller and they shorter?” Baruch Feuerstein responded, “We worshipin the Czortkower Kloiz and they in the Beis Midrash. ”Yeshaya Krohn the Miracle WorkerYeshaya Krohn, Shaika the scribe’s son, was a well known personagein Skala due to his strange profession, or professions. First, he was agreat writer8, with fine penmanship, Hebraic expressions and withflourishes. He utilized that skill frequently. He possessed an entirebox with addresses of very wealthy people and other personalities inGermany and also in Vienna. He also knew when all of thesetycoons and great people observed yahrzeit or celebrated some sortof joyous occasion. At every occasion, especially for RoshHashanah, he would send a letter with the finest blessings to all ofhis honorees. To the wealthiest people, such as Rothschild, hewould circle and ripple the title along the entire side. He wouldindeed receive money from those epistles.That activity formed only a portion of his livelihood, only whenhe was at home and in the city. Yeshaya would often troublehimself to travel to far off villages and towns when nobody knewhim, accompanied by an assistant, Shlomo Sofer, and presents The term used here often implies some sarcasm.350Skala on the River Zbruczhimself as a “Fine Jew”9, a miracle worker.With a silk Radziwolka1" over his kapote, a spodek on his head, aTurkish pipe in his mouth, and a cane with an ivory11 handle, flatshoes and socks that extended above the knee-he presented thevivid image of a Rebbe.His custom, for example, was as follows: He would arrive in atown on Thursday night, and stay overnight at one of his Hassidim.On Friday morning, when the woman of the house was occupiedwith the preparations for the Holy Sabbath, and with preparationsfor him “May he live,” his assistant went in to ask about the fish“May it live”—one must have fish in honor of the Sabbath. If thewoman of the house would answer him with embarrassment that toher sorrow, there was no fish in these places, the assistant wouldreturn to the “Rebbe” and shortly come out from him, saying “TheRebbe, may he live asked that we go to the river of the town tocatch a fish in honor of the Sabbath.” (He was certain about this,for when he arrived in the town the previous evening he tossed asack of live fish into the river). He, “May he live” ordered, is it notto be pertinent! The head of the house went to the river, and,wonder of wonders, he caught fish. Does one need a better sign? If“May he live” wants it, he can do it. He had a sign-the next FridayJews went to the river to catch fish and came home with empty.Now I will tell about another sign that Yeshaya was known for inthe places where he traveled.In a certain village, there was a wealthy lessee who was also agreat miser. The lessee’s wife was an evil woman. Not only wouldthey not give any donations to poor people, but they would not letany Jew through their threshold. When Shaika heard about thisheartless couple, he decided to teach them a lesson and to returnthem to the path of good. On a cold winter afternoon, when thesnow was blowing fiercely, Shaika set out to the lessee. He remainedsitting in the sled and sent Shlomo his assistant into the tavern to9 This term “Guter Yid” can mean a Hassidic Rabbi.10 Meaning uncertain. A kapote is a Hassidic frock and a spodek is a fur hat.11 Literally “bony,” which I interpret as ivory. The word I translated as “handle” (golke) is alsonot clear.351Skala Characters of Yesteryearask if the “Rebbe” could enter. The lessee responded immediately,“You know, we do not let any vagabonds in” Shlomo assured himthat he was not a vagabond, but rather a Rebbe, a Tzadik, and theonly thing that he requests is that he be permitted to enter to recitethe Mincba and Maariv services. The owner agreed, saying, “Lethim come in, go to the back room, recite his prayers, and thenimmediately leave.” After receiving the permission, Shlomo wentout, returned with the “Rebbe,” and entered the back room. ThereShaika suddenly saw a cat warming itself by the heater. He decidedthat now was the appropriate time to teach the evil people a lesson.He unbuttoned the cover of the feather bed, caught the cat, threw itinto the open cover, rebuttoned it, and began to recite his prayers.He concluded his prayers and, while already in his coat, he had aconversation with the lessee, “In any case, I forgive you forembarrassing me, but you must repent on account of the concernsof my holy forbears.” He boarded the sled and set off. As he wastraveling, he said to Shlomo, “We will travel to a nearby village, tothe lessee, and wait for them to come to us.” In the meantime, themiserly lessee made up the feather bed, went with his wife into thebedroom, turned off the lamp, and immediately went to bed. Then,after he had warmed up, the lessee’s wife began to shriek: “Help!Woe is me! Something is crawling around in the featherbed.” Theman, terribly afraid, tried to calm her down, that it was herimagination. It did not help. She continued to shriek thatsomething is running around. The lessee got out of bed, lit acandle, and started shouting woe; the entire feather bed wasshaking. He shouted again, “I will have you in the ground, you evilthing, for you embarrassed a good Jew, a good deed on you.” Seeinghowever that the thing running in the feather bed did not hear, andthat his wife was full of terror, the lessee said to her, “Get dressedand go prepare the sled. I will go to the good Jew, fall before his feetand beg forgiveness from him.”Terrified and afflicted, they arrived in the first village, traveled tothe local Jewish innkeeper, to ask him if he had seen some Rebbe.352Skala on the River ZbruczThe neighboring innkeeper answered happily, “The Rebbe is withme.” The terrified couple felt a stone lift from their hearts. Theyboth went to the “Rebbe” with a wail. Falling at his feet, they beganto weep to him, “Holy Tzadik, we have sinned greatly, have mercyupon us and remove the curse from us. We tell you that we willconduct ourselves differently.” Shaika sat in thought and finallysaid, as if to himself, “So, if Jews repent, one must forgive them.”To the lessees he said, “Go prepare the sled, I wish to travel homewith you.” Upon arrival, the “Rebbe” ordered, “Let me into thebedroom. Nobody should open the door until I come out. I mustpray.” He went into the room, closed the door behind him,unbuttoned the bed cover, and let the cat out. Right after, “May helive” came out with a shining face and said, “Believe G-d, you cango to sleep.” He also spent the night there. The wife of the lesseewent into bed, and it was pleasantly quiet. Witnessing the “portent”with their own eyes, they already looked differently at the “holy”man. They rewarded him, and from that time, they were changedpeople. The lessee became a fervent follower of Shaika and also ahost of guests. (I heard about the portents of Shaika from hisassistant Shlomo Sofer, may G-d avenge his blood, when I studiedin cbeder with my dear Rebbe, Reb Avraham Morgansztern ofblessed memory, the Bodzanower Melamed).More MiraclesWhen Shimon Gottesfeld (Glezer) married Esther Yosi’s (Wiesen-thal), they had no happiness for the first years of their marriage.This was because they had no children. Esther did everything thatone was to do in such a situation. First, as a member of theWiesenthal family, fervent Czortkower Hassidim, was wont to do,she ran with notes of request and donations to the CzortkowerRebbe. She was not unburdened, however; her wishes remainedclosed.This was until one time, during a moment of bitterness, she saidto her brother: “Perhaps I should go with a note of request to the353Skala Characters of YesteryearVisznitzer Rebbe and then I might be helped through him?”“Heaven forbid,” her brother shouted with trembling, “You mustnot dare to do such a thing, I refuse to allow you.” So, she had toobey.Once, the Horodenker Rebbe, Rabbi Yechiel Michael of blessedmemory, came to Skala. Esther could no longer withstand the trial,and she went to the Rebbe, where she poured out her bitter heart.The Rebbe wished her that she should have a male child. Miracleover miracles, that year she became pregnant and bore a son (ourFeivele Gottesfeld, today in Haifa). The joy was great and even herfamily had to admit that she had done something good.Obviously, she then joined the Horodenker Hassidim. Twoyears later, when the Horodenker came again to Skala, Esther tookthe child by the hand and set out joyously to the Rebbe. Uponreading the note and recalling the incident, the Rebbe said, “Iprayed for this lad”12. His Hassid Moshe Kohn, who was presentand was amazed at the Rebbe’s sharpness of memory, said, “He hassuch a head, he will take down the foolishness!”The Vienner Shochet and the Congealed ChallahThe “Vienner” Shochet was one of the religious functionaries inSkala. As with all other shochtim, he performed his holy workhonorably. Why was he known as the “Vienner” Shochet? It couldbe that the collar of his shirt was already buttoned with a buttonand not bound with loose ribbons; and also perhaps because hewore boots with bootlegs on his feet rather than shoes with socks upto the knee. It could also be that he set his beard and peyos withakripli. Or perhaps there are other reasons.Skala jokers told the following awesome story about that“Vienner” shochet and his wife.12 A quote from I Samuel, when Chana brought the child Samuel to Eli the priest.13 Akrip could mean boiling water, but I believe that here it means some lotion or potion thathold the beard and peyos in place.354Skala on the River ZbruczEvery Thursday, the sbochet would be busy with cattle in theslaughterhouse until late at night. It already became the eve of theSabbath. He came to his house tired, had something to eat, andimmediately fell into a deep sleep.His wife would get up a few hours before dawn on Friday inhonor of the Sabbath, to heat the oven and bake cballab and othergood things in honor of the holy day of rest.During those days, wives would leave the kneaded dough underthe feather bed, especially in the wintertime, so that it could risevery well in the warmth. On a winter Friday, when the sbocbet’s wifegot up for her work, felt that there was an extreme cold in the houseand that her husband was sleeping like a corpse, she took the doughout from her cold bed and laid it in her husband’s warm bed. Shelit the oven and went red-faced to her husband’s bed to nip off apiece of dough and throw it into the fire to fulfill thecommandment of taking cballablA. She began to lift up the sbocbet’sfeather bed, attempted to nip off a reasonable peace, but, oh no,nothing came. She nipped and nipped, but she could not break offa piece of dough. Terrified, the sbocbet’s wife screamed, “Woe is me,a misfortune happened to me, a disaster happened to me.” Thecballab has congealed, and it was completely impossible to tear off apiece of dough. She used force and made a very strong nip. Thenthe sbocbet shouted out, “Do you really have nothing better to dothan to pinch me in my rear end, in the cold and in the dark? Ashame!”Then the shochet’s wife realized her mistake, and nipped off thereal dough in the trough...14 The Torah commands that when dough is prepared, a portion is to be taken off and given tothe priest. When the Temple does not exist, this commandment is fulfilled by taking off asmall piece of dough and burning it. This commandment is called "taking challah.” SeeNumbers 15: 17-21.355Skala Characters of YesteryearBelief in TzaddikimThe following story took place when the great fire broke out in Skalain 1899, which almost devoured the entire town. As is known, thisfire began at the home of Wolf Meir David’s (later MosheWasserman’s) house and the flames quickly spread to other houses.The outcry literally pierced the heavens. Peretz (Eliahu Herszer’sgrandfather) went out and calmly counted the houses. Whenastonished people asked him what he was doing, he answered, “Ihave a blessing from a Rebbe that if more than seven houses do notburn, then mine will be the eighth.” What was the end of the story?In the “merit” of his faith, his house indeed burnt down with itscontents.356The Landowner Itzikl EvankoverBecomes a Money MinterLouis MenchelSome lines and episodes of the life of my great-great-grandfatherReb ltzik Menczel, or, as he was called, Reb Itzikl Iwankower,can give a partial portrait of life in Skala of more than 130 yearsago.Around the year 1844, Reb Itzikl Iwankower was a landowner,as well as a very scholarly, pious, charitable Jew. He gave moneygenerously to aid the marriage of orphan girls and was also a veryhospitable man. Beyond that, he was a fervent chasid of theVizhnitser Rebbe, Reb Mendeli, and was under his influence.Reb Itzikl Menczel (Iwankower) had acquaintances as well as aparticular influence in the circles of Kaiser Franz Josef s courtiers.In the year 1845, there was a lack of ten kreuzer pieces{zekserlekb—”sixers”) in the money market. This greatly disturbedthe Skala civic banking business. The Jewish Iwankower proprietorthen went off to the finance minister in Vienna with a request forten kreuzer coins. At that time, the regime lacked the metal to makethe “sixers” so he authorized my ancestor ltzik Menczel to mint acertain number of “sixers” under the control of the regime. The“sixers” were made of a red metal and were current for a period oftwelve years.The “sixers” were then called the red “Itziklekh.”As has been said, our grandfather, ltzik Menczel was a ferventVizhnitser Hassid, so he traveled to the rebbe on every Sabbath thatcoincided with Rosh Cbodesb1.1 Rosh Chodesh is the beginning of the Jewish month, marked by special prayer services andother observances. It occurs for one or two days, depending on the length of the month (If thepreceding month is 29 days, Rosh Chodesh is on the 1st’ whereas if the preceding month has 30The Landowner Itzikl Evankover Becomes a Money MinterAt that time, a number of Vizhnitser Hassidim, headed by mygrandfather Itzikl Menczel, gathered together in Skala. In the year1848, he built a kloizd in which the Vizhnitser Rebbe’s prayer riteand customs were strictly followed. The synagogue was called“Itzikl’s Kleizl.”The related families that descended from our great-great-grandfather, Itzik Menczel the landowner of Iwankow, wereMendel Menczel, Mendel Kahn, Mendel Kelman, Mr. and Mrs.Kopel Weintraub, and Sarah Wiesenthal.days, Rosh Chodesh is on the 30th and the 1st). Rosli Chodesh will coincide with the Sabbathtwo or three times a year.2 A Kloiz is a small, informal, Hassidic prayer hall.358The Public Schooland My Father’s ShtrymelJacob Wisenthal [z ”l'J[Born in Skala, 1891; died Miami Beach, Fla., 1982][Grandfather of Helene Schwartz Kenvin]Translated from the Yiddish story1 2published in the Skala Yizkor book (1978)FlG. 54: Jacob WiesenthalWhen I was a young religious school student before the FirstWorld War, in Skala and other communities in easternGalicia there suddenly appeared a distressing decree. All children1 z”l means zichrono Tvracha (may his memory be a blessing).“ Shkola means school. A shtreimel is a fur hat worn by Hasidic Jews on the Sabbath andholidays. A fendung is a German legal writ issued to ensure that someone complies with acourt order. A bailiff will go to the person’s house with the fendung, to see if there is anythingof value that can be confiscated. In modern times, rather than actually taking items, the bailiffusually puts stickers on them indicating that they do not belong to the person any more.Anything needed for daily life cannot get taken. The fendung gives the person time to do whatthe court has ordered. If the person fails to comply with the court order, the stickered items areforfeited and sold.The Public School and My Father’s Shtrymelgoing to senior-school must attend a state-run elementary school.Private tutoring with a teacher — which until now was permitted-was not enough. One had to go to a sbkolalThe Austrian king Franz Josef was really a gracious king.3 Hewas good to the Jews; but to go to a sbkola — he should not havedone this. The king’s education-ministry had maintained: You haveall rights and freedom; so send the children to the sbkolalAmong pious scholars, the Hasidic Jews, there was a turmoil.Sending children to sbkola means they must sit without a yarmulke,with a bare head, and crucifixes hang on the wall? They will hearunclean trash, where Christian children babble on, and who knowswhat else? Perhaps they will have to go to sbkola on the Sabbathand, God forbid, desecrate the Sabbath? That will not happen! Letbe what will be, Jewish, pious children will not go to sbkola, andthat’s it!My father, Reb Hirsh Eliahu, may he rest in peace, was alsoamong the naysayers who said absolutely not. The state educationcommittee eventually became used to the decree and my father waspunished by being fined by them. A fendung was issued, whichmeant that something had to be removed from his house.Moshe Yonah, the Jewish policeman who came to direct thefendung, deliberated and decided that the best thing to take fromthe house was my father’s sbtreimel. But Moshe Yoneh thepoliceman, a Jew with a beard and side curls, who wore a fur hatand long coat on the Sabbath and the holidays, found a trick bywhich he could get out of the dilemma.How could he allow a Hassidic Jew like my father go on theSabbath and holidays without a sbtreimel?. So every Sabbath eve andholiday, Moshe Yonah brought the sbtreimel back to my father’shouse and after Sabbaths and holidays he picked it up and returnedit to the police station. That is how Moshe Yoneh enforced Franz3 Many Jews thought Franz Josef of Austro-Hungary was good to the Jews because he had aJewish mistress. His edict that all Jewish youth must attend public schools may have been awell-intentioned attempt to universal education; but it was a source of dismay to religiousJews.360Skala on the River ZbruczJosefs statute for appearance’s sake: either the king had thesbtreimel or my father had it.In addition, in order to carry out and direct the king’s decree,Moshe Yoneh took care of tombstones. He also took the troubleevery Friday evening to examine if the eruv was intact, so that Jewscould carry items on the Sabbath. Moshe Yoneh also watched sothat no one should, God forbid, desecrate the Sabbath in public. Awoman should, God forbid, not carry a handbag or an umbrella.Moshe Yoneh had to only give one look, open his mouth: A womanwho dared to do such a thing immediately ran away like a bow andarrow. But seldom, seldom did someone like that dare ... not inSkala ... not in those times. Was there really such a place as Skala?Perhaps it is just a dream...361Three Funny Charactersof the Distant PastBy Benzion FidererAn Egg for Every SoulThere was with us in Skala a Jew whom everyone called ShmuelPoisik. He was an intelligent Jew, but not very wealthy.Unfortunately, he had to spend several months a year going intoRussia to collect some rubles. Once he went to Kamenetz forPassover, where he worked for a baker at baking matzos. One day, awagon with a pair of fine horses rode up to the bakery. Someoneentered the bakery and purchased a considerable quantity ofmatzos. They packed the matzos into two large boxes for him.Before he set out for home, he asked the baker, “Perhaps you knowsome Jew here who could be a ‘provoditel’ for the Seder? I need a1providitel’ (that means a person who can conduct the Seder)-, Hewill have a good Passover with me, and I will accommodate himwell.’’ The match was made with Shmuel Poisik, who said that hewas prepared to be the ‘providitel’ for the Seder. He then went withthat Jew to his place.When he went there, he was given honor as if a rabbi. On theeighth day of Passover, the wife said to him, “I have heard thattoday one recites Yizkor, but I cannot enumerate the souls.” Heanswered her that for every soul, she must beat an egg into thecheese pastry, and “I will calculate the souls.” You should not askhow many eggs the wife beat into the cheese pastries, and how goodthe cheese pastries were. The head of the household had been a“cantonist,” who had been snatched as a child and served 25 yearsin the Czarist army. Afterwards, such people were given a piece ofland, but such “cantonists” knew very little about Judaism.Skala on the River ZbruczThe Doctor and the Town FoolSkala already bad two doctors, approximately two dental technicians,as well as teachers, university students, and other members of theintelligentsia. One of the doctors was Dr. Zeidner, who had studiedmedicine in Vienna and had become “Germanized.” He spokeGerman and Deitscbmerisb1. He had a beard and carried a pair oftweezers in a black ribbon. He was not overly cunning, and wassomewhat sloppy in the way he carried himself. The town jokesterswould call him “Shaya Moshe” after the name of the town fool.There was a story that pious women who worked as a distributorof charity died. She used to take pity on the true Shaya Moshe, andgiven him some food, a shirt, or a few coins.Once the “orphaned,” bearded, true Shaya Moshe met Dr.Zeidner on the street. He stopped him and waved to him, “Whathave you done? Did you send her to the cemetery? She must bewithering away there in hunger. Tell me at least, should I take her aroll with radish to save her from starvation?” “As you wish,”answered Dr. Zeidner, “It cannot hurt, goodbye... goodbye... I’llsee you later.”The Tax Office Must Know EverythingA Skala haberdashery store had to give an accounting of its income tothe tax office. This was called a “posia.” The storekeeper was RebYehuda Hirsch Kohn. The posia had to be written in Polish, andsince Reb Yehuda Hirsch Kohn was not overly proficient in thePolish language. He turned to Reb Motia Fueurstein, who wasfluent in both Polish and German. He earned his livelihood fromsuch writings, and incidentally, he was very intelligent and enjoyedmaking a joke. In the accounting, one had to answer variousquestions which were printed on the form. Among the various'According to Uriel Weinreich’s dictionary, this word means: "Too much like German (said ofmodern German words of phrases sporadically used in Yiddish but not accepted by cultivatedstylists).”363Three Funny Characters of the Distant Pastquestions which Feuerstein asked Reb Yehuda Hirsch, he slipped ina question in Polish: “Da Katorega Rabina Fan Jedzia?” meaning, towhich Rebbe do you travel? Reb Yehuda Flirsch was beside himselfas to why the tax office wished to know to which Rebbe he travels,for he used to travel to the Czortkower and at times to theHorodenker. He began to muse, “Should I state that I go toCzortkow? I indeed travel to Horodenka as well?’’ Fueursteinremarked that here, one must tell the truth, for this will be going tothe office. Reb Yehuda stated, “Write, da Czortkowa i daHorodenki” (to Czortkow and to Horodenka).364A Gas Lamp and an Oil WellJacob SoferI clearly remember the great wonder and excitement in Skala whenthe first gas lamp was installed and turned on. It was a largelantern with filaments that shone and twinkled with a greenishlight, just like daylight. That gas lamp attracted young and old to itevery evening. At the beginning, one could not stop wondering atthe remarkable invention. There were Jews who specifically readtheir correspondence or an old newspaper by the light of the streetlamp just to see how strong the light was and how good their visionwas. Orthodox Jews gathered around the lap to look heavenwardfor the ceremony of the Sanctification of the Moon (It was brighterfor the dance of “Shalom Aleichem. Aleicbem Shalom... Siman TovUmazal Tov”)1 For the white group1 2 the lamp was an attraction. Byits light, one could make jokes, dispute, and make practical jokes.But the gas lamp was as nothing compared to what took place inSkala when the “good news” spread that the town would becomerich because an oil well had been discovered. How was the oil welldiscovered? The story was as follows: a new well had been dug andit soon appeared that the water that we drank from that well tastedof kerosene. It was a clear sign that there, underground, the black“treasure” was flowing. So Skala could become a type of Borislow,where “black gold” flowed. The question was, to whom did thattreasure belong and under whose ground did it flow? And if thatground belonged to the town or to the community, then prosperitywould not be lacking for the Jews in any case would not be lacking.1 Phrases from the monthly ceremony of the Sanctification of the Moon (Kiddush Levana).2 The meaning of ‘white group' is uncertain, but it seems to be a term for the people whowould enjoy spending their time in conversation and camaraderie. It may be an opposite of the‘black garbed group’-i.e. the Orthodox.A Gas Lamp and an Oil WellIs kerosene a small matter!There were those who argued that if it was not kerosene, thenthat water with a taste was “mineral water” and Skala wouldbecome a spa like Truskawiec or even Karlsbad. After all, were therenot nearby forests as well as mountains, and an old castle too? Aready-made spa! There was no lack of musicians. Yitzchak Yaakovand his musicians would make things cheerful, and Jews and non-Jews would come from near and far and bring much prosperity tothe town. People would be revitalized and cure their weak stomachswith Skala’s “mineral water”. All that was needed was a couple ofhotels and restaurants to accommodate the guests, but that was asmall matter. There would be livelihood for all.But very soon, the kerosene and “mineral water” matter fizzledout. The story was as follows: the Skala water merchants with theirhorses and barrels, who carried water from the wells to thehouseholders, saw the spring as a bitter competitor which woulddetract from them their meager morsel of bread. They decided torid themselves of the nuisance in a way that would render the springwater undrinkable and unusable. At night, they poured several pailsof kerosene into the well to be rid of it. Later, the ruse of the poorwater sellers became clearly evident, and Skala laughed ... In thosedays, Skala could still laugh, and there were those who could laugh.366The Great Torah “Oyfruf” in Skala1Yitzhak AlfasyIn the Hassidic world, the city ofSkala was renowned because of agreat event that took place there in the year 5604 (1844), onehundred and thirty-two years ago. One Sabbath that year, noneother than the young Reb Mendeli, later to be the first YizhnitzerRebbe and the founder of the first Vizhnitzer rabbinical line, wascalled up to the Torah. The 14 year old Reb Mendeli, anexceptional, insightful genius, was the groom and that was theSabbath on which the groom was honored by being called to theTorah a few days before the wedding. The groom was the youngestson of the saint of that generation, Reb Chaim of Kosow. Who wasthe bride? She was Miriaml, the daughter of the Rizhiner Rebbe,Yisroelche. Two great pillars of Hassidism joined their families inmatrimony.Why did the aufruf (the calling up to the Torah before thewedding), take place in Skala? The story is as follows: TheVizhnitzer rebbe had fled from Russia because of a denunciationagainst him that he sat on a golden throne and carried on as if hewas a Jewish czar, that he was disrespectful of the Czar, and othersuch accusations. Having crossed over peacefully to Austria fromRussia, the Rizhiner spent a little time in Skala. The family was stillin Kishinev, Bessarabia.Tens of rebbes, good Jews, rabbis, Torah greats, and thousandsof Hassidim from near and far came to the aufruf in Skala thatSabbath. It goes without saying that the father-in-law on thegroom’s side, Reb Chaim of Kosow, also came to Skala.'Excerpted from “Tiferet Sheb’malchut” (Glory in Kingship) by Yitzhak Alfasy, pp. 144-146,Tel Aviv in 1941, published by Ariel, the Library of Hassidic Research, Tel Aviv, 5721(1961). Told over by Chaim BrettlerThe Great Torah “Oyfruf” in SkalaThere had never been as much crowding in Skala as there was atthat time. There were guests in every house. People also slept inattics, in rooms, in Beis Midrashes, and in the courtyard. The hotelin which the two celebrated tsadikim and the groom were stayingwas constantly besieged by crowds. People wanted to catch aglimpse of the customs of the tsaddikim-Mossr they presided overtheir tables, how they said words of Torah and so on. It was literallyimpossible to enter. Those who merited that privilege were latersurrounded in order to hear some word from them. On theweekdays, musicians played constantly and the singing and dancingnever let up.On the Sabbath on which the aliya took place, the hotel inwhich the in-laws and the groom were staying was besieged bythousands of Jews. The surrounding streets and alleys were blackwith mobs of Hassidim and the ordinarily curious Jews who wantedto watch the groom and the in-laws go to the synagogue. However,the relatives and the groom simply could not get outside. There wassimply no way to clear a path for them. People stood on roofs andfences, and clung to trees, neither inside nor outside. The in-laws,the rebbe Reb Chaim and the rebbe Reb Yisroelche, decided torecite the service in the hotel and to read from the small Torahwhich the Rizhiner Rebbe always carried with him. While they wereworshiping inside, a huge crowd gathered outside, wrapped intallises and reciting their prayers so loudly that they could be heardfrom one end of the city to the other. That sort of Sabbath servicehad never before been heard or seen in Skala, and indeed, was neveragain.The next day, the Rizhiner made a huge feast in honor of his in¬law Reb Chaim of Kosow. Before the Grace After Meals, theRizhiner made a gesture to the Kosower, “My in-law, you knowthat it is a mitzva to praise the groom in the presence of the bride,and to praise the bride in the presence of the groom, and to pointout their good attributes.” At that point, the wife of the KosowerRebbe appeared at the side door and made a request the Rizhiner,“Let the father-in-law place his hands on the head of my son the368Skala on the River Zbruczgroom and bless him because a saintly man is like a priestperforming the priestly blessing.” At that, the Riziner responded toher, “There is no need to put one’s hands on his head. It is enoughto make a blessing orally. It is explicitly stated in the holy Torahregarding the priestly blessing, ‘Thus shall you bless the Children ofIsrael, say unto them’2. It says ‘say unto them’, meaning that oneshould bless with the mouth and not necessarily with the hands.”During the course of that feast, the Kosower rebbe, Reb Chaim,saw that the Rizhiner tzadik ate almost nothing. So he asked him,“Why does the in-law eat so little? Is it perhaps the taste?” TheRizhiner replied as follows, “Before we came down into this worldwe made a condition with our body, that we could not be boundwith it unless it was content to be satisfied with little. Well, so thebody agreed and kept to its agreement and condition.”At this point, the Kosower rebbe let go of the spoon in his handand stopped eating. The Rizhiner asked him. “Why is the in-lawnot eating?” The rebbe, Reb Chaim then gave him the followingreply, “Normally it is my custom to eat as much as my bodydemands and requires. So what is it? Now a matter that has alwaysbaffled me has become clear. When a Jew comes home from Fridayevening services, two angels accompany him. He welcomes themheartily with ‘Shalom Aleicbem’. But before he makes the Kiddusbblessing, washes his hands, and seats himself at table to eat, he saysto the angels, ‘ Tseitcbem leshalom ’ (go in peace). Now the matter hasbecome clear to me: A Jew cannot eat in the presence of angels.”The Rizhiner smiled and was very pleased by his in-law’sintelligent reply.As everyone knows, the wedding took place in Kishinev wherethe bride was, with her mother and brother. The father, RebYisroelche, was afraid to travel there lest the Czarists put him inprison. He accompanied the groom Mendeli and his relatives onlyas far as the border. They especially chose a different bordercrossing, Husyatin rather than Skala. Countless Hassidim2 Numbers 6, 23.369The Great Torah “Oyfruf” in Skalaaccompanied them the entire way from Skala to Husyatin.More and more Hassidim joined them along the way, and thesinging and playing of musical instruments did not stop until thegroom and his relatives crossed the border into Russia. They allcrossed, except the father of the bride, the Rizhiner, who stayed onthe Austrian side of the border river.Later, Hassidim would repeat over and over again the tale of thegreat aliya to the Torah in Skala, and of that exalted Sabbath.370A Folk SongBenjamin- Wolf Ehrenkrantz (1826—1883)iThis 19th century wandering Yiddish poet and song writer wasbetter known as Yelvl Zbarazher. According to GedaliaLachman, who as a youth learned this song from Asher Herscher ofblessed memory, “simple folk used to sing it in our area ofGalicia.” It is a satirical portrayal of shtetl characters and of thedominant Orthodox- Hassidic establishment at the time.G-d sits on his throneNot far from the Garden of Eden;Crowds of Tsadikim * 2 come before HimEager to speak with Him.What do you want, my children”-He asks?What troubles you?”Then everyone separately startedTo utter his plea.Then G-d bowed his headAnd nobody moved from where he stood.G-d then regarded them with His eyes,And smiled and said not a word.Here comes the Rabbi with the Yoreh Deye3Experiencing great pleasure,'The song by this Yiddish bard was popular in East Galicia among simple folk and recalled byGedalia Lachman, who learned it from his neighbor Asher Herscher z”l2 Righteous Jews3 One of the four sections of the “Shulchan Aruch”-Code of Jewish Law.A Folk SongHe curls his peye 4And strokes his gray beard.“I have studied with Your children”-he says,“Teaching them to fear You,“Showing them the great wonders“Of Your holy Torah”.Refrain:Oh G-d, I would like to ask You,To repay me now.The Garden of Eden is not enough for me,I want three hundred and ten worlds5Next comes the Cantor with his thumb on his waistband.“I know the skill well”—he says“I have a voice like an organ.“I have prayed with devotion“And read the Holy Torah“On the Sabbath, on Rosh Chodesh and the High Holy Days“For you, oh living G-d”.Refrain:Here comes someone else,Swinging a large lantern.“I was-he says-a shamash6And also had to sweep the synagogue.I roused the people to come to selichot7Served at weddings and circumcisions;I only performed holy services,And everything I wear is ragged.4 Side curl.5 A reference to the Mishna “Uktsin’ ’ stating that in the world to come, G-d will grant everyrighteous person 310 worlds, obviously meant to be interpreted homiletically.6 Synagogue sexton.7 Penitential prayers recited every day during the High Holidays season.^372 ^Skala on the River ZbruczRefrain:Here too comes running the mohel8And says he is a fine and skillful practitioner,“I know-he says-the trade well,“To cut, suck the blood and remove the foreskin9“Reciting the blessing myself“And at all the circumcisions of the poor,“I was the master of the trade”.Refrain:Then someone at a distance stands still,Without underwear, please pardon;“I was not poor-he says,“Nor debauched, Heaven forbid.“I beg you G-d, give me a handout,“Show no preference,“I have never performed a good deed,“But I show you that I am nevertheless a Jew.Refrain:Here comes another one runningIn a fur hat with thirteen corners,Wearing a caftan with its ties undoneAnd torn into pieces.A follower of the Hassidic RabbiAs everyone had recognizedBy his fine clothes.He danced and jumped like a goatShouting, “make way for me, you infidels”Humming a song and scratching himself along the way .Refrain:Looking over the Hassid from head to toe,8 Circumciser.9 Three fundamental requirements of the circumcision procedure.373A Folk SongWith his holy face.On top of his Shtreimel10Lies a Matzo shmura 11And on the corners are Chanukah candles,A mezuzah on his nose;And four cups with a twist of doughAnd Peyos that are endless!On his forehead two pairs of tefillinAnd a shofar on his tongueAnd in his mouth a full cupFrom Kiddush and havdalla for the holy drink.And from Shavuot left over a dairy crepeAnd from Passover a kneidlAnd a piece of bread with honey for a blessing,And the head of a sheep 12And a dreidl from ChanukahAnd the lips that are coveredWith the blood of circumcision,And the feet adornedWith chalitze13And a Purim hamentash holding to his chestAnd a stuffed cabbage from Simchas Torah;And then he makes a courageous leapBefore the living G-d.Refrain:The good Lord looks at his faceAnd that of the entire crowd ofPerhaps fifty thousand,Who all came with the same request!And the Lord G-d shrugs his shoulders and10 Fur hat.11 Unleavened bread made with special stringencies for the Passover Seder.12 A symbolic food for the Rosh Hashana meal.13 A ceremony to release a woman from the obligation of levirate marriage in which thewoman removes the shoe of her brother-in-law and spits before him.374Skala on the River ZbruczWith difficulty repressing His laughter,Not knowing what to do with them says:“How can I repay you all“Even though I am G-d Almighty ?“What do you need so many worlds for?... So all of them left empty handed!375The Skala Benevolent Societyin New YorkJacob HerzogFlG. 55: Jacob HerzogJews jrom Skala began arriving in the United States about 1890;many of them were still boys. They arrived to escape joblessnessand poverty in Skala, but poverty was what they found in NewYork, although less extreme than that which they had left behindthem. Jobs existed, but they were hard to find, and they paid little.In the days of President Grover Cleveland, the American economywas in recession.One summer night, suffering from heat of a kind they had notfelt back in Skala, some young men climbed several stories to thetop floor of a tenement at 46 Delancey Street to reach MendelEdelstein’s apartment. They shared the latest news from home.They were all lonely “greenhorns”, with their bodies in New York,but their hearts back in Skala, among their families and friends.They were members of the “progressive” group. They hadassembled to discuss the need to create a benevolent society, orSkala on the River Zbruczlandsmanschaft, to help immigrants from Skala. They decided tocontact the other young people from their town, those who were nolonger so “green”, and to build this organization with them.While these people looked for and organized the veteranimmigrants, a lonely young Skala native died penniless in NewYork. There was no Skala Burial Society to bury him. The youngmen of Skala passed the hat until they raised the needed funds, andtheir friend was duly buried. The Skala Benevolent Society wasborn as they returned from the cemetery that day.The Skala Benevolent Society, known as the SkalarUnterstutzung Verein, came into being in 1892. Only Americancitizens could legally charter such an organization, but none of thefew Skala natives then in New York had yet acquired citizenship.The Skalars therefore asked three young men from benevolentsocieties representing other towns to sign for them. The Skalaorganization was officially founded and functioning in June, 1893.We do not know exactly what the Skala Benevolent Society didin its early days, because nobody kept records. People simplygathered together, had heartfelt discussions, talked about the news,shared letters from Skala, and went home. The Skala Society senteither fifty or a hundred dollars to help the town’s residents afterthe great Skala fire at the end of the nineteenth century to ShmariaMelzer to distribute among the victims. We do not know exactlyhow he divided up the money.After a while, a group of older Skalars wanted to build a Skalasynagogue, as immigrants from other towns had done on the LowerEast Side. They did indeed create such a synagogue and gave it aTorah scroll. In time, however, the younger, more recently arrived,more “progressive” Skalars distanced themselves from the older oneswho were involved with the synagogue. The Skala organizationdisintegrated. Three years later, however, fresh faces arrived fromSkala, a new enthusiasm infused the Skala organization, and theSkala Benevolent Society revived.By the turn of the year 1914-1915, after the early months of theFirst World War, when Russian and Austrian armies were fighting377The Skala Benevolent Society in New Yorkin the province where Skala was located, some of the more recently-arrived Skalars held a meeting and decided that their hometownneeded all the help they could give it. They decided to found aSkala Relief Committee. Some of these people were also membersof the Skala Benevolent Society. The Relief Committee wanted theBenevolent Society to direct all its efforts at helping Skala, ratherthan each other in America. The older leadership opposed thischange, but eventually the entire membership of the BenevolentSociety subscribed to the new program of relieving the suffering thewar caused Skala. From then on, all efforts of the organization wentto gathering and providing money for Skala.The initiators of the relief works arranged two theater and twodance evenings. They also gathered money from Skalars to put asidefor the time when they would be able to send it back to the oldcountry. Everybody worked faithfully and with urgency. Everybodywho had to travel paid his own way to raise funds. Every dollarcollected went in its entirety to Skala. A woman’s relief fund, calledThe Skala Progressive Ladies, was also created, and it made asubstantial contribution to the relief work.No letters came from Skala even after the war ended inNovember of 1918, because combat between Russian and Polisharmies still continued in that region. We did not know what wasgoing on there.About that time, our fellow Skalar, the writer Chone Gottesfeldappeared before the committee and told us that the organizationcalled “People’s Relief’ was about to send Max Fein, a well-knownlabor leader, to the Ukraine. Because he would be in KamenetzPodilsk, a town near Skala, Gottesfeld said that he would ask Feinto bring some money to Skala and give it to whomever we specified.The committee sent a thousand dollars.After Max Fein distributed this money, several letters arrivedwhose writers claimed that they had been cheated, and that themoney should have been sent only to them. We paid little attentionto these letters, because we knew who had written them.A short time later, Yaakov Melman, a member of our committee,378Skala on the River Zbrucztraveled to the Ukraine to bring his relatives to America. We sent$1500 with him. He sent his brother-in-law from KamenetzPodilsk to Skala to deliver it, because those roads were too difficultand dangerous for him to travel himself.More letters arrived complaining that Melman’s brother-in-lawhad exchanged the dollars for rubles and other currencies, and thatit was wrong for him to have done so. Our committee then triedsending financial assistance to individuals in Skala, but we soonlearned that this too was not a good way to provide relief. In theend, the committee decided that we would have to establish aspecial committee in Skala itself, to whom money would be sent,and who would be responsible for distributing this money fairly andhonestly. The organization in New York suggested the names ofpeople in Skala they wanted to serve on the committee.Shlomo Schwartzbach of Skala was the first secretary of thiscommittee when it was organized in Skala. Avraham Bilgorai tookover when Schwartzbach left. The new local committee cooperatedwell with the local relief committee. We received clear, preciserequests and instructions from Skala as to how we could helpthem—a fine example of professionalism.The Skala committee informed us that the Joint DistributionCommittee, with whom it worked, wanted to create a charitablefund, and to build a new mikveh, or Jewish ritual bath, in Skala,because the old one had fallen into disrepair. The Skalarepresentative of the committee also asked us to help them build acommunity center.To those ends, the local relief committee volunteered fivehundred dollars and asked the Joint to match that grant. The Jointagreed to give five hundred dollars. We later collected another eighthundred dollars to build a new mikveh for Skala. Although we hadpromised to give more if more were needed, the Skala committeeasked for no more funds. We twice sent two hundred dollars to thetown’s charitable fund. We sent several additional contributionstoward the building of a new community center in Skala.Every year, until the outbreak of the Second World War, we sent379The Skala Benevolent Society in New Yorkfive hundred dollars to the committee in Skala as a donation to bedistributed to the poor for Passover, and at Sukkot we sent anadditional two hundred and fifty dollars.My Trip to Skala in 1929I took my family to visit the place of my birth in March of 1929,eighteen years after moving from Skala to the United States. Theorganization in New York had given me five hundred and fiftydollars to distribute in the town. I had scheduled three weeks formy visit, but I stayed for seven.The terrible devastation I found in Skala shocked me; the placehad been much better off a generation earlier. Almost no family hadan income. Most of them had poor stores with meager merchandiseor empty shelves. The anti-Semitic Polish government imposedhigh taxes on people who had little money with which to pay thosetaxes.The only positive developments were that several youthorganizations were active, as was the Gemilut Chassadim, thecooperative bank which the American organization had helpedcreate. I saw the mikveh we had financed, and the public hall, orBeit Haam, worked well. Skala had a good Hebrew school, akindergarden, and a library stocked with Hebrew, Yiddish,German, and Polish books. Cultural life was good; the onlyproblem was the lack of economic opportunity.I gave the committee the money I had brought a week beforePassover. I was deeply impressed by the fairness and the precisionwith which the committee’s members worked. They read the list ofnames and decided how much money to give each family. Theydistributed the money the next day. Of the eighty householdsreceiving help, only one complained to me about his sum, and hewas not correct. I was able to report to our organization that theSkala committee operated honorably and efficiently.I met with the school committee and with the libraryadministration. The school committee told me that they were in380Skala on the River Zbruczneed, and that an extra ten dollars a month would help them a greatdeal. The library administration also asked for a little money withwhich to buy new books. I told both these groups that I would dowhat I could for them when I returned to New York. I returnedhome in a somber mood. The situation of Skala and her Jewsdepressed me.At a meeting of the Skala Women’s Organization, I told themembers about the misery of Skala, and I presented these requeststo them. With the assistance of Mrs. Yaakov Wiesenthal, whosename was Ida, and Chana Harnik, wife of Mendel Cohen, we wereable to arrange for me to send $10 to the school every month. Someopposed wasting money on books when people had no bread, butother members managed to raise twenty-five dollars for the Skalalibrary.The Skala Benevolent Society during World War IIW<? were cut off from news of Skala for the entire six years of theSecond World War. We tried to establish a connection through theRed Cross, but we received no news, and we had no idea what ourrelatives and friends were enduring there.When the war ended and we finally heard something from Skala,we immediately sent twenty-five food packages through the Joint.The Joint eventually returned our money to us and told us that thefood was somehow stuck in Russia.The first hard information we received came from the town ofBytom, Poland. We were told that all the surviving Jews from Skalahad been brought to Bytom. We received a list of all known livingJewish Skalars. Only one hundred and eleven names were on thatlist-all that remained of the few thousand who had once lived inthe town where I was born. All the others were dead. We wereshocked. We sent food packages to those in Bytom who asked forthem.We soon heard that almost all the Skala Jews had left Poland,some to refugee camps in occupied Austria, others to Italian camps,381The Skala Benevolent Society in New Yorkand a few had managed to get to the Land of Israel, then calledPalestine. We managed to make contact with a few of them, andsome refugees came to America. The Skala Assistance Organizationdecided to give a hundred dollars to each Skala refugee to help himget started in the United States. A few accepted the money, butmost declined it. Most of the new immigrants from Skala joinedour organization and began participating in its activities.The Jewish community of Skala no longer existed.We therefore directed our activities to helping Israel. Wecampaigned for the United Jewish Appeal of 1947, raising $5500,and we twice gave two and a half thousand dollars to build homesfor new immigrants in Israel. We contributed as much as our meansallowed us to. We donated two thousand dollars in 1958 to theHistadrut Campaign to build a clinic in Netanya. This clinic was tobe named for Skala.We began working on our Yizkor book in 1961. Membersresponded very strongly, especially among those most recentlyarrived.382Light in the Darkness:Righteous Gentiles_Who Saved Skala TewsMax Mermelstein (Weidenfeld)Of the approximately 1700 Jews who lived in Skala betweenSeptember 1939 and September 1942, only about 145 sur¬vived the Holocaust, including 27 who survived the war period inthe Soviet Union.1 Only 118 Skala residents-men, women and chil¬dren—have miraculously survived the horrors of the Nazi genocide;28 by hiding in the nearby forest2 and 90 who were rescued by ahandful of compassionate, brave and courageous gentiles.According to “YAD VASHEM”-the State of Israel Martyrs’ andHeroes’ Remembrance Authority-a “Righteous Gentile” is one whorisked his own life to save the life of one or more Jews during theHolocaust period. The individuals and families of gentiles and theirlife-saving deeds described in the following chapters certainly fitthat honorable designation. At great risk to their own lives and thelives of their families, those gentiles provided desperate Skala Jews,running for their lives, with places to hide in their homes, attics orbarns. They also fed and protected them to the best of their abilitiesand gave them hope and courage to survive the Nazi nightmare.To rediscover, identify and acknowledge those “Righteous Gen-1 After Nazi Germany invaded the Soviet Union in June 1941, about 70 Skala Jews foundthemselves in Russia. 43 of them perished there during the war. among them Red Armysoldiers and others, who managed to escape to the east with the retreating Russians as well asthose, exiled to the Siberian gulag by the Soviets as “enemies of the state” during theiroccupation of our region between September 1939 and June 1941.' For a full account of this subject, see my chapter in this book entitled “Surviving in theForest” on pg 181.Light in the Darknesstiles” and their noble deeds is the purpose of this monograph. Toresearch and write on the subject 65 years after the end of WorldWar II, when most of the survivors and their saviors are no longerwith us, was undoubtedly a most challenging and frustrating task.Yet, we owe this debt to the memory of those brave men andwomen as well as to our history and tradition of “hakarat hatov”-ofacknowledging with gratitude-even at this late date, the deeds ofthose who came to our rescue in the most critical and perilous daysof our desperate struggle to survive. In researching and writing thispiece, I received the invaluable help and encouragement of a num¬ber of our survivors and their children. To all of them I herebyexpress my deepest gratitude.What follows are alphabetically, the results of my endeavor: thenames, backgrounds, photos (where available) and deeds of those“Righteous Gentiles” as well as the names of those Skala Jews theysaved. Regretfully, for obvious reasons, this is by far, not a full orexhausting account of the subject matter, but the best one couldwrite under the circumstances.ATAMANIUK, STEFKA and ANTOSHKO,a very kind and compassionate Ukrainiancouple, who lived with their son Petrus,near the Jewish cemetery, at great risk totheir lives, rescued 12 (twelve) Skala Jews,the largest number saved by any singlegentile family in town. Those saved were:Bilgorei Abraham and his wife Gitel (neeSchnitzer) Frenkel Moshe and his wife Nunia(nee Schnitzer). Plitt Chaya (nee Schnitzer)Sandberg David and his wife Leba; Schwartz- fig. 56 : Stefkabach Leon, his mother Ryvka, his wife Sala Atamaniuk, who with her(nee Frenkel) and son Israel; Jaegendorf Zhe- husband Antoshko andflld' son Petrus, saved 12 SkalaFrom the summer of 1943 through early Jews-April 1944, the twelve (12) were hidden by the Atamaniuks, some384Skala on the River Zbruczin their own attic and others in the atticof their nearby relatives. They providedthe twelve with food and drink, cleanedafter them and sheltered them, until theirliberation. With unprecedented courage,devotion and sheer guts, Stefka and An-toshko Atamaniuk, poor farmers and oddjob laborers, have with the help of theiryoung son, accomplished their “missionimpossible.” They had many Jewish friendsin town and stood-by them in their timeof greatest need. Sadly and ironically,fate has been very cruel to this wonderfulcouple. After the war in 1950, their onlyson Petrus, was killed by the KGB andAntoshko passed away in the 1960’s.Widowed and heartbroken Stefka lived untilthe Spring of 2001, when she passed away.In the course of our numerous visitsto Skala, between 1990 and 1998, mywife Clara and I always visited StefkaAtamaniuk, bringing her money and scarce medications from herever grateful survivors in America. She lived alone in a dilapidatedtwo-room shack, consisting of a small kitchen, a medium sizebedroom and an adjoining outhouse. The abode was lit by oneelectric bulb, hanging from the ceiling on a loose wire. Yet, theplace was clean and she was always neatly dressed. Stoically, bent byage and sorrow, she always received us with kindness and warmth.On our last visit to Skala, in the summer of 1998, as we enteredher poorly lit home and sat down in the kitchen to speak to her, wenoticed through the open bedroom door a middle aged womanlying, stretched out on a bed. When I asked her, who this womanwas and why she is in her house. Stefka explained, that the womanis a partially paralyzed, distant relative, she is taking care of. “Howdo you manage to do this at your age and with your own poorFlG. 57 : StefkaAtamaniuk (in 1998photo) in front of herSkala home385Light in the Darknesshealth?” I asked. Her quick and short reply was: “If I cannot helpsomeone in need, life is not worth living.” This—I believe—aptlysums up the character and motivation of this unique Ukrainiancouple and their truly heroic deeds. May their memories be blessedand remembered as the most noble and genuine of righteousgentiles.BATUR, ALEXANDER, a Ukrainian day laborer and subsistencefarmer, who lived in old Skala with his wife and two children, savedAbraham Tracy and his brother-in-law, Mendel Ringel, hiding themin the attic of his stable, from November 1943 through March1944.Abraham Tracy was the only Skala Jew, who miraculously sur¬vived the infamous Janovska death camp in Lvov by jumping out,half naked, from a moving freight train, taking him and otherinmates in the winter of 1943 to their death in Belzec. Afterwalking nights in freezing weather through snow-covered fields,Tracy made his way back to the Borshchow ghetto, where he wasbriefly reunited with his sister. Afraid to remain in the ghetto, heproceeded to Skala and sought safety by hiding in basements andattics of empty, former Jewish dwellings. After the liquidation ofthe Borshchov ghetto in June 1943, during which his sister with hertwo children were killed, Tracy linked up with Mendel Ringel, hisonly surviving relative, and both continued in their desperate questto find a hiding place to survive in.In November 1943 Ringel recalled that he had once workedwith Alexander Batur in a flower mill. Next night he and Tracydecided to visit Batur. What happened next is told by Tracy in hismemoir3:“When we reached Alexander’s house, he was outside gatheringwood for his fireplace. When he saw us, he quietly signaled us tofollow him to his stable. He then went into his house and returnedlater with a hot pot of corn mush for us to eat. When we asked him3 “To Speak for the Silenced”, Jerusalem-New York. Devorah Publishing, 2007.386Skala on the River Zbruczfor suggestions as to where we could hide, he offered the attic in hisstable. We were surprised by his offer, since he had no large pro¬perty or space and had two children....The attic was small and theceiling low, but there was plenty of straw and Alexander gave usrags to cover up with. He also cautioned us to keep very quiet, foreven the slightest cough could alert his neighbors. To reach the atticwe had to climb up a ladder. Every morning after bringing us foodand feeding his animals, he would remove the ladder and hide it, sothat no one could go up to the attic and find us, while he was awayat work. Twice a day, once in the morning and once in the evening,we were allowed to come down and stretch our legs.... On March24, Batur informed us that Russian tanks arrived in town.”BABYICHUK, FEDORKO and PARASKA, a kind and gentleUkrainian couple with two children, living in a modest farm housein the village of Gushtyn, north-west of Skala, saved the lives ofBerisb Weidberg, bis daughter Lucy Poliak and Cbaim Prettier. FromOctober 1943 through the end of March 1944, the three werehidden by the Babyichuks in an attic above their barn. In spite ofthe fact that Fedorko’s mother and his single brother also lived withthem in the farm house, he and Paraska were determined anddedicated to the task of saving the three Jews, placing in jeopardynot only their own lives, but also the lives of their extended familymembers. Moreover, they also had to feed three additional mouths,although the financial burden was also shared by Weidberg andBrettler. Why and how did they do it?It all goes back to a long and special relationship the Babyichukshad with the Weidberg family that dates back to the turn of thecentury, when Simcha Weidberg, father of Berish and grandfatherof Fucy, had business dealings with Fedorko’s father. In June of1943, after the liquidation of the Borshchov ghetto, when thehandful of survivors hiding in Skala were faced with daily roundupsand executions, it was natural for Berish Weidberg to turn to histrusted friends Fedorko and Paraska to ask for their help. In spite ofthe great risk involved and a crowded house, the Babyichuk’s did387Light in the Darknessnot hesitate and offered shelter not only to Berish and Lucy, butalso to their friend, Chaim Brettler.FlG. 58: Paraska andFedorko Babyicbuk. In theattic of their barn inGushtyn, Berish Weidberg,his daughter Lucy Poliakand Chaim Brettler weresaved.In the attic, above their barn, the Babyichuks’ fashioned a hidingplace for the three with plenty of straw bedding, where the threehid during the day, while at night they were invited to come downto their living quarters to share a hot meal, the latest news and hourlong conversations, often past midnight. At the end of December1943, when there were some rumors in the village about hiddenJews, the three left the Babyichuks’ household for two weeks, butreturned on January 13 and remained there hidden until theirliberation at the end of March, 1944.Recalling the kindness and generosity of the Babyichuks, LucyPoliak, who was a teenager at the time, remembers with deepemotion how Paraska used to divide her meager daily milk supply,between her and her two children. “The couple-she said-were thenicest people I ever met”.MARTIUK, PETRO and AHAFIA, a high profile, prominentUkrainian couple in Skala, saved the life of Gedalyahu LachrnarP.By profession an architect and master builder, Petro Martiuk was aleading figure in the Ukrainian community of Skala and served aschairman of “Prosvita” (Enlightenment)—a Society for the preser¬vation of Ukrainian education and culture. In the 1920s and 1930s,4 As co-editor of the Skala Memorial book, Gedalyahu Lachman, provided the basic researchon the history of the town and its Jewish Community, authored several leading chapters,including on the destruction of Skala and on the folklore and humor in the life of Skala youth.388Skala on the River Zbruczprior to World War II, Petro Martiuk, maintained friendly personaland business relationships with Skala Jews. Professionally, he wasinvolved in the construction of the “Beth Am”—the Jewish Com¬munity Center in Skala, and also employed Jewish craftsman in hisconstruction projects.Fig. 59:Ahafiaand Petro Martiuk,the saviors ofGedalyabuLachman (in 1958photo).From the early Fall of 1943 through the end of March 1944,Lachman was hidden first by the Martiuk family, in their own barn.After the Police came snooping around their barn, they arrangedwith their friend and neighbor, Paraska Prokopovich, who livedalone in a house down the road, to hide Lachman in the attic aboveher house, while the Martiuks, supplied all the food for him.The relationship between Lachman, a young university educatedscholar and intellectual in his late twenties, and the middle-agedMartiuks with three teenage sons, dates back to the mid-1950s. Atthat time, Lachman established in Skala a private gymnasium5 ofwhich he was the director and only instructor. The private schoolwas designed to prepare students whose parents could not afford topay the high tuition of out-of-town institutions for university entry.The school, which was at the time, Lachman’s main source of in¬come, attracted both Jewish and Gentile students, among them thethree sons of Petro and Ahafia Martiuk . In the course of time, theMartiuks’ became great admirers of Lachman, appreciating his great5A school for secondary education in parts of Europe, preparing students for University entry.389Light in the Darknessintellect, seriousness, personal charm and effectiveness as a highlysuccessful educator.After the September 1942 roundup of Skala Jews, in whichLachman’s mother was seized and sent to her death, the Martiuks’reached out to Lachman, often inviting him to their house for mealsand conversations and eventually offering him a place to hide intheir barn. On those occasions, Lachman also taught the Martiuksons Latin grammar and conversational German. To this day, hisformer students, Stephan Martiuk, who lives in Toronto, Canadaand Vasyl Martiuk, who lives in Skala, fondly remember theirfavorite teacher , paying tribute to his memory by contributing twoshort memoirs to the book published in Israel by the Lachmanfamily in 2008 to mark the 25th anniversary of their fathers’ passing.SKAWINSKI, WLADYSLAW, a Polish farmer with his Ukrai¬nian wife KATARZYNA, and mother-in-law, MARIA KAPA-CILA, who lived in a small house in Old Skala with three children,saved the largest single Jewishfamily of six to survive the Holo¬caust in Skala. The six were: Hes-cheles Samuel, bis wife Sara Hes-cbeles, their married daughter Danaand her husband Abus Seidman, sonVictor Hescheles and niece, CesiaFlG. 60: The Skawinski family (in1948photo), who saved theHescheles family of six: Sitting (leftto right): Katarzyna with babyRyszard in her lap and husbandWladyslaw. Standing (left toright): son Michal and daughterStasia.Lamensdorf From July 1943 through March 1944, Skawinski andhis family, risking their own lives, provided a safe haven to the390Skala on the River ZbruczHescheles family by hiding them in an attic of their chicken coopand providing them with a hot meal every day.As a poor farmer, Skawinski had to supple¬ment his income by using his horse and wagonto transfer goods from the Skala railroad sta¬tion to local merchants and driving some ofthem with their goods to weekly fairs in near¬by towns. One of his steady clients was Sam¬uel Hescheles with whom he developed overthe years a very close and friendly relation¬ship; it was the kind of a relationship, thatwhen Skawinski decided before the war tobuild an extension to his house and had nomoney to purchase the needed building sup¬plies, Samuel Hescheles provided him withthe necessary line of credit.After surviving the liquidation of theBorshchov ghetto in June 1943, the Heschelesfamily miraculously managed to escape backto Skala, walking under the cover of night through fields and forest.After reaching Skala they established contact with Mr. Skawinski,who came the next day with his mother-in-law Maria Kapacila, tomeet them in the forest, bringing along two pails of food for thestarving family. What happened next is vividly related by VictorHescheles, the youngest member of the surviving family:“When my father started to plead with Mr. Skawinski to take usinto hiding, he responded, that he would gladly do it, but wouldn’thave enough room and food for all the six of us. Instead hesuggested, that he would take three of us and ask his neighbor totake the other three. At that point, his mother-in-law turned to himand said: ‘Son, if God has so far kept them together, we have noright to separate them now; either we take all of them, or we takenone.’ Then Skawinski looked at this mother-in-law and said: ‘sowhat does mother say?’ Her immediate response was: ‘we take themall.’ .... They were the angels who saved our lives.FlG. 61: MariaKapacila, mother-in-law and fullpartner in therescue of theHescheles family.391Light in the Darkness“The following night Skawinski met us again in the forest andtook us back to his house, putting us up for the night in the attic ofhis chicken coop. Late that night he came up to the attic telling ushe had a dream to build a blind wall in the attic for us to hidebehind, in case the police would come looking for us. Fortunately,he had on hand the building supplies necessary to put up the wall,which ironically my father helped him purchase before the war.After telling us about his dream, Skawinski proceeded the samenight to erect the blind wall with the help of his son Michal and thethree men in our family. At day break the wall was finished.“One day, three months later, Skawinski received an anonymousletter, telling him to get rid of the Jews, because he and his familywould also be killed, if the Jews were found on his property. Whenwe saw the letter, we decided to go back to the forest in order not toplace in jeopardy the lives of our host and his family. Back in theforest, we met other Skala survivors. Some of them had under¬ground bunkers and we moved into one of them. Shortly thereafter,German troops surrounded the forest and killed scores of them,mostly those who had no bunkers to hide in. Frightened anddesperate we left the forest at night and went back to the Skawinskiattic. Shortly before we were liberated, the Ukrainian police alongwith some Germans, came looking for us, but we were safelyhidden behind the blind wall. They searched for hours and finallyleft after beating up Mr. Skawinski. On March 24, 1944 we wereliberated by the Russians”.SOKOLOWSKI, SIDOR, a Polish farmer who lived with his wifeand daughter in the tiny village of Trujce (pronounced Trooytze),near Skala, rescued from the Nazis the family of Benjamin Gottes-feld, bis wife Sbeyntzie, daughter Fanya and son Arthur, by hidingthem behind a chicken coop under his barn, from June 1943through March 1944.392Skala on the River ZbruczThe circumstances and conditions underwhich this courageous man risked his life tohelp a desperate Jewish family in distress, inspite of the fact, that his wife was less thanwilling to accept the risk involved, are vividlydescribed by Fanya Gottesfeld-Heller:“My late father barely knew Sidor Soko-lowski, having met him only a few timesbefore the war, yet he was willing to pro¬vide us with a tiny hiding space in his barn,share with us the little food he had and riskthe exposure by suspicious neighbors. Thedugout he made for us to hide in was smalland narrow and we always remained therein a crouching position that created adomino effect; when one of us moved, allthe four of us had to move. There was noair, no light and no water in our hidingplace. We did not know day from nightand we only knew the change of seasons because winter was freezingcold and summer brought the sweltering heat. The mice and licewere our constant companions.“Sidor also had to make life and death choices that oftenmiraculously saved our lives. When he caught typhoid fever fromus, he stayed home instead of going to a doctor, because doctorsknew that Jews in hiding had lice, and lice were the carriers of thedisease. Going to the doctor would have raised suspicions and putus all in danger. He also chose to share with us the little food hehad, but somehow we survived on the meager rations he was able toprovide us with.“Sidor never explained to us his deep resolve to help us survive.He was simply a good Christian who saw it as his duty to try saveanother human life. Rescuers like Sidor teach us that, even duringthe nightmare of the Holocaust, some human beings had the abilityto act humanely and make the right choices instead of remainingFlG. 62: SidorSokolowski, the savior ofFanya Gottesfeld-Hellerand her family of three:mother Sheyntzie, fatherBenjamin and brotherArthur.393Light in the Darknessbystanders in the face of evil”.In 1997, Sidor’s daughter Hania traveled to Israel, where in thepresence of Fanya Gottesfeld-Heller, her brother Arthur, otherfamily members, friends and the international media, the memoryof her father Sidor was honored for his compassion and bravery, atan emotional ceremony in the Yad Vashem Garden of the Right¬eous in Jerusalem. On behalf of her late father, Hania acceptedthere the Yad Vashem medal of honor.UHRINSKA, MUNCIA, a humble, single Polish woman of 40,living with her old mother in a small farm house on the outskirts ofSkala, had in two incredible acts of compassion and courage,extended a life-saving hand to two desperate Jewish girls: GeislerFrieda (nee Leibart) and Scbecbter Yenta. In the summer of 1943,the two girls have miraculously survived two massacres in Skala andcame to Muncia’s house in the middle of the night, pleading forhelp. The two girls did not know each other and were also totalstrangers to the their savior.From August 1943 through March 1944, Yente Schachter washidden by Muncia in her attic, while Frieda, who came to her threemonths later, was invited by her to a small room, next to her own,without the knowledge or consent of her mother. Muncia was apoor woman. Her entire household consisted of a small garden, onegoat and five chickens and her meager, daily meals she shared withher mother and the two girls, consisted of bread with fruit jellyfrom her garden and flour dumplings with skimmed milk.The two girls were not Skala natives. From where and whenYenta came to Skala, we don’t know, but assume she was a survivorfrom one of the neighboring towns or villages. Frieda Geisler wasborn in Chortkow and lived there before the war with her parentsand younger sister. She had deep family roots in Skala and oftencame to Skala to visit her maternal grandparents, Mr. and Mrs.Hersch Auerbach as well as her aunt and uncle, Chana and IsraelApfelbaum and their daughter.394Skala on the River ZbruczIn a moving testimonial to Muncia Uhrin-ska, published in the Chortkov Memorial Book,Frieda wrote the following about her savior:“After escaping from Chortkov when thetown became ‘Judenrein’ (emptied of Jews),I fled to Skala with my mother and sisterand a blind chance led me to Muncia’shumble abode at the edge of town. When Itold Muncia, that I lost my parents andonly sister and am now alone and pennilessin the world, she took me into her houselike a mother who welcomes a lost daugh¬ter. For six months—the toughest of mylife-I found a safe shelter in her house. Inspite of the most difficult living conditionsat the time, this wonderful woman, dideverything possible to help me, providingme with a clean bed, motherly love andsharing with me her last crumb of bread.“After two weeks with Muncia, I discovered that in the attic ofher house, another Jewish girl was hidden. It turned out, that threemonths before I came to Muncia, the girl, Yente Schachter, wasshot in her eye during a pogrom in Skala on August 10, 1943.Taken for dead, she was thrown on a wagon and taken with othercorpses to the Jewish cemetery. After the corpses were unloaded andthe wagon returned to town to pick up the remaining bodies, Yenteregained consciousness, crawled away from the pile of dead and hidbetween the tombstones. After darkness, bleeding and blind in oneeye, she reached Muncia’s house and together with me was hiddenthere until our liberation at the end of March 1944. It should benoted that for the ‘crime’ of saving Jews, Muncia could have paidfor her courage and compassion with her own life.”* * *FlG. 63: MunciaUbrinska, theincredible savior oftwo Jewish girls in1988 photo.395Light in the DarknessIn addition to the saviors of Jews described in the preceding pages,there were a number of gentiles in Skala, during the Holocaustperiod who, while not risking their lives to save Jews, respondedwith acts of compassion and kindness to help Jews in distress.Those acts also deserve honorable mention in this monograph.Among those gentiles were:KOVALYSHYN, OLENA (nee Martiuk) was a kind and com¬passionate woman from a prominent Ukrainian family in Skala,who reached out during the Holocaust to Michael Edelstein and hisfather Sholem. From July 1943 through March 1944 Olena Kova-lyshyn provided the two Edelsteins with food, while they werehiding first in the nearby forest and then in the basement of anabandoned house in town.Speaking of his struggle to survive,Michael Edelstein said: “while most of ourgentile acquaintances refused to help us,Olena Kovalyshyn never turned us down.Whenever we sneaked up to her house atnight in quest of food, she always gave usbread, porridge and fruits to sustain us.Moreover, immediately after our liberation,when my father was weak and unable to walk,Olena cared for him in her home until herecuperated.”Olena Kovalyshyn passed away in 1988.Ten years later, in the summer of 1998, onhis first visit to Skala since the end of the war,Michael Edelstein and his family met MyronKovalyshyn, Olenas’ son and his family. Healso placed a wreath of flowers on his saviors’up for Olenas’ goodness, has been helpingMyron Kovalyshyn and his family ever since.FlG. 64: OlenaKovalyshyn (neeMartiuk) whohelped save MichaelEdlestein.tomb and to make396Skala on the River ZbruczRADCHUK (no first name available), a poor Ukrainian forester,who lived with his wife in an isolated farm house in the forest, isanother gentile, who deserves favorable mention in these pages.During the winter months of November 1943 through March1944, twenty eight of us were hiding in an underground bunker inthe forest, a few miles from Radchuks’ house. During that entireperiod Radchuk was our only reliable source of bread that his wifebaked for us. We used to pick up the bread from his house ondesignated nights once a week or every second week, pay for it andreturn undetected to our bunker. Those night expeditions werequite dangerous, because Germans or Ukrainian police often paidunexpected visits to his house. Under the circumstances, Radchukmade every effort to alert and protect us from such dangerousencounters by placing warning signals in his windows on ourscheduled night visits. Radchuk was also our only contact to theworld beyond the forest, providing us with news from the battlefronts and with hope for our eventual delivery from this nightmare.POLISH COLONISTS. There was a small village at the edge ofthe Skala forest, called Mazury. It was established after World WarI by the new independent Government of Poland and was designedto polonize our predominantly Ukrainian province with Polishsettlers from the west. Those settlers who were Roman Catholicswere often ostracized by the Greek Catholic Ukrainians and some¬times persecuted by the German and Soviet authorities during theiroccupation of our region in World War II. As a persecuted mi¬nority, some of the Mazury colonists showed sympathy and com¬passion toward the condemned-to-death Jews hiding in the nearbyforest.I vividly remember the late June of 1943, when my two cousinsand I, along with a handful of other young men and women,escaped to the forest during a week-long rainy weather spell. Wewere cold, wet and starving for days. Our first “meal” in the forest,was a slice of cold corn pudding we all shared, that my cousin,Nechemia Stock of blessed memory, brought from the Mazury397Light in the Darknesscolony after sneaking out of the forest and knocking at the door ofa Polish colonist, a total stranger. Later that summer, my cousinMalcia Rothstein (nee Stock) made a deal with a woman colonist toknit sweaters with wool provided by her in exchange for bottles ofmilk, a rare luxury at the time.In the fall of 1943, after German troops raided our section of theforest, killing scores of Jews, we decided to build undergroundbunkers for the winter. The Mazury colonists were those who lentus the necessary construction tools-saws, picks, shovels and ham-mers-no questions asked. Those tools eventually made our survivalpossible! Regretfully, the names of those individual Polish colonistslie buried in the graves of the survivors who dealt with them at thetime, but their deeds are still remembered with gratitude.* * *The Talmud teaches us that, “whoever saves a single life is as if hesaves the entire world”. To paraphrase this Talmudic proverb, Idare say, that the gentiles who saved scores of Skala Jews is as if theyhad saved “many worlds”-the worlds of our children, grandchildrenand countless future generations of survivors. May all those com¬passionate and courageous gentiles be remembered and blessedforever!398Skala TodayThis chapter consists 0/photos taken between 1990 and 2009.FlG. 65: Plaque in Ukrainian and English at theentrance to the restored Skala CemeterySkala TodayFlG. 66: Among the surviving tombstones in the Skala cemetery is that ofRabbi Noote Drimmer of blessed memory, who served the Jewish Communitybetween 1918 and 1930. He was the grandson of the late Rabbi ShlomoDrimmer, world-renowned Talmudic scholar and author, who started the110 year- old Rabbinic dynasty in Skala in 1832, which came toa tragic end in 1942.FlG. 67: Some of the surviving; tombstones in the restored Skala Cemetery.400Skala on the River ZbruczFig. 68:Survivingtombstone of thelate AronMeshulamFeuerstein,prominentCommunal leaderand keeper of itscivil records, whopassed away in1932.FlG. 69: Partialview of Skalacemetery after itsrestoration andfencing in 1997401Skala TodayFlG. 70: River Zbrucz, next to Skala, frequently served as border throughouthistory, such as between Galicia and Russia prior to World War I402Skala on the River ZbruczFlG. 71: Deserted side street in Skala, where Jews once livedFlG. 72: Recently built hotel and spa403Skala TodayFig. 73: Spa formerly a mikveb404Skala on the River ZbruczFlG. 75: Memorial to the Victims ofBorschov Ghetto405FlG. 74: Memorial to the Victims ofBorschov GhettoPhoto CreditsFigures 9B, 65, 66 Copyrighted byAnatolie DidykFigures 56-57, 65-67, 69, 74-75 Max Mermelstein (Weidenfeld)Figure 63 Zehava PalnitzkyFigure 64 Lancy SpalterFigure 68 Rachel BrillFigures 72-73 Paul Blank? 8 53 8 53 55jlS&K t!Eli if£t£cg7fHshiiiiiliSi,5?§l'2§SH&fpihllMliftiMHklHSvHKsMStfdvtvxs (aio) vavis,