DAVID AND SYLVIA STEINER YIZKOR BOOK COLLECTIONSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARYNO. 02020Davyd-Haradok Memorial BookMemorial book of David-HorodokTHE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY - NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSTHE STEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARY PROVIDESON-DEMAND REPRINTS OF MODERN YIDDISH LITERATURE©2003 THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY ANDTHE NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERMAJOR FUNDING FOR THEYIZKOR BOOK PROJECT WAS PROVIDED BY:Harry and Lillian Freedman FundDavid and Barbara B. Hirschhorn FoundationDavid and Barbara MarguliesThe Nash Family FoundationHarris RosenDavid and Sylvia SteinerRuth TaubmanOriginal publication dataAUTHORTITLEIMPRINTDESCRIPTSUBJECTadd'l titleMemorial book of David-Horodok / translated from the Yiddish and part ofthe Hebrew original.Oak Park, MI (15331 Rosemary Blvd., Oak Park 48237) : B. Chase, [1981]129 p.; 28 cm.Jews -- Belarus -- Davyd-Haradok.Davyd-Haradok (Belarus) -- Ethnic relations.Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945) — Belarus — Davyd-Haradok.David Horodoker memorial bookTHIS BOOK MEETS A.N.S.I. STANDARDS FORPAPER PERMANENCE AND LIBRARY BINDING.PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.MS B CHASE1^1 ROSEMARY BLVDOAK PARK Ml48237*^Wl.lBEARCH(H/Translator's NoteThe 17th of 57A1 Is the fortieth anntverary of* the destructionof the Jews of Dsvid-Horodok. On that day in 1941, 3000 Jewish menwere surdered, and their wnen and children were driven out, B«st ofthem dying within the year.For many of the survivors who ifere wise enough or fortunate enoughto escape the holocaust, the painful memory has dimmed. For theirchildren, grand-children and great grand-children, there Is no memory -only the name of a town from where the old folks came - Impossible tofind on the map.The Memorial Book of David-Horodok was published In Hebrew and YiddishIn 1957. This translation has a double purpose: to teach the English-speaking descendants of the David-Horodokers about their roots and torevive the memory of the tragic martyrdom of our relatives and friends.Many authors contributed to the book. None were professional writers.This, coupled with my own amateur status as a translator, accounts forthe uneven quality of this translation. I apologize for the manyInaccurate and Inconsistent phonetic translations of proper names. Thiswas In part due to the multi-authorship. Most of the Insertions Inparentheses are mine. I am afraid that some of these comments willInsult the intelligence of the reader.Much of the Hebrew original is duplicated in Yiddish. However,some Is not, and this has not been translated - a project for thefuture, perhaps for another descendant of David-Horodok.Norman HelmanAugust 17, 19811Fortunate is he and blessed shall he be.Who will perpetuate your tears.Holy, two thousand year old tears.(H. H. Bialik, 1 Wish to Cry)Oh that my head were waters.And my eyes a fountain of tears.That I might veep day and nightFor the slain of the daughter of my people.(Jeremiah 8:23)ForwardIn this book ve are together with the holy memory of our dear David-Horodoksisters and brothers who were cruelly murdered by the Nazis.Let this book serve as a holy permanent memorial for the lives that werecut off without mercy. At the same time let this book be an unforgetablemark of Cain on the brows of those who, like wild beasts, spilled the innocentblood of men, women, children, the aged, and the sick - peaceful anddefenseless Jews.* * *In this book we have mac,? an attempt to revive and relive the town’sbusiness and work-activities as well as to give a picture of the effervescentsparkling life in all its forms and in all its epochs.Future generations will find in this book, as well as in all memorial books,a reflection of Jewish life in the eastern Europian diaspora in the periodbefore the terrible holocaust.This book does not pretend to reflect the entire many-sided colorful Jewishlife in David-Horodok. In fact, it contains only a small part of the originalDavid-Horodok reality.Our town was not uniquely different from all other Jewish towns in pre-warPoland; but for those who were bom in David-Horodok and for those who spenttheir youth and a great part of their lives there, this town is an inexhaustiblesource of unforgettable experiences, of memories and stories. What once was,is gone forever.* * aWe want to sufficiently emphasize that our town is one of the few communitieswhose chief murderers amongst the indigenous Belorussian population, the Horodt-chukas, were arrested and imprisoned thanks to the untiring self-sacrificingefforts of our compatriot Aharon Dev Moravtchik.* * *2fifteen years haTC passed since the tragic horrible day of the I7th of5711, the day of the mss nirder in our town. The wound has not healed, norvlll It ower be healed.Hie only thing that ve could do to perpetuate the maory of the mrtyrs wasto write this mnorial. Therefore, let this mmriel send its hesrt-rendingcry to the heavens for ell generations.This sttBoriel book is e product of the collective efforts of our survivors inXscael end tiie various countries of the diaspora. The descriptions were writtenby Jews who never were and do not pretend to be writers. That is the special■erit of this book ^ich is an expression of unassuming simplicity.Congratulations to all in Israel and elsewhere who wrote their recollections,gathered doeumnts and photographs, devoted time, energy end effort, obtainedthe necessary funds and helped the editors fulfill the holy mission imposed onthem.The Editors* * *We extend our gratitude and acknowledge all those who helped us publishthe sMinorial book to commemorate the mrtyrs of David'Horodok and vicinity.•The David'Rorodok Womn's Organisation of Detroit and Mrs. Bans Spielberg-Granadler who was responsible for a large share of the group's accomplishmnts.-The David'Rorodok Organisation of Hew York and Mr. Yakov Kitai who accomplish-ed a great deal in gathering mterial and collecting money for the book.>Our friends Itshak Zeldin-Eden, Yosef Lipshits and Yakov Moor (Kopel Merav-tchik), who participated in writing, editing, translating and correcting the book.>A11 of those who devoted tim and effort eo that the book could be published.-Let this book be s source of contemplation, both in detail end in general,for the entire suxvivlng David-Rorodoker family, both in sadness end in suffering.Let this eecomplishmnt, this book to commemorete the Devid-Rorodokermrtyrs, represent a permnent mmorial until the last generation.Ceendttee for David-Rorodok and Vicinity in IsraelThe Ristory of David-RorodokForwardI have been assigned the task to write a narrative history and give a pictureof our town David-Rorodok in general and of its Jewish population in particular.1 am not a writer and certainly net a historian. I have no pretensions toeither. Therefore, I do not know how successfully X can describe the historicalfacts correctly and in their proper order.For this book I have used the materials from the YIVO Letters, the History ofLithuanian Jews by S.A. Bershadski, The Settling of Jews in Lithuania and Polandin the Past, Until the End of the Eighteenth Century by 1 Shipair, and the anthology1000 Years of Pinsk,Unfortunately, ve were separated from the materials and archives which would havegiven us a more accurate and clearer picture of David-Horodok.The history of the town In the last 70-80 years was derived from the recollectionsof our town elders, supported by vy own memories, and also from all those who couldadd and contribute something.1 have attempted, as much as possible, to report only facts and data, avoidingjudgments. I have also attempted to verify these facts.1 am certain that this work is not an exhaustive one. Possibly certain importantevents will not be reflected in this work. It could be that certain moments shouldhave been described in greater detail, and others abridged. For these flaws, Ibeg the pardon of my dear readers and compatriots.I have written this work with reverence and a trembling heart. 1 consider itmy holy duty to perpetuate on paper the history of our town - how our ancestors livedfor hundreds of years, built their homes, raised their families, practiced theircustoms and habits, experienced times of joy and sorrow, and finally tragicallyperished along with the great majority of European Jewry at the blood soaked handsof the murderous Nazis.I believe that I would not commit the sin of local patriotism if I venture tosay that David-Horodok was an unusual town that was distinct from surrounding citiesand towns.It was a town in which the Jews were pious but not fanatic, and were concernedwith both Jewish and general education. The Jews were not ashamed to do any sortof work, but they considered it a disgrace to be ignorant.. It was a town that was Zionistic throughout, with an organized and productiveyouth who studied and aspired to education and knowledge.It was the only town in the entire diaspora where, in the pre-war years, the youthspoke Hebrew exclusively between themselves, with the adults, and even with thegentile servants.It was a town that possessed one of the best Tarbus (culture) schools in Poland,many cultural institutions and organizations, and libraries with avid readers. Allpublic readings and lectures were presented at fully packed halls.It is painful to write of all this in the past tense, knowing that it has alldisappeared and perished in such a tragic manner.Therefore, m>’ dear compatriots, let me offer you this work as a small modestmemorial to our martyrs.4The General History of David~HorodokVc have no clear idea as to vhen or how the tom was established, norwhen the Jewish coonunity began. This chapter will deal with what littlehistorical data is available, with the geography of the region, and with thenasing of the town as based on current evidence.David-Borodok is in the heart of Polesye by the Borin River, 10 kilometersbefore the Borin spills into the Pripyet River. The Pripyet River is 570kilometers long, and it connects Volhynia with Polesye. As a result, Volhyniaand Polesye are linked with the Ukraine on one side and Lithuania on theocher side.Returning to the question as to when Davld-Horodok was founded, we mustget help from the general history of Polesye which will enlighten us a little.The first historical reference to Polesye is in the year 988. The Chroniclesof Sudrdaler Farayaslov describes the portion of Russia that was divided be-tween the sons of Vladimir the Great. It says that one of his sons, Sviata-folk, acquired Plnsk, Turov and their surrounding villages.In 1005, a church center was established in Turov and vicinity, Pinskwas Included in this Turov diocese.In those days, all Russian towns were periodically attacked by the Tatars.In 1185, one such Tatar attack so completely destroyed Turov that itnever regained its former eminence.In 1240, the Tatars devastated the entire region to the east of the Horinand the Pripyet. All of the inhabitants fled to the other side of the riverand gathered mainly at Pinsk where Michael the Tchemlkov duke concentratedthe remnants of his army together with the dukes of Volhynia.The Tatars stayed in Polesye for a long period of time. They developedthe area, and they were responsible for the establishment of Oavid-Horodok. Theyalso built the hill by the riverside which served as a fortress. In later years,a Greek Orthodox church was built on this hill. That this was indeed anartificial hill was proven by excavations in 1936-37 which found a variety cfimpleiaents and graves under the hill.Where does the name Davld-Horodok come from? There are numerous legends. Onesays that it is the name of a duke's child, David. The second legend, a Polishone, that the Roman Ovidius was exiled to the region of the Black Sea, and thetown where he died was named after him. A third legend says that the name Davidis widespread mong the Tatars, and they gave it the name David-Borodok,*To this day there is a remnant of the Tatar race amongst the inhabitants ofDavid-Borodok who are called Horodtehukas. They are distinguished from theneighboring gentiles by their broad Tataric nose, their clear brown colora-tion, and by their body build.*Translator's note: The author assinnes that we know that Gorodok or Horodokmeans "small town" in Russian.Davld-Horodok v«s •atabllshcd and devclopad by the Tatar* at the and of thellth Century or the beginning of the 12th Century.The first historieal reference to David•Berodok la from the year 1400, inregard to the treaty between the ruler and the Lithuanian Grand Duke Vitos whobcesne recognised as the Independent ruler of Lithuania. In the treaty papers it■antions that Finak, David•’Rorodok and Ledair (Tladiair Vollnak) were transferredfroa Vito* to the Staradubian Duke Sigiaaund Kastutovitch.This shows that in those days David'Horodok was an laportant town. Proathen on, David-Borodok was linked to the Finsk duchy which in that tiae includedall of Folosye.In the 15th Century, Dsvid-Horodok went over to Duke Uri SaaionovitchAlshanski who was the governor of the Lithuanian grand duchy for the PolishRing Cassiasnr Yogalo.After the death of Duke Uri, the governor of the grand duchy becaae IvanSviatoslovitch, and after his death the Finsk duchy reverted for a short tiaeto the Polish crown.In 1427, Duchess Harya bccaae the ruler of the Finak duchy. She ruled withher son Vasily until 1495. After Vasily's death, his sister Alena ruled withher husband Fyodor.In 1521, Baron Fyodor died, and the Finsk duchy then went over to KingSigisannd 1. On October 8, 1523, this king gsve his wife Vans Sfartza theFinsk region including Klstek, David«Horodok end Rahatchan.During the era of Vans Sfertsa, she developed Folasye. She brought inPolish colonists and gsve thea free land to settle. She cleaned out therivers and dug canals. She levied a special tax on the inhabitants of Finskfor the purpose of creating a permanent coamunication link between Finsk, Novaland David'Borodok.In 1556, Queen Vena Sfartza left Poland, ending her rule over the Finskduchy.The Polish king and the Lithuanian grand>doke Sigismund August took over theregion, abolished the Finsk duchy which then became united with Koask, Zjob,and Boroditch, and they were annexed to the Lithuanian duchy.1569 was a turning point in the affairs between Poland and Lithuania. Inthat year, during the reign of the Lublin Rational Asseably, a loose con-federation was created between Poland and Lithuania. This union opened thedoors for Polish lauigration into Lithuania. .Polish culture, especially theCatholic clergy, permeated the entire area. >There was a twofold purpose;to Folonire the Russian region, and to convert then to the Rosuin Catholicfaith.With the support of the Roman Catholic Ring Sigismund III, the Catholicclergy took to their task with great fervor. Nothing kept then from theirwork. They destroyed Greed Orthodox churches and monasteries. They let allthe people know that as Roman Catholics they could do anything, but as CreekOrthodox they would have no rest or safety.Xo order to ease the coneerslen of the Greek Orthodox people to CathollelsB,the so'ealled Unlate church was created which was aupposad to be a bridge be-tween the two churches. The Uniatas allowed the Creek Orthodox church to usetheir own careaonias» their own language and Moy of their own rites, and■ost iiportant, they racogaisad the pope as the head of thair church. Asan axaaple that illnstratss wividly the fight between the two churches, takathe story of the ■arkatplaca and shops in DsTid-Borodok. It Is a fact thatin tha apot where the ■arkatplaca and its shops atood, thsra was once aCrack Orthodox canatary. So hew did there coae to be a ■arkatplaca withshops? Vho pamittod it? It is only understandable within tha context oftha fight between the two eburehas; it being pamitted through tha Catholicauthority in order to wipe out the traces of tha Creak Orthodox property.When tha cnargatic priest YoknisTitch cans to David-Borodok. ha iasadiatalybegan to repair tha idjustica which had bean dona to tha Greek Orthodoxchurch, and in tha niddlc of tha ■arkatplaca ha built a church sdiieh standsto this day.The fight between the Creak Orthodox church on one hand and theKonan Catholics on the other hand, was a vary bitter one, and it ranainedstrongly ingrained in the ■aaories of both sides.Va felt tha rennants of this even in nost recant tines. After World War I,whan David-Horodok bad gene over to Poland, once again the Uniatc was broughtup, which hadn't bean heard of during the Csar's tiaes. Tha Greek Orthodoxpriests began to feel lets secure both in their rule over the ■asses andwith their possessions. Quietly the war between the churches ratuned.This war would have taken sharper forms had the Poles not bean afraid thatthis would be oil for the wheels of the coBunist propagandists in thevicinity. At this tine David-Borodok was 30 kilonatars fron the Polish-Soviet border.Interesting to note that in the religious controversy between the CreekOrthodox and Catholic churches, tha Jaws quietly supported tha latter.Tha era of the Lublin Ifciion brou^t great changes in Polesye in political,religious and aconoadc life.In 16A8, there ware great and bloody happenings in tha region of Polesye.Tha Cossack uprising under tha leadership of Bogdan Chnialnltxki did notoverlook Polesye.Tha Polish fclndon never had full control over its eastern provinces.Tha masons for this are nany and varied, for axaaple, tha'character of thecolonists that ware brou^t them. For tha nest part those who cans had leftthair home for political, social or mligious refuge; or they ware seekingan assy livlihood or were sinply crinlnals.The rebels were not alone in their fight. They were Joined by the oppressedpeessnt snsses vho wanted to throw off the yoke of the hated nobility. Thisrebellion was taken up in Polesye.7The year* of the Coeseck rebellion vere Inscribed with bloody letters InJewish history. The years 1648 and 1649 vere years of destruction anddevastation for eastern European Jewry.There is no clear knowledge as to how the Jewish cosnunity of David-Horodoksurvived the destruction. There is however evidence that the Dsvid-Horodokcoenunity took a loan in order to rebuild the devastated town institutions.Concerning this, there is soae accurate inforaation regarding the part playedby the Davld'Horodoker Christians in the Cossack uprising. In the history ofPinsk, it is told that the greatest destruction occured with the attack of theCossacks, Tatars and the peasants from David-Borodok and Tterov. Three tisms,it is told, Plnsk suffered from the Cossack uprising, but the greatest destructionoccured when the David-Borodok Christians participated. The Jewish contsunlty inPinsk was almost extinguished cospletely.In 1707, the Swedes appeared in Polesye. Bowever, because of difficultieswith lines of coiamunlcation, they did not stay very long in Polesye. They evenbegan building bridges over the rivers, but they quickly stopped and left the area.The elders of David-Horodok tell the following story. Once three Swedishsoldiers came to David-Horodok on patrol. They vent into a whiskey distilleryand began drinking from the huge casks standing there. One of them became sodrunk that he fell into a cask of whiskey, and he drowned. The local populancewas afraid of the vengeance of the Swedish army, and they hid for three monthsin the surrounding forest. The Swedes, however, did not come because they soonleft Polesye altogether.In 1793, Poland was divided a second time, and David-Borodok remained part ofRussia until 1920. From 1920 until September 1939, David-Horodok belonged toPoland. The Red army entered David-Horodok on September 19, 1939. In July 1941,David-Horodok was taken by Hitler's armies, and in 1944, David-Horodok wasreunited with Russia.The Christian PopulationAs previously mentioned, the David-Horodok Christians, the so-called Horodtehukasvere exceptional in all of Polesye.The typical person from Polesye had a mild character, phlegmatic andpessimistic. In contrast, the Horodtehuk was far from sdld, feisty and energetic,more sturdily built and taller. The Christians of the nearby village of Alpinalso had a reputation, having stemmed from Lithuanian forebears snd never havingassisd.laced with the surrounding people.The narrowmindedness and hatred that the Horodtehukas had for the surroundingpeasants was no less than they had for the Jews. It la Interesting to note thatthey never smrried outsiders. They vent on business throughout the country, butfor marriage they came home to David-Horodok. Because of this, for years they didnot assimilate and remained the direct descendants of the founders of David-Horodokwith Cossack-Tatar blood flowing in their veins.Their Cossack-Tatar heritage was also noted in the way they made a living.They were not farmers and had no desire for working the land. The gardens8Chat their wonen worked «wre for personal uac only. If there vaa any surplus, thewife would sell the produce at the awrket, and the aoney would belong to her.In general, the Horodtchukas. with the exception of a swall nuober of aerchants andartisans, had no stable occupation. They did everything. For the aost part, theiroccupation depended on the season of the yesr. They were fisheraen. they %^regreat experts in forestry. Vinter they finished wood products and in spring theyprepared and hauled the wood that they had worked on during the winter in thesurrounding forests to the river banks. They were experts on water, good navigatorsof steastthips, berlinas (a type of riverboat), and rafts which they would takefroa Dantig all the way to the other end of the Dnieper Diver.tn the last years before World War II, as the surrounding forests becaaesaaller, they worked farther away. In David'Horodok, there were apeeial brokerswho Interceded between the luaber dealers and the boataan, and they would assignthe workers to the nerehants.They were good builders, aasons, shipbuilders of various sixes andespecially good shoemakers. They were also skilled aerehants.Host of the Horodtchukas in spring would travel to fairs selling seeds, summerselling ice cream throughout the land, autumn di^sling in red berries, snishroomsand boots, and winter they were occupied at hone with shoensklng.It is noteworthy that they always avuided dealing with sdddlenen. In shoe*making they would prepare their own raw material, and in the worst case theywould purchase their materials from the first hand. They would also go to thefairs throughout Poland to sell their own wares.The same is true in the meat and wurst business. They went to the localvillages to buy meat,’prepsred it themselves and sold it themselves. TheHorodtchukas had the wurst business in all the larger train stations in Poland.This was a specific people. They wandered throughout Russia before World War I,and between the two wars, throughout Poland. Nowhere did they assimilate.One could recognise them anywhere because of their unique clothing, speech andmannerisma.Since the time of Cxarist Russia, they had a higher social-political statusthan the neighboring peasants, and this enabled them to improve themselvesaoamwhat. They were strongly given over to Cxarist Russia and were calledmonarchists.After the 1905 revolution, there was a Black Hundred organisation founded.It was a reactionary terrorist group which had the responaibility of support-ing the Cxar against the revolution. They also established a strong andtight Black Hundred organisation in David-Horodok, and it existed until 1917.On a certain aunday, they even attempted a pogrom. Thanks to the self-defenseorganisation of the Jewish youth in particular and the entire Jewish populationin general, and also because of the opposition of the magistrate Avtchinkovwho had business dealings with Jews, they came out with only a few wounded.Their sonarchist reputation remained with the Horodtchukas even after the1917 revolution. A portrait of the Csar continued to hang in many houses.They were lukewarm to Kerenski's uprising, and they were outspoken opponents9of the Bolthevik revolution.At the flrat opportunity, they set up an araed rcalatance against theRed anqr. At that tlae the Jeva also helped, and they paid dearly for it,as will be described in a later chapter. In the district headquarters ofthe Bolshevik authorities, the Christian paopla of David-Borodok wereconsidered a oounterrevolutionery eleaent.During the 20 yaar raign of tl^ Polish power in Davld>Borodok (1920*1939), the Horodtehuka aconoiiy was atrengthenad, hut this did not drivethen to assimilation despite the fact that the Polish authorities didnot allow them to open a Russian school, and their children ware compelledto learn in Polish schools. However, they kept their Belorussian languageand Greek Orthodox faith. They would teach their children the Russianalphabet in their hootes. When the Bolsheviks ratumad to David-Horodokon September 19, 1939, they were mat with the hateful looks and enmity ofthe Horodtehukas. With few axceptions, they did not become members ofthe Connunist party and did not take part in political life. They werevery disappointed that instead of the nearby Hazi regime, the Bolshevikshad taken over.Once more, as the Bolshevik regime became established and began requisitioningand nationalizing everything, their hate for the regime grew and they waitedfor Hitler even wort. This was demonstrated at the election which occuredin western Belorussia for the national assembly which was supposad to confirmthe annexation of western Belorussia to eastern Belorussia. They threwslips into the ballot boxes with the following written on then; "Death to theCommunists and Jews", "Down with the Bolsheviks" and "Long live Hitler".Hore than once, they threatened the Jews that when Hitler came, theywould settle accounts with them.They kept their word. In the beginning of July, 1941, when the Bolsheviksretreated from Dsvld-Horodok and Hitler's forces suirched into town, theHorodtehukas were the first in all Europe to assist the Germans in under-•taking an "action". On the 17ch of 5710, they murdered all of the amnin the town.The entire time of the German occupation, they served Hitler faith-fully, and they Id tom enjoyed the full trust of the |iazi authorities.When in 1944, the Red arsy freed David-Horodok from the murderous Nazioccupation, they found not a single living Jew in the town. They alsodid not find any of the gentile leaders of the town. They iMd left withthe retreating German army.e * *The Jewish Conznunity in David-HorodokIt is difficult to answer the question as to when the Jewish communityof David-Horodok was founded. There is not a single remaining historicaldocument that would clarify the question. The records of the community.lU•vcn if they bad aurvlvcd, would not have enlightened ut auch, beeeuteIt wee only 200 year* old, and there exlata auch prior knowledge of theJewish coaaunlty in David'Borodok.To •etebliab epproxiaately when • Jewish coaaainity was founded in -our▼ieinity, we aust consult the history of the Jews of Lithusnis and followthe settling of the Jewish eoHunities.la S.A. Bershsdski's overview of the history of Lithuanian Jewry which waspublished In 1883 in Petersburg and in X. Shapiro's History of the Jews ofPoland Phtil the End of the 18th Century ^ich was puhlished in 1914 in Moscow*,it shows that the years 1500-1S50 were a period of growth for the Jewishcoanimity In Lithuania. In these days, awny new conaunities were founded, andthe existing ones were expanded.The atreaa of Jewish iaaigration was froa west to east. Thus, the firstJewish conaunities %fere in the western part of Lithuania. It is clear that,for exaaple, Grodno, Brisk, Lotsek and Pladiadr-Velinsk caae before David*Borodek, Luniniatx, Staline and others.lit should be noted that the coanunity of Vladlair-Volinsk waa Sstabllshedin 1388, and Dsvid-Horodok together with VladiBir-Volinak were part of theStaradubian duchy in thoae daya. It is not definite that there was a Jewishcoanunity in David-Horodok at that tias.The inaigration stream to Lithuania was even stronger at the beginningof the 16th century due to the fli^t of the Jews froa Gerasny.The new Jewish coBaunities in Lithuania were founded in the following aanner:around each larger eoamunity there would arise saallcr settlements. In suchfashion the Jews pressed ever further into Lithusnis. Jewish historians areof the opinion that if you look at a sap of old Lithuania, you can pinpointwhich Jewish settlements were older. The older settlements are in westernLithuania, and the yotmger settlements are in eastern Lithuania.In conclusion, we cannot reckon on an organised Jewish coaunmlty in David-Borodok before there was one in Pinsk.An organised Jewish conaiunity was created in Pinsk in 1506. That wouldassn that an organised Jewish conaunity in David-Borodok cane later. Thatdoesn't tule out the possibility of sons Isolated Jews in David*Horedekbefore that time.In those days, Jews would drive through the entire lend on business.Besides this, they leased monopolies for whiskey asking, salt asrehsntlng,innkeeping end tax collecting. It is possible therefore, that in David*Horodok, which had all the nodem conveniences since 1190, that Jews livedthere long before the establlshaent of an organised Je%/lsh coenunity.The first accurate historical knowledge concerning the David>Horodok* A current reference source in English is: The Jews of Poland by BernardD. Veinryb, Jewish Publication Society of America, Philadelphia, 1973.11Jewish cotoDunicy Is from 1667. In thst yesr, the Plnsk eoBBunlty took e losnfrom the Lahlshin church for its own needs and for the needs of the surround-ing communities. As collsterel for the losn, they collected goods from thesurrounding Jewish comnunities, amongst which Is sientloned David-Horodok.This occured after Bogden ChmieInitzki'a uprising which destroyed theentire Jewish comraunity of eastern Europe. Those who had fled, returned totheir destroyed homes. The poverty and distress were great. Everything hsdto be set up anew, and there was no available money-broker. They thereforehad to go to their gentile neighbors for help. The gentiles cane to the Jews,and loaned there money, not out of charitable feelings, but rather out of purecommercial calculation. They aude very good businesa from theae loans. Theytook as gaurantees the atudyhouses, the bathhouaes and even the cemeteries.More than once, for not paying the intereat on time, they would tear apartthe atudyhouse or not allow a burial in the cemetery. Besides that, the lavassured the rights of the lender. For net paying a debt, there were severepenalties, even death.In the Lithuanian court records of those tines, there are a great nuBd>erof death sentences given to individuals, to groups and even to entire Jewishcomnunities. This shows the great poverty of the Jewish communities in thosetimes. In truth, the death sentences often remained on paper because therewss a large gap between the handing out of a death sentence and its execution.The Polish authority in those days was riddled with anarchy. Its power toact was paralyzed, and rebellion against the authorities was a daily occurence.The Jews also did this, but only as individuals. The community debts had tobe paid.In the realm of these debts, there was great friction and controversybetween the small comnunities and the large coBDunities. They could neveragree among themselves as to how much each comunity had to pay. Therewere religious court suits at the "Council of the Four Lands", and the disputeseven resounded in the government courts. This situation changed abruptly with theCossack uprising. The prestige of the central government authority was greatlydiminished. The hardship of the small towns was immense, and they were in noposition to contribute their share to the central comnunities since they didn'teven have the ability to rebuild their own ruined communities.Then the fight intensified between the small coanunities against the largecosmmnities with the purpose of getting rid of their guardianship. In the vicinityof Finsk, the following communities began fighting: David-Horodok, Turov, Staline,Slotzik and Drahitzin.The controversy was prolonged and very severe. The central government stood onthe side of the large consminitiea, because it wanted to be paid in a centralizedouinner. The Lithuanian war minister gave an order that the military should aidthe large communities in collecting taxes from the recalcitrant astall communi-ties. However, the aoldiers were of no help. The frequent religious courtdecisions were also of no avail because of the weakness of the central powerwhich was caused by the separatist strivings of the Polish nobility and especiallybecause of the new confederation adopted by the central assembly in 1766 trhichcancelled the general tax on Jewish communities, and replaced it with an indi-vidual tax of two gulden per head (beginning with one year old children). Thus,12the large eennunitles lest the battle, and the small eotmunltles became Independent.Concerning the new tax system In Poland-Lithuanla, there vas a census takenof the Jewiah people, giving us some idea of the number of Jews in that time.The census vas taken In 1766, and here are the results (excluding childrenless than one year of age) in the following towns:David-HorodokTVirovRaradneStalineYanaveDrahitsin408 people316109408422510Ve sRist accept these numbers with sene reservation because, for purposes oftaxation, the number is not entirely correct. Either the Jews gave amsllernumbers in order to pay less tax or the officials gave larger numbers in orderto collect more tax. To show that the tally was not correct, we can use the secondcensus which was taken in 1784. The second census gives us a ce^>lately differentpicture:David-RorodokTurovRaradne'StalineYanaveDrahitsin386 people31947207261248It is unlikely that the number of Jewish people In all the towns woulddecline in a span of 18 years. This is an indication of the incipient declineof the Polish kingdom, and the officials did not carry out their Jobs carefully,not believing themaelves in the uaefulneas of the cenaus.In general, the last years of the Polish reign were difficult for the Jewsof Lithuania. The central authority was weak and demoralized; the taxes great;the local noblemen dominated, each in his own way; the Jewish eonmunlties toreat each other; and rivalries arose between Jewish merchants. All of thisimpoverished the smsses, and the distress vas great.In that time, two things occured that had a great influence on the livesof Lithuanian Jews. The first occurence was of a general political characterwhich had an indirect effect on the lives of Lithuanian Jews, namely that in1793, Poland vas divided a second time, and the region went over to Russia.This brought a tremendous change in the economic and cultural life of the Jewsin Lithuania. The second occurence vas of an inner Jevish-religlous significancethe founding of the Hasidic swvement.The Hasidic movement began to develop strongly et the end of the 18thcentury. It embreced great masses. It eeme as a result of the poverty of theJewish masses on one side, end from the inner Jewish reaction from the secondside. This was also a protest against the severe hand of the eoamiunlty ring'leaders and the powerful.The new Torah resonated In the hearts of the poor village Jews, tenant workersand merchants.It Is Interesting that the Hasidic movement did not have a great influence13In David-Horodok* David-Horodok vas not affected by the nearness of Pinsk»wherein Rabbi Levi Itzhak (of Berditchev) resided for awhile as well as theeminent Rabbi Aharon the Great of blessed fnemory* Finsk was the scene of acontroversy between the hasidim and the misnsgdim (rationalists). David-Horodokdid not participate in the controversy.Staline, SJalbin and Dambrovitz came to help the hasidim of Plnsk in the fightagainst Rabbi Avigdor who stood at the forefront of the battle against thehasidim. They forbade Rabbi Avigdor to visit their comnunities. David-Horodokdid not forbid him.It seems that David-Horodok was strongly under the influence of the VilnsCaon who stood at the head of the fight against the hasidim. In David•Horodok,even in modem times» the religious would observe the anniversary of the deathof the Vilns Gaon. and many had his picture hanging in their homes.In genera1, David•Horodok was greatly influenced by Lithuanian Jewry» andthe struggle concerning the rabbis was greater in Dsvid-Horodok than in allthe surrounding towns.From this, one should not conclude that there were no hasidim at all inDsvid-Horodok. There were also hasidim there. Of the five studyhouses inDavid-Horodok, one was haaidic, the so-called ahtibel. The relative numberwas not great, and they did not have a great influence.« Sr eThe Economic Structure of Jewish David-HorodokWe have no certain knowledge of the economic structure of the David-HorodokJews in the first years of the Jewish settlement there. In order to clarify thequestion^ we must use the material of the surrounding towns and from the generaleconomic structure of Lithuanian Jewry. We must remember that the Lithuaniangovernment opened the gates for Jewish immigration from Germany, not out ofh\imane feelings, but because this accorded with their policy which visualizedin the Jewish immigration an element that would revitalize and activate thestagnant economy of the country.They therefore gave the Jews many rights. Jews were considered freemen(not royal servants such as the peasants) along with the nobility and the land-owners. For Rilling or wounding a Jew» the penalty was death. One could notInterfere with their prayers» nor could one call them to court or make thempay debts on the Sabbath. They were allowed to deal In whatever they wanted,and they were free to move throughout all of Lithuania.In old Lithuania, the government did not collect Its own taxes. They gavethe Job to tax farmers. Understandably, Jews were the tax farmers.In almost every town and village, Jews leased the following functions:collecting taxes, whiskey monopoly, beer and mead - both wholesale and retail,salt monopoly, the official weights, inns and toll booths.14This last was a tax which each merchant had to p<iy beforehe could sell his goods. This tax was called mlta. Themerchants had to drive along the roads where the tollbooths were.That «ras how the Jews of that era made a living. In allliklihood that is also how the David-Horodok Jews subsisted.David-Horodok Jews also had probably begun dealing inwooden articles such as Joinery, material for ship building,potash.and tar which were plentiful in the region.Jews also took to farming and cattle raising. Untilmodern times. David-Horodok Jews were accustomed to keepingone or more cows. Jews also took up gardening.Because of strong restrictions by the ruling guilds, aswell as their strict religious character, there were noJewish artisans in those days. Only after the Cossackrebellion, when a large part of the land was destroyed andthere was a great shortage of craftsmen. King John Kasimirin 1669 permitted the Jews to organise their own guild.Then for the first time the Jews, who were ruined by the Cossack rebellion, began to learn crafts.It should be mentioned that the standard of living wasvery low in those days. They were poorly clothed. Bootswere only worn on the Sabbath and in winter. In summerthey went barefoot. They would go through mud in sacks.The clothing was made of canvas. Meat was eaten only onthe Sabbath, and sometimes not then either.2. Business in the 19th Century tantil World War IAfter the Napoleonic war. there %ms an improvement ineconomic development for Polesye. Victorious Russia becamethe great power of Europe, and began gradually rebuildingthe land, especially South Russia. The Ukraine developeda great movement to build new colonies, a fleet of shipsfor the Black Sea. and railroad lines. The nearest sourceof timber for all this construction %ras Polesye. A broad-based business developed with the Ukraine. This of courseaffected David-Horodok which lay by the Horin River and inthe center of the forest region. In the second half of the19th century, there developed in David-Horodok a merchantclass for lumber production and so-called watermen.The David-Horodok lumber merchants %#ere. with few excep-tions. not wealthy, but they and the so-called watermen15together caused a marked Improvement In the merchantbusiness. Lumber dealing was not simple. It required muchknowledge and skill. Buying the raw material requiredexpert examination of the quality, and making a precisecalculation of how to %rork the vrood, transportation, etc.The %^termen used the so-called betlinas or berlinchikas%fhich were the chief means of communication on %fater.Xn bygone days they used badiaks which %fere wide heavyboats. However, they %#ere not very convenient, and by thesdddle of the 19th Century they were no longer used. Theywere replaced by barges and berlinas.The barges were usually open and had the followingdlmenslonst 15-19 sajen (one sajen equals seven feet) long,7-8 arshin (one arsViin equals aSout one meter) wide and24-2B virshak (one virshak equals almost three inches) high.They carried a load of about 4-5000 pood (one pood equalsabout 36 pounds), that is 80 tons. The barges %rere mostlyused for carrying firewood and boards.The berlinas were covered and ve^y larget 17-20 saJinlong, 3 sajin %d.de,and 2 arshin high. They were dividedinto three or four sections in which they transported avariey of goods. Such a berlina required as many as 18workers plus a captain.In spring, they %#ere mostly loaded with firewood or otherwood material, and went downstream as far as Kiev and inrecent times as far as Yakaterlnoslav. A trip from David-Horodok to Kiev %iould take, in normal circumstances, t%i;oweeks. In the sximmer, the berlinas %rould work at the banksof the Dnieper for hauling various loads from one point toanother.Xn the fall season, they %iould load up with a variety offood items from the rich Ukraine, or %«ith salt, and go up-stream to David-Horodok. The return trip would take about40 days. Hot uncommonly, %d.nter «rould come early, and theywere forced to remain somewhere along the route. Xn such aease, they %fere understandably far from their source ofincome.This %«as not an easy business. One %fas separated fromhome 8-9 months of the year. One %#as dependent on weatherconditions, such as %rinds, water depth in the rivers, etc.The business required great gkill and knowledge.Until World War X, this business %ias a major source ofincome for the towns along the banks of the rivers. Thiswas a multi-faceted business with brokers, agents and «rare-houses.16The larger merchants boxjght the material and sold theproducts, while the smaller businessmen earned their incomesthrough transport.In this regard, it is worth mentioning the family Bregmanof David-HorodoK which had at the end of the 19th century alarge business. The Bregmans owned many of their own ber-linas. and from time to time «#ould make deals with outsidersto transport merchandise for them. They had wrehouses inmany places. Later they had their own steamship called theMontefiore. They had agents all along the wy from Pinsk toVakaterinoslav who would bv^ and sell for them, hire workersfor them, procure food for the %»orkers, and also determinethe prices of produce, sugar, salt, etc. They would alsoinvestigate the condition of %iood reserves in the Ukraine.This was a large firm with wide-ranging interests andthereby enjoying boundless credit and trust.The water business created a shipbuilding Industry inDavid-Horodok from which many Jews and Christians earnedtheir livllhood.The class of wood merchants and %^ter-men had a strongeffect on the development of the town and especially of theyouth. The elders endeavored to give their children not onlya Jewish education, but also a broad secular education aswas required for their businesses.As a result of the extension and development of the watercommerce and lumber business in Polesye in general and David-Horodok specifically, a Jewish community was founded in Nirtchaat the beginning of the 19th century.Nirtcha is situated at the confluence of the Horin andPripyet Rivers, and it is 12 kilometers from David-Horodok.The water communication between David-Horodok and the Ukraine,between pinsk and the Ukraine, bet%ireen Pinsk and David-Horodok,as well as the water link on the return trips had to passthis particular point. In those days, when business betweenPolesye and the Ukraine began to develop and %#Bter %m8 thecheapest and sole means of communication, Nirtcha became im-portant from a commercial point of view. Zt %fa8 a place thatcould give a large number of families sustenance.Just after Napoleon's defeat in 1812, when Russia beganto heal the wounds of the war, when they began feverishlybuilding and developing, and when commerce began developing,in those days the Jewish community of Nirtcha was founded.Zt was a unique community. Zt %7as begun by the one familyof Joseph Haravtchik, and in the scarcely 100 years of theexistence of the Nirtcha community, it expanded and attained17a population of 100 at the time of the dieeolution of theJewish community. These included sons and daughters.daughters«in-law. sons-in-law. grandchildren and greatgrandchildren of the same Yosel Maravtchik.The Maravtchiks ran a unique business In Nirtcha. employ-ing both peasants and merchants. Their existence %ras basedon horticulture which they %forked themselves, fishing, raisingcattle, and especially in dealing with lumber and %«oodenarticles. They themselves would haul firewood by transportships to Kiev. They %iould provide food for the workers onthe steamships, rafts and berlinas. They also prepared foodfor the travelers on passenger steamships.The inhabitants of Nirtcha were examples of hardy plainfolks. They had daily contact with the Jews of David-Horodok,and. thanks to contact with a variety of business people,they were not ignorant villagers. They brought for thechildren the very best teachers who incidentally vrere quitewilling to go there.The land whithey occupied and worked belonged to theDuke Radziwell. They paid him rent.As mentioned, the community of Nirtcha existed for almost100 years. Zn 1906. this community %fas liquidated, and allthe inhabitants of Nirtcha moved to Oavid-Korodok.The cause of the liquidation of the Jewish community ofNirtcha is as followst The Duke Radziwell chose that placeto build a sawmill. He %fas certain that, at such an impor-tant communication point, he %«ould make a good business.The extraordinary efforts of the Nirtcha Jews to annul the deonee%fere of no avail. They received compensation from the Dukeand with great bitterness left the place where they had livedand earned a respectable livllhood for almost 100 years.At first it was a great tragedy for these Jews. They hadto start building anew in the town, seeking a means of exis-tence. Later they were very pleased with the change. Theybecame involved in the town. They bou^t houses with thecompensation money. Zn 1914. when the first iforld %#ar brokeout. they %iould of necessity had to flee anyway and nat-urally %rithout compensation.The duke had not made a good exchange because the sawmilldid not develop, and he had to close it.Shops were an is^rtant part of David-Horodok life.Having a Christian population which purchased everything itneeded (the Horodtchukas %rere mostly merchants and laborers),and having a large number of surrounding villages - there«ms room for many shops in the town. Zn time, a large shop-18keeper class developed in t.own. In truth, few became rich,and without the help of the bank and credit unions, mostwould not have been able to exist.The competition between the shops was considerable. Insuch a manner they persevered, more or less.Many families in David-Horodok earned a living in themeat business. The town was surroxinded by farm country,many grassy sieadows for pasture, and the vicinity vras richin herds of cattle and oxen. The butchers of David-Horodok%rould buy these cows and oxen both for the town's needs aswell as for export, especially to Warsaw.Amongst the David-Horodok butchers %#ere some bigger mer-chants who would travel to the Ukraine, mainly in the Paltavregion, purchase shipments of cattle and send them to Warsaw.It is of interest that these shipments, along with theirattendants, %»ent the entire way on foot.This was a risky business because there %wre no standard-ized prices. The prices depended on the supply and the bid-ding of the Warsaw merchants. Not Infrequently the profiton half the transport sold on a certain day would barelycover the loss on the sale of the second half of the trans-port on the following day.The great majority of the butchers were not Involved inbusiness dealing. They earned their bread with great dif-ficulty. Three to four days in the week, they would goaround the local villages to try and buy something. Bringingit home was also not easy, and selling it involved intenserivalry betwen the butchers, and, not infrequently, ananimal was found to be unclean.The meat business brought much money and contributedgreatly to the economy of the area and especially for thepeasants. It also created the basis for the tanning in-dustry which wrought the great quantities of hides in theregion. From the processed hides, the shoemakers of David-Horodok produced boots for the entire region.The meat business also produced tallow which was used tomanufacture soap and candles.The fish industry %ras very important in David-Horodok.It was a source of income both for the Christians who werethe fishermen and for the merchants. In this regard, it isnoteworthy that the fish merchants did not bother with sel-ling fish on the spot. That liras done by the fishermen them-selves, the Christians. The fish merchants would buy up thesurplus of fish which the town was not capable of consuming,and they sent it to Warsaw.19There «fere itx or seven merchants who would bargain forthe right to purchase fish from Radzi%#ell*s lakes. TheChristians %fould catch the fish there, end the Jewish mer.chants %fould send them to Warsaw. This %faB not an easybusiness, but it was profitable.Xn Oavid-Horodok there were a large group of drivers whowould go throughout the land with their %fagonB from David-Horodok to Finsk, Minsk, Vilna, Brody and Odessa.As in other towns, they 'were organised in Oavid-Horodokinto a "eong^ny", and they %forked in partnerships. Alongwith other Folesye teamsters, they participated in the fastthat they decreed at the opening of the Folesye railroadline in 1888.Incidentally, it is important to emphasise that thedevelopment of the railroads bypassed David-Horodok to thisday. To this day, the town has no rail connection. Thenearest train station is at Lakve on one side, 25 kilometersfrom David-Horodok, and on the other side Horln-staline,over 30 kilometers from David Horodo<.Xn 1898, a group of five drivers organised and purchaseda small steamboat called "Vienna** which shuttled back andforth between David-Horodok and Nirtcha, delivering David-Horodok passengers to the large steamships shuttling betweenFinsk and Kiev. Hot all the drivers %»ere trustwortt^ enoughfor this business, and most of them abandoned the partnership.The first years, the drivers who purchased the steamboatcontinued to %rork with horses In the winter. Gradually thebusiness developed; they sent another steamboat to Stalineand Gorlne; and they completely abandoned their previousvocation. later Finsk Jews Joined the partnership, and astcasboat link was established bet%reen Finsk and David-Horodok.World War Z did not disturb the steanboaters, and after-%#ards, when David-Horodok %ient over to Fcland, they succeededin returning the steamboats which were left in the Russianrivers.After the war, when the Ukraine was shut off due to thenew Soviet-Folish border, the development possibilitiesbecame somewhat reduced, and there remained only the cruiseroutes of David-Horodok - staline and David-Horodok - Finsk.The existence of the steamboaters was secured by these tworoutes.After the world war, as automotive transportation dev-eloped, a larger group of teamsters organised, purchased aauto, and began plying over the route between David-Horodokand Gorine. This time however, the venture %ras unsuccessful.20The two reasons for this %^re the rapid deterioration ofthe auto because of the poor Polesye roads, and the hugetaxes imposed by the government.The Davld-Horodok teamsters %mre well organised. They«rere divided into two groups. One group, which worked inthe town, transported the wares arriving on the steamboatsto the businesses and %farehouses, and the second groupwould travel to the train stations at Lakve and Staline,and in the winter they would also travel to Pinsk. They allwozked in partnership, and they would divide up theirearnings each %reek.It was not an easy way to earn a living, but, with fewexceptions, it was a respectable trade, and a few of themwere well-to-do.CraftsmenDavid-Horodok %^e a town with many craftsmen who workedindependently. There was no special item produced thatwas characteristic of David-Horodok. However, having apopulation of 10,000 souls and many surrounding villages,there was room for a variety of tradesmen who earned arespectable liv^ihood working for the populace.The major trades of the David-Horodok craftsmen were asfollows!Tailors who were divided into two categories: those whoworked for the Christian population on order or preparedfinished products for shipment to the fairs in the town andthe nearby villages, and those who fashioned finer thingsfor the Jewish population.Shoemakers, who worked only for the Jews and for a fewChristians. The Christian populace %ms provided with bootschiefly by Christian shoemakers who sold their products notonly to the local Christians but also throughout the entireland.Blacksmiths and lodcsmithsvtowoxked mainly for the peasantfarmers. They would repair %fagons, forge plows and axes,and make a variety of other tools for construction %7ork inthe town.The greatest nxamber of craftsmen were in constructionwork. These %reret architects, carpenters, bricklayers,glaziers, painters and roofers.21Jews also found vorX in ahlp-bullding. However, the naj-orlty of ahip-bullders %fere Christian.There were a few who had two trades, one in summer andone in winter.These were the trades in David-Horodok until the outbreakof wor^d War Z.There were a number of strata amongst the tradesmen. There%#ere some who %fere quite well-to-do, others who barely hadenough to exist, and the great majority who led a modest butsecure and respectable living.The Villages Around David-HorodokDavid-Horodok was surrounded by many villages populatedby Jews until World War I. These Jews existed from workingand dealing with the local peasant populace. It is notcertain how long these villages were in existence. We havehistorical knowledge concerning only two of these villages,that is Alshon whcih was founded by 0\ice Url Alshanski whoruled in Plnsk from 1447 lo 1492, and Alpln which was namedafter a Lithuanian boyer (aristocratic landowner) who ruledin Polesye in 1341.Jews began to settle in these villages after the freeingof the peasants. In general, the village Jews led an unas-suming life. Their living standards were not much higherthan the local peasant populace. The Jews' main concern wasto satisfy the religious and educational needs of theirchildren. Even with the smallest number of families, thevillage Jews would make every effort to keep a teacner forthe children.Some sent their children to learn in to%m. For a timebefore the outbreak of World War I, the number of Jews inthe villages began to diminish. The youth did not want toremain in the village. They %»ere impressed by the town.The outbreak of World War I accelerated the tempo of migra-tion of Jews from village to town.The Jewish population was eonpletely dissolved in the fol-lowing villagest Mirtcha, Chvarsk, Holatz, Liadetz, Bekaisk,Great Aril and Viallamitch. Jews remained in the followingvillages: Alshon, Ramla, Karamsk, Little Aril, samihostitch,Tarablitch, Jkzdamitch, Mallshav, Karatitch, Talmatchav, Ludka,Kalk and Kapun. Understandably, their number was somewhatdiminished after World War I.22There was hardly any change In the number of Jews in Alpinwhich %iras considered a suburb of David-Horodok. The villageRublye had a Jewish population like that of a small town.Just before World War I there were 60 families with a rabbiand two study-houses. There was an oarganired and Zionisticyouth movement. The Pioneer Organization was very strongthere, and the first Pioneer Organization convention inPolesye was held in Rublye in 1924. The youth, seeing nofuture in the village, began leaving. The largest numberstade aliyah to Israel. Thanks to this, there is now in Israela reasonably large number of Rublye Jews.The above description of the economic structure of David-Horodok until World War I shows us that the town did not haveany really %#ealthy men among the merchants nor any reallypoor among the laterers. In general, living standards werenot high, and their demands not very great.S\immer in the town was G[uiet. The majority of the Christ-ians were occupied in the fields, and the Jewish merchantswere on the rivers. The tradesmen would work in the villages.In such a manner, the tOM^ was at a standstill in the sunvner.In the fall things began to liven up. The fairs wouldbegin. The peasants would bring their surplus produce intotown, and purchase their needs for the winter. The berlirraswould arrive fron the Ukraine with flour, salt and availetyof food articles which they sold in and around the town.The lumber merchants and watermen would arrive in order toconfirm the arrangements of prior years, and to acquire newbusiness. The Christian townspeople would also come beforewinter and buy supplies. Winter was for them the season ofmarriage. All of this revived the town and its business.If the winter was normal and the byways (both %^ter and land)established in the right time, the lumber industry would bestrongly revived, and it was a great source of income forthe town.That is the way David^orodok carried on a normal exist-ence until the outbreak of World War I which shook up thewell established living patterns.David-Horodok in the Years of World War IThe outbreak of World War I had an umsually seves effecton the town. The mobilizatinn, which called up a large partof the population, the cry of those families separated ^the mobilization, the new martial law, the requisitioningof numerous wagons and horses for the needs of war- were allindications that it was taking on an ominous character."Experts" were predicting that the war would not last morethan two or three months, but everyone was nevertheless upset.The effect wee particularly oppressive because, sincethe times Chmielnitslcl, the town could remember no war.The Swedish lypassed David-Horodok• Napoleon'saxmies never saw David-Horodok? people in the town scarcelyheard of the Russlan-Turkish war? and the same is true inthe time of the Russian-Japanese %rar.At first, after those mobilised had gone off for mill-tary training,the town did not feel the effect of war sostrongly. Only later, when the Russians had begun wreakingdestruction on the Galician front, %ras the entire horrorof %rar felt.The head-commander Nikolai Mikoliovitch gave an orderthat the Jews in the provinces of Suvallk, Lublin and ChelmBiust leave their homes in 24 hours. Hungry, naked andunfortunate refugees fled thxoxigh Davld-Horodak. Lookingon helplessly at the Jewish refugees had a shocking effecton the Davld-Horodck Jews. Understandably, an assistancecommittee was immediately organised, and the entire Jewishpopulation received the refugees wholeheartedly. They ac-comodated them in schools and private houses, and providedthem with clothing and food.At the same same time, evacuated Germans began passingthrough David-Horodok from the region of Volin. Thesehad been driven back by military force. They came toDavid-Horodok with their own %iragQns, and from there theytook boats on the river deeper into Russia. Waiting forthe boats, they loitered on the banks of the river in theto%m. This resulted in epidemi cs of disease which spreadto the townspeople.People began to thov up who were fleeing from Briskand Plnsk. Some David-Horodok Jews began looking aroundfor evacuation routes. The Slonlmer Rebbe and a few otherfamilies actually left. Many families bought horses andvragons from the atreating Germans and prepared for dapartuxe.Others drove to Pinsk with the purposeful intention ofstaying with the Germans so as to avoid being mobilizedinto the military.The front came even closer. Panic increased. Cossacksappeared in the town. They took down the bells from thechurches so that they wouldn't fall into the hands of theGermans. At night, cannon shelling could be heard.However, the Germans, having taken Pinsk on September 16,1916, stayed there. Subsequently, almost a month passed,and the front had not moved. As the fall rains and mudcame, they began to realize in David-Horodok that the frontwould not move during the winter, and they grad\ially beganto adjust to ths situation.24This was not greeted happily by the Davld-Horodokevacuees. These Jews, who had bought horses and wagonsfrom the German refugees In order to have something toevacuate with, sold them back. They became accustomedto the nearness of the front. The psesence of militarygarrisons in the town gave a fresh source of income. Theyhad profitable dealings with them, and the economic sit-uation improved considerably.This situation continued for over a year until early1917 when the Kerenski revolution broke out.Even the remote areas far from the center of Davld-Horodok felt the new refreshing winds that began blowingin distant Petersburg. Prom mouth to mouth, in the still-ness, with eyes gleeunlng expectantly, the rumors werespread that the hated czarist regime was toppling. Jewssilently prayed that it should be true. Then came theinformation that some duke had poisoned Rasputin inPetersburg, and that the royal court was turbulent. Onewaited from day to day for fresh news. Mo-one yet believedthat the dream would come true. Was it possible that en-trenched hundreds of ySars old czarism could come apazt?Was this not an empty dream?Then came surprising news. The uncensored Russiannewspaper that came to town rep>orted that Czar Nicolaihad abdicated his throne in favor of his son.It was not to be believed, one was afraid to talk ofit aloud for fear that it might turn out to be a lie.Then something happened in town which showed everyonethat the previous information %ras correct. The royalrepresentative in town, Avtchenikov, went out into themarketplace, and, in front of everyone, he tore off theepaulets from his uniform.It is impossible to describe the great Joy that encom-passed all of Russia. Understandably, the re Jsicing vaseven more among the Jews who freely opened the gates oftheir towns and offices for all citizens. The firsthoneymoon of the Russian revolution in the beginning of1917 gave reason to believe that they %fere standing onthe threshold of a new epoch of equality, friendship andbrotherliness between the common people and the landowners,and that, under the wings of this revolution, there ccttldfreely develop in greater Russia the economies and culturesof the numerous national minorities.25There was great enthusiasm and tremendous rejoicing as theywaited to celebrate the international workers holiday- thefirst of May in David-Horodok.May 1, 1917 in David-HorodokThe preparations for the holiday %iere in full swing, afirst of May committee was established jointly between jewsand Christians. A special delegation was sent out to theHussar cavalry regiment, which was stationed not far fromDavid-Horodok. in order to invite them with their orchestrafor the holiday. The plan envisioned that the orchestra%fould play Marseillaise andHatikvah at the celebration.However, it turned out that the orchestra did not have themusic for either of the two hymns. The musician VelvelKrapal came to the rescue. He wrote out the notes forHatikvah. Thanks to the help of the old 1905 revolutlon-aries. the notes of ^ Marseillaise veze also put together.In truth, that which the orchestra then played was not verysimilar to Za Marseillaise. However, the proper feeling%ias there, and everyone understood that it %ras supposed tobe ^ Marseillaise.The day of the first of May %^s a full holiday in town,and everyone participated.The first demonstration occured in church. Jews, whowould usually pass the hill on which the church sto^ witha certain anxiety, went Inside freely with red flags.There the ceremony was led by a Christian. Misha Tukin.Thanks to the revolution, he was freed from prison where hewas serving a fifteen year term.Leaving the churchy a small incident occured. An oldpeasant woman stood on the small bridge leading to thechurch and screamedi "Enjoy yourselves; enjoy yourselves;you will yet seek and beg our father Nikolai that he comeand restore order for you." Needless to say. they quicklytook her away and had a good laugh.From the church, they went on to the synagogue. Therethe demonstration encountered Rabbi Ravinski with torahscrolls. He invited the general and the officers inside.The orchestra played the Marseillaise and Hatikvah. Therabbi gave a sermon, and he pledged. among~other thingsin the name of the Jewish people, that together %rith allthe peoples of Russia, they would wage war against the out-side enemy until final victory. He added that all theyouth who had not volunteered to serve in the military ofNikolai's regime would now willingly go into the army.After the street demonstration, there follovnad a recep-tion for the officers. They prepared lunch and, after eat-ing, there was dancing to the sound of the military orches-tra.For the first time in the history of David-Horodok,Jewish girls danced with Russian officers.In the evening there was a solemn convocation. Zn thename of the Jews, Anshel Zeitchik appeared. He was not aDavid-Horodoker, but he happened to be there as a guest ofhis relatives. He gave an inspired talk concerning thegreat friendship and brotherliness between peoples whichth«^> revolution had engendered. He then kissed the gentileYasif Anashka who stood next to him. This made a tremendousimpression on all the onlookers. Many people wept with joyMay 1, 1917 was the happist day in the entire history fthe Jewish community in David-Horodok. The dream was beingrealized that "the wolf would dwell with the lamb" - actuallythe time of the Messiah.Who would have believed then, that in 25,years, in the earlyautumn of 1941, that same Yasif Anashka and all the Horod-tchukas who were onlookers at that meeting, would takesadistic Joy and pleasure in sending to the slaughter theirJewish neighbors with whom they had lived for hundredsof years.In those days, there was a strong development of Zionisticand communal activities in David-Horodok. This will bedescribed in another chapter. It should be mentioned thateconomic conditions had improved somewhat. Jews could moveabout freely, and there was no Job shortage.The honeymoon of the revolution quickly passed and greyreality arrived. The front had not moved. The war hadbecome sickening and ugly. All of Kerenski's offensives hadfailed. The people were tired and %«nted to more war. Thearmy was becoming increasingly denozalijsad. Soldiers ap>-peared in town and began selling revolvers, rifles and evenmachine guns. The Bolsheviks drove out the constituentassembly and seized power.The situation in the town became unstable. There was nofirm power in David-Horodok, and, in the meantime, every’thincwas done by the system of the prior regime.27Zn the autumn of 3 918, The Germans entered the to%rn. Theyunited David-Horodok to the Ukraine. This did not cause anysignificant change in the economy of David-Horodok becausethe tovm %ni8 already economically bound to idev and theUkraine. They felt a little more secure with the Germans,and they began to do business with them, making some gooddeals. The German rule over David-Horodok did not last long.A revolution had Iroken out in Germany, and the German mil-itary began leaving the Ukraine.Zn the Ukraine, there appeared Patlura and his bands, andpogroms began against the Jews. However, the Patluraviansbypassed David-Horodok. Zndeed, one day a group of Dombro-vitt gentiles, who called themselves Patluravians, showedup in town, but then they quickly left.The town remained without governing authority. Traincommunication became Irregular and dangerous. Many Davld-Horodokers were stranded in various Ukrainian towns andwere unable to return home. All business came to a stand -still, and there %^s no available work.Lakve, on one side, was occupied by the Germans, staline,on the other side was occupied by the Patluravians. OnlyDavid-Horodok was without a government. The town affairswere managed at the municipal court with the aid of severalpolicemen,Zt should be noted that there were no assaults or theftsin the town. The municipal affairs were concerned withstraightening out land disputes bet%^een the peasants, re-cording land sales, giving out birth certificates, marriagecontracts or divorce decrees for the Christians. The Jewstook care of all these formalities with the rabbi.Characteristic of the times was an original punishmentwhich the court authority of those days Imposed on a Oavid-Horodoker Jew named Berl Elsenberg for not obeying the law.They caught him driving Illegal whiskey. Zn those unsettledtimes, even that law was obeyed in David-Horodok. The pun-ishment was as followst they hung the kettles in which hedistilled the whiskey on his shoulders, and a town gentilenamed Adam Pavuk went in front beating on a dnm as theyled him through all the streets of the town to the laughterof all the residents.Zn this manner the town led a quiet existence, a calmisland in a stormy sea of %far. The affairs between Jewsand Christians in the town %fere peaceful and normal.28This calm did not last long. The Bolshevik militaryforces captured Lachve and Luninlatz, and then somethingoccured that shocked and interrupted the idyll of David-Horodok. The leaders of the town, both Christian andJewish, then made a blunder for which the town paid dearlyboth in human and material sacrifices.The Punishment ExpeditionThe Bolshevik military detachment in Luniniatz sent outa group of soldiers into the surroxmding area to requisitionfood for the troops. They also came to David-Horodok. InVisake, four kilometers from David-Horodok, there %^re herdsof cattle belonging to the landlords which the Bolshevikswanted to requisition.Until today it is impossible to understand what provokedthe Horodtchukas to set up resistance against the Bolsheviks,and, even more unbelievable, why the Jews then stood alongside the resistance.It is, however, a fact that they organized a defense.They went to the priest and convinced him that he shouldring the church bells and persuade the gentiles to Join theresistance and not allow the removal of the cattle herdsfrom the town.The rationale for the resistance was as follows: if theywould allow the removal of the landlord's cattle today, thentomorrow private cattle would also be taken.The Jews, and e6F>ecially their youth, helped organizethe resistance, with Joint effort they actually succeededin their opposition and prevented the removal of the cattle.Some shots were exchanged by the two sides, and, as a result,one of the Christian members from Ravkom named Dennis waskilled, and one soldier was wounded.They foresaw that the Bolshevik military power vrouldreact on learning of the events. There was a wrarlike mood.They removed the bridge on the road to Chuvarsk, erectedbarricades, and they waited for the enemy. At the same time,they sent a delegation to Stallne where Patlurovians%fere stationed and asked them for help. However, the Patlur-ovians could give no help since they themselves %»ere prepar-ing to retreat.The author of this chapter and his brother were in Lunin-iatz at that time, running a restaurant. They were acquain-ted with the staff that had sent the squad of soldiers torequisition the cattle. The staff knew that the brothers29were from Davld-Horodok, and they came to inquire as towhat sort of town it was.They could not understand what reason the Jews had tooppose the Bolsheviks. In those days It really was madness.Indeed the Bolsheviks had ruined the economy of the Jewishmiddle class, but they %rere also the only ones who foughtagainst antisemitism and against all the gangs that carriedout antioJewish pogroms. In those days there were thousandsof Jews who joined the Red Army in order to fight againstthese gangs.The staff in Lunlniatz was manned by some very competentstudents from Great Russia who had no feelings of antiseml.tlsm. There were also Jews on the staff. Thanks to theseJews, the town came out reasonably well. Under the circum-stances there eould have been many more casualties.They sent a strong disciplinary detachment of soldierswith cannon to David-Horodok. Understandably, the townquickly surrendered, and the youth fled. The punitive exped-ition entered the city. The soldiers were given free reinto take anything they wanted except naturally not to layhands on the people. That was the exclusive right of thecommandant and the political commisar who happened to be aJew.Three Davld-Horodoker residents were executed by thepunitive expedition in proportion to the population - twoChristians and one Jew. Baytzl Yudovitch. Besides this, theyemptied out the town. They took out everything that wasmovaHe. At that time there were large food reserves in townthat had been brought in from the Ukraine over the sximmer.This was all requisitioned. They even took good shoes rightoff people's feet. The David-Horodoker people were forcedto take all their requisitioned things themselves to thetrains at Lakve and Lunlniatz.The destruction was great, especially the needless sacri-fice of B. Yudovitch who was a well known personage, thevictim of a foolish poorly conceived action which was not inthe interest of the Jews.The death sentence was carried out in the Christian ceme-tery. and that is where they buried B. Yudovitch. A fewweeks later in Lunlniatc. the author extracted permissionfrom the military to bury the martyr in a Jewish cemetery.This is how David-Horodok paid for trying to resist theauthorities. After this episode, the town was put on theblacklist of the Bolsheviks, and the Horodtchukas became thedeadly enemies of the Bolshevik regime^The Bolshevik authority %ras strengthened in the region.However, the economic situation deteriorated. The town wasImpoverished. There were no business opportunities and no%for)c. People began suffering fr«n hunger. They %#ent out tothe villages to swap clothing for food. The peasants wouldaccept only gold as currency. A pood of grain was acquired%rith the greatest difficulty.At that time they began organizing cooperatives. Theyacquired parcels of land, and they planted it themselves withrye and potatoes. There was no lack of land.The Bolshevik authority then declared a mobilization. It%ias rumored that the Poles were not far away, and thereforeno-one wanted to be far from home. In order not to go intothe military, one could volunteer for forest labor in siankav-itch. This work freed one from military service. Hundredsof David-Horoddcer youth volunteered for this %rork in whichthey produced firewood for the trains.However, in one month the Bolsheviks evacuated, and thePoles entered Davld-Horodok.1920-192It David-Horodok Passes from Hand to HandWith feelings of dread and fear, the Davld-Horodok Jewsreceived the Poles. Rumors regarding the behavior of thePolish military, particularly the Holertchikas. towards theJews and the prior reports of a pogrom in Lemberg, gave themreason to be very worriod. The sad and shocking news arrivedthat the Poles had groundlessly shot 35 innocent young Jewsin Pinsk. Even though under the Bolsheviks life was verydifficult and they were half-starved, they looked toward theirnew future with dread.The Poles entered David-Horodok. The Jews could barelylook up at them. The regime of the town was very harsh. Firstof all, they condemned to death a Jew named ^rapivkin who wasthe head of the town's professional union under the Bolsheviks.People were seized for forced labor, organizational and Zionistactivities ceased. Fear enveloped the entire town.A little later the regime became somewhat siilder. They hadbegun to receive protests from America rigarding the persecutionof Jews. Morgenthau came to Pinsk on a fact-finding mission,and an investigating commision arrived. The persecution dimin-ished for awhile.David-Horodokers began to accustom themselves to the new life.The frontier was more distant - as far as Kiev. It becamepossible to communicate with Pinsk. They slowly began to dobusiness. The chief item of trade was salt. With this item31they determined the worth of all other articles of trade. Onepood of aalt was exchanged for three poods of rye.A link «iae established with America. Delegates came withhelp* The "giant* became active. An American committee wasformed which distributed goods and clothing to the poor. Priorto Pesach. the committee received flour for making matsa. andthe sfatra was then distributed to the people. The schools wereopened, organisational life began to develop. An orphanage%fas established. However, this did not last long. In the earlysummer of 1921. the oir was once again filled with powder.The Poles suffered a stunning defeat near Kiev and began a rapidretreat.Then began nightmare filled days for the Jews of David-Horodok. Day and night for two consecutive weeks, retreatinggroups of Polish soldiers passed through the town. People wereafraid to go into the streets. Eventually the Poles burneddown the bridge and were left on the other side of the river.That was the worst day. In the courr of that day. the Polishsoldiers would cross over the river to loot the houses. Thingsfinally quieted down at nightfall. The Bolsheviks had arrivedat the outskirts of town, and they entered David-Horodok thefollowing morning.The Jewish population greeted the new authority with mixedfeelings. On the one hand, they were glad to be rid of thePolish authority which had revealed its anti-semi tic characterin the short span of its rule. They %rere particularly pleasedthat the tension of the past month had finally ended. However,on the other hand, the advent of the Red Army meant that David-Horodok %fas now cut off from the rest of the %iorld. The linkto America %ras broken, and the way was blocked to Eretz Israelwhere many of the youth had planned to Immigrate.Pood provisions, which had been sufficient under Polishrule, seemed to disappear overnight. The situation becamedifficult. Business came to a standstill, and there was no workavailable. Authority %ras in military hands. They began organ-ising cooperatives, but. in the meantime, most of the time wasspent in Metings. assemblies and concerts. What would theysay in David-Horodok? "They are poor and happy."However, before long and before one could look around, therecams news of the Red Amy defeat near Warsaw. Things againbecame unsettled. The Red Army began a rapid retreat. Therewas tremendous chaos.The Jewish populace became terrified when they heard thatamongst the first detachments of the advancing Polish army was theBalakovtzes. This was a Russian military group from the "White"army under the leadership of General Bulak Balakovltch whichfought alongside the Polish military against the Red Army.32Retreating with Polish military from Kiev, they laacame in-famous for the terrible massacres that they committed on theJewish population of Volin.The Bolsheviks retreated from DavidoKorodok during theintermediate days of Succos. 1921, and a detachment of BulakBalakovitch's troops entered the town on the night of HoshanaRabba.There was great terror. The youngsters and particularlythe women hid themselves, and no>one «fanted to go out in thestreet. A few of the bolder ones who tried to go outride quick-ly returned indoors terrified. The Balakovtses were scornedwith plumed hats embroidered with deaths-heads, and they ranabout the streets like greedy beasts. The first ones to beassaulted were Rabbi Dudle and Motle the shopkeeper who hadgone early S^ini Atteres morning to pray at the synagogue.Afterwards they Wgan to pillage the houses and beat up theJews.By noon, a larger number of troops had arrived in town,and they were quartered in Jewish homes. The Jews catered tothem, hoping that they would prevent the other soldiers fror-entering and looting them. In many houses, that was the case.There were other homes, however, where the soldier would ini-tially look around to see what was in the house, and, on de-parture, he would either himself or send other soldiers toremove all the valuables.The last night that they were in town before going to thefront was particularly severe. There were many casualtiesthat night. Several women were raped and many Jewish homespillaged.The few weeks with the ^lakovtzes in town were a terriblenightmare for the Jewish popuTace. They tried to associatethemselves with the Polish military authority, but the fewPolish officers in town either would not or could not help.In those %feek6 the situation %«ould change from time to time.Several times military detachments passed through David-Horodokwho were former Red army soldiers that had been captured bythe Poles. They had willingly enlisted in Balakaviteb's armyfor the sole purpose of returning home. These detachmentswere %fell behaved.The staff of Balakavitch*s army* with Bulak Balakavitchat the head, passed through David'Horodok. When the David-Borodoker Jews complained to him about the belavior of hissoldiers, he replied that he had ordered that civilians shouldnot be harmed, but that he could not be held responsible inthis town where there were many Jewish communists who were thefoes of the soldiers.93When the last remnants of Balakevitch's army had left townand the Polish troops were supposed to enter, they thoughtthat the nightmare was over. Unfortunately, it was destinedthat the Davld-Horodoker Jews «fould have to endure a deaththreat which they would only commute by paying a large ransom.When the last of Balakavitch*s anry had left David-Horodok,a small detachment of their cavalry returned, rode over toRabbi Ravinskl and arrested him along with several more Jews.They demanded a payment of 100,000 rubles within two hoxirs.Zf not, they %#ould shoot everyone. The rabbi %fas freed so thathe could collect the money and valuables.It was horrible to see how the rabbi had to go over thestreets with two sacks hanging from either side and pleadingwith tears that everyone should give as much as he could. TheJews began bringing golden rings, chains, watches and whateverthey had. With this they vrere ransomed from the hands of thebandits.The OavldoHorodoker Jews later experienced a special boostin their morale. The Balakevtzes. having advanced further,suffered a defeat, and verf forced to retreat. However, atthat time the Riga peace treaty was signed, and the Polish-Soviet border was established bet%iwen Turov and Davld-Horodck.At the border the Poles disarmed the retreating Balakevtres.Without weapons they passed through David-Horodok on the wayto concentration camps. The Jews went out into the streetsespecially to laugh and mock at those bandits.With that ended the sorrowful chapter of that gang whichhad caused hundreds of Jewish casualties, and had economicallyruined thousands of Jewish families.Under Polish Rule (1921-1939)After the Riga treaty, David-Horodok %me situated withinthe borders of Poland. The border passed through the town ofMalishov, 20 kilometers from town. The economic situation lirasvery difficult. The town had been pillaged by the Balaktvttesand had been impoverished by the war. The Poles instituteda severe martial law in the town. No-one was allowed on thestreets after eight o'clock in the evening. It was forbiddento leave town without a special permit. Because of the newnessof the border, the movements of the people were restricted.The town had been torn away from the Ukraine with %rhich it waseconomically bound . Because of the conditions of martial law,it «ras difficult to adapt to the new life.34After about half a year, the regime became more lenient,and life became somewhat easier. They could move aore freely,and it was easier to get about. The "giant" began its reliefactivities. Delegates came from America who, among otherthings, brought help from American relatives for David-Horodokerinhabitants. They also helped in the immigration processfor those families whose fathers and husbands had alreadypreceded them to America.There began a great stream of immigration. After survivingthe horrors.of the war, they did not want to remain in David-Horodok. At first the immigration stream went to America.Afterwards, when it was more difficult to get into America,they %#ent to Canada, Cuba and Argentina. They went whereverthey were allowed. A pioneer group was also formed to immigrateto Eretz Israel. However, because of events in Eretz Israelin T55T7 the ally a was halted, and the group remained TrTDavid-Horodok.The economic situation gradually began to improve. ThePolish mark became devaluated, and goods became more expensivefrom day to day. Almost everyone began business dealing.Shops grew like mushrooms after a rain. They began to earn"millions".That is the way things were until there was stabilizationof the Polish currency. The worthless marks could not be ex-changed for full-valued Polish zloti. The orgy %ras over. Allthe new merchants were forced out of business, and it becamedifficult to earn a groschen. To this was added the well knowntax system of the then Polish finance minister Grobskl, wholevied on the Jewish merchants and craftsmen an impossiblyhigh tax which Impoverished them.In the meantime, organizational and political life developedin the town. They established political parties, youth move-ments, cultural societies and charitable institutions. TheJewish people of David-Horodok, and especially the youth,threw themselves into these tasks with fiery zeal and exception-al devotion. They established a Habrew Tarbus (culture) publicschool which in time became one of the best in Poland. Theyestablished banks such as the Public Bank and the Merchant'sBank. They developed an excellent orphans' committee which gaverise to multi-faceted activities. They founded libraries,sports clxibs, drama circles, etc. However, %ie will not dwellanymore on all these institutions, as we will describe them inmore detail in later chapters.After the Pilsudski upheaval, conditions began to stabilize.The Jews led a more or less quiet existence. They could earna llvlihood from commerce and handicrafts. However, life wasmonotonous and uninteresting.35Hitler's coming to power in Germany served to intensifythe anti-semitism in Poland. In Polish towns, there werepogroms against Jews. They began Wating Jewish students.There was instituted the new infamous avshem politics (boycottpolicy) in economic life. This policy was to boycott Jewishbusinessmen, shops, handcraftsmen and factories. In David-Horodok, several Poles were imported to open up shops and com-pete with the Jews, The air was saturated with primitive anti-semitism. Yet this anti-semitism was not expressed in as vivida form in David-Horodok as it %ra8 in other Polish towns. Thisis explained by the fact that the Poles constituted only 5-10percent of the population in David-Horodok, while the remaining90-95 percent %rere Jews and Belorussians, the Horodtchukas. whoalso felt abused by the Polish authority. Despite the calm inthe town, the Jews felt quite alarmed.The conditions of the youth seemed particularly hopeless. Thosewho could, took every possible way out of town, host of themmade aliya to Eretr Israel. The majority of the town's youthcould not make allya because of immigration restrictions, andthey saw no way to get themselves out.The Jews waited for better times, not knowing and notbelieving that they would ever come. They were embitteredand full of hate for the anti-eemitic Polish authority.Meanwhile, the danger of a Polish-German war approachedwith giant steps. After Hitler's friendship gesture to Poland,and with his poisoning the atmosphere in Poland with the spiritof anti-semitism, he diverted the attention of the Poles awayfrom the true danger that was approaching them. He then beganto make his territorial demands in Poland.The danger of war came closer from day to day, hour to hourand minute to minute. The Jews felt like they were living \x)der ablack cloud. They forgot their previous score with the Poles.They put themselves in the service of the Polish government inorder %o fight land in hand against the common enemy.On September 1, 1939, Friday morning. Hitler's troopsinvaded Poland. The Jewish people of Poland, amongst them theJews of David-Horodok, stood and fought the Nazi enemy.The sad ending of the Jewish community in David-Horodokapproached.We %rill now interrupt the chronologic narrative of eventsin Dsvid-Horodok and take it up again at the end of this work.Now we will return to describe the political, organizationaland cultural institutions in the town in the time between thetwo world wars.Polit.ical, Cultural and Organizatonal Institutions in David-KorodoXThe Zionist MovementDavid-Horodok was pro-Zionist since the times of theHoveve Zion (Lovers of Zion). As mentioned previously, thetown was under the influence of Lithuanian Jewry. The haskala(enlightenment) movement came to David-Horodok from there atthe end of the 19th century. The Zionist movement also camefrom there.Peretz Smolenskin"s Wanderer Through Life and Abraham Ifapu'sLove of Zion and The Guilt of Samaria adorned the shelves ofbavid-Horodoker households along side the TAl>*iud,They read the Hebrew press in David-Horodck. They collectedand bound The Dawn. Nahum Sokolov's Friday evening articleswere not only read but also studied. They also tried to educatethe younger generation in the spirit of Zionism. For thatpurpose, they brought the best teachers to David-Horodok whointroduced classes where they taught Hebrew by speaking Hebrew.After World War I, there were youth circles in which theyspoke Hebrew exclusively. In 1915, the youth of David-Horodoktook the initiative and arranged an illegal memorial servicefor Dr. Herzl.Keren Kayemes (Jewish National Fund) stamps were sold atDavid-Horodok weddings as soon as they came out. ShimonLaichtman and Shlomo Razman would come to every wedding andsell these stamps.The eve of Yom Kipur they would sit in every synagoguewith a collection plate for the National Fund. Whoever donated25 kopecks had his neune inscribed in a special book. TheSlonimer Rebbe used to donate a ruble.Because of the war and the czarist regime, it was difficultto develop diversified Zionist activities. However, undervarious pretexts, they would hold assemblies and celebrationson a variety of Zionist themes.Vigorous Zionistic activity began after the Kerenskirevolution in February, 1917. It was as if they had been in alethargic sleep of latent energy, and they wanted to make upthe lost years of inactivity by throwing themselves intoZionist activities with wholehearted seal and energy, filledwith the hope and belief in the great possibilities that theRussian revolution promised for the Jewish people. The entirepopulation of the town became involved in organizational andpolitical activity. It was a disgrace not to be associatedwith a party. It was as if they forgot their worries aboutlivlihood and existence in their preoccupation with party work.17With all their zeal, they threw themselves into the electioncampaign for the constituent assembly that was taking place inJtussia. They set up the Jewish communal organization, openeda large Hebrew school, founded a library, established coop>era>tives, and they were active in every realm of town and commun*Ity life.Organizational life quieted down when the Bolsheviks seizedpower. However, as soon as the Germans entered David-Horodok,Zionist activities resumed. At that time, news arrived of theBalfour Declaration which encouraged Zionist activities evenmore.However, this did not last long. The Germans retreated;the Bolshevils re-entered; and once again all the Zionist workcame to a halt.Following the stormy period of the Polish-Bolshevik war andafter a civil government was installed, there was renewedintensification of Zionist activities.The first visit from the Keren Hayesod (Foundation Fundof the Zionist Organization) represeotative Dr. Haimzun in 1923,was transformed into a magnificent demonstration for Zionism.The campaign for the Keren Hayesod was conducted by the entireJewish population of David-Horodok. There was not a singleJewish family, even the poorest, which did not support theKeren Hayesod.The visit by the Jewish National Fund representative, Y.Manuch from Degania, made an even stronger impression. Thetown was ruled hy a complete holiday atmosphere. No smallthing, a delegate from Israeli People were curious to have alook at him. They wanted to see what a real Jewish farmerlooked like. An extraordinary enthusiasm had seized the inhab-itants of the town. The Jews in David-Horodok were then simplybreathing in the air of Israel. The visit of Y. Kanuch hadstrengthened the Jewish spirit and consciousness. This wasthe first direct contact with a Jewish farmer from Israel,and it gave feelings of coxurage, national pride and self-worthto the Jews of David-Horodok.Through the visit of Y. Manuch, a "troop** of the KerenKayemas was organized in town. It existed until the outbreakof World War 11, and it conducted widely ramified activitiesfor the Beren Kayemes. They gathered Zionists from all direc-tions, young an3oT37At that time, they had begun aliya to Israel. The pioneersthat left David-Horodok Included entire families, ouch as A.Y.Shafer, Noah Granadier, A. Turkenitch, A. Shostokovski, L.Dushnlk, D. Rimar, A. Lakovski, S. Mastair, z. pyne and others.38With the onset of normal organisational life in David-Horodok,the political parties became active in the town. The first torenew their activity were the General Zionists and Ee*ireiZion (young Zionists). These were the principal parEi^s in townTuring the entire span between the two vars. They %»ere the mostinfluential, had the largest memberships and were the most active.When the General Zionists renewed their activity, they sealouslythrew themselves into multi-faceted enlightenment activities.They worked for the Keren Hayesod and the Keren Kayemes. Theyopened a new library which was not used during the Poli sh-Bolshevik war. They held frequent steetings and lectures. Theyassisted in the rise of the Tarbus schools in David-Horodok andlater also founded their youth movement Hashomer Hale• umi(National Watchmen), later called Hano*ar Haziorii (The ZionistYouth). The General Zioni^s took an active part in the variouselection campaigns in town, such ast election for the sejm.town council election, Jewish community council election, Zionistcongress election, etc. For a ^ort period of time there wasa training kibbutz of the Hano*ar Hazioni in the town. Thiswas run by a youth group from outside David-Horodok who had tospend their training period in David-Horodok. This trainingkibbutz did not last long, scarcely the one year of 1934,Because of a job shortage in the town. The youth from thiskibbutz went away to train in kibbutzim in other towns, and therethey waited for approval to make aliya.The General Zionists recruited mainly the well-to-do homeowners.The artisans, handcraftsmen, laborers and especially the youthconstituted the bulk of the Ze*irei Zion party.The Ze'irel Zion, just as the General Zionists, renewedtheir activities and regained their feet once normal livingconditions were established.The Ze'irel Zion was a party of the youth right from theonset, that is, its activists as well as its general membershipwere all young people between IB and 25 years of age. This gavetheir work a dynamism which was felt in every campaign.Pull of youthful seal and temperament, full of self-confidenceand youthful idealism, they threw themsebres into party work,and they strove to encompass ever widening circles, not allowingany realm of organizational life to pass without their Influenceand involvement.Lectures, assemblies, elections, night classes, Keren Kayemeswork, conferences, etc. - were their daily bread. The localwas filled every evening with members who were ready to do anysort of work that they were given. The Ze'irel Zion reallydeveloped a nice diversified group for ail realms oi organiza-tional life.39Ze*lrci Zion had great success In conducting a "tool"campaign in David Horodok. This was the first great demonstra-tion on behalf of the workers of Israel, and all gladly gavetools for the laborers of Israel.An especially selected comnission of Ze*irei Zion took onthe task of helping the pioneers who came out of the SovietUnion.Through the initiative of the 2e*irel Zion, the activitiesof the orphans' committee was renewed.In 1923 the Ze*Iral Zion founded the Ha^lutz (Pioneer),and in 1924 they established a training kibbutz in Lisavitch.In 1925 the Po'alei Zion (Zionist Workers) founded a lib-rary named after I. L. Peretz which developed very well bothin number of %iorthwhlle books and in nximber of readers. Inthe last few years before World War II, it was the only activelibrary in the town.The youth organization of the Po'alei Zion was Freiheit(Freedom). It was established by the party in 192S, and itdeveloped a nice educational function for the youth, helpingto teach vocational trades. At the same time they broughtmany of the youth to aliya.In 1931, the party organized the town handcraftsmen into agroup called Ha'oved (The Worker). Many members of Ha'ovedmade aliya to Israel.Unfortunately, the activities of the Po'alei Zion weresharply curtailed in the few years before the onset of WorldWar ZI because of the current reactionary fascist government.As an example, in the last kehila (Jewish assembly) electionin 1937, the list of Po'alei Zion candidates was cancelled.The most important Zionist work amongst the religiouspeople of Pavid-Horodok was done through the Mizrachi (orMerkaz Ruhani or Spiritual Center) and the Hapo'el Hamlzrachl(Workers of the Spiritual Center). In 1925 ihe Hapo'elHamizrachi founded a training kibbutz in Dabrin, and most ofthe sienJbers made aliya to Israel. Mizrachi and Hapo'elHamizrachi took an active part in working for the Keren K ayeme sand the Keren Havesod.In 1935, a party called Hataehad (The Union) was establishedin X>avid-KoSPdok. However, with the aliya of its foundingfathers to Israel, the group ceased to exist.Besides the above aientioned youth movements of Freiheit andHano'ar Hazioni. there were two other active Zionist youthmovements in David-Horodokt Hashomer Hatzair (Young watchman)and Betar (abbreviation for Berit Trumpeidor or Covenant ofTrumpeldor, the Revisionist Youth Movement).40The Hashomer Hatzalr was established in the town in 1927.They did a good Job ofeducating the youth of the town. Atthe same time, they %irere active in all aspects of Keren Kaye me s%»ork. They were involved in the League of Workers for EretrIsrael, and they took part in all of its activities. TheHashomer Hatzalr sent many members for training, and mostof them succeeded in making aliya.Betar was founded in David-Horodok in 1929. They also senttheir members for training, and most of them made aliya.As already mentioned, David-Horodok was an absolutely Zion-ist town. There was no Bund (General Jewish Workers Union inLithuania, Poland and Russia) in the town during the periodbetween the two world wars.As a result of the reactionary and anti-semitic policiesof the Polish regime and the bad economic and helpless situa-tion of the Jewish youth, there developed a small group ofCommunists in David-Horodok. Their number probably nevereven reached ten. They had no Influence in town. The groupwas completely dissolved after a few of them were arrested.Some of those who were freed from jail, later %fent to EretzIsrael. The others remained in David-Horodok but refrainedcompletely from Communistic activities. When the Sovietsfirst came into David-Horodok in 1939, they became involvedagain as Communist activists, and they caused considerabletrouble for the Zionist concerns. As a result of their denun-ciations to the N.K.G.B., many of the town Zionists vrerearrested.2. The Socialist Movement in David-Horodok in 1905Unfortunately we have no material to anUghten us about theyear 1905 in David-Horodok. We have no alternative but todraw on the memories of people who^had not even taken anactive part in the happenings of that stormy epoch.From these memoirs we learn that in 1905 a small group ofthe Bund was organized in David-Horodok under the leadershipof the %«ell-known A. Litvak, A Bundist who %ras rumoured tohave been banished to David-Horodok,There was also a group of Socialist Territorialists.Concerning this group, we even have a historical reference.In the American Porvairts (The Jewish American Forward), apicture was printed of 26 members ot the Davld-HorodokerSocialist Territorialists (the picture is printed in ourmemorial book). The Po*alei Zion party also existed in David-Horodok at that time.41According to the stories, all of these socialistic movementswere embraced by a great number of the youth. For a certainperiod, they %#ere the rulers of the town. They had developeda self •'defence organisation and had weapons. They demanded a12 hour work day. The laborers themselves did not want that*little" work, but the revolutionaries would come and forcethem away from their work. There %fere cases where the childrenrevolutionaries would come to their employer parents and takeaway the last workers. Aside from this, the revolutionaries%iere occupied with education and self-instruction.With the downfall of the revolution, all these organizationsdissipated in David-Horodok. Some individuals were arrestedand sent away. Many fled to America. The remainder left townduring the period of danger.In reference to this, it should be noted that after theKerenskl revolution of 1917, left over members of Po'alei Zionre-established their organization. All the old revolutionariesagain became very active and devotedly participated in the work.They tried to organize all the workers and sympathizers, andthey were very active.Their activity %ras widely diversified: organizing readings,night classes, drama circles, a library, cooperatives and mana-ging the professional movement.In those days the town was divided in two - the GeneralZionists and the Po'alei Zion. At the election of the constit-uent assembly in Russia, the General Zionists received 120 morevotes than the Pc *alei Zion, 740 to 620.With the turnover of Davld-Korodok to the Bolsheviks, thesituation changed. A few of the Po'alei Zion leaders Joined theBolsheviks. The great majority oiTtKe”leaders along with theentire membership did not follow them. They died off politics iiy.From the entire powerful Po'alei Zion organization of those days,there remains only memories.3. Cultural Institutions.AS indicated in a previous chapter, David-Horodok was cul-turally under the influence of Lithuanian Jewry. The Haskalah(enlightenment) movement had permeated the town in the lastcentury through the boys who had gone to Lithuanian yeshivasand especially throxjgh the Jewish merchants of Oavid-Horodokwho encountered in their travels the new winds blowing in thelarger Jewish centers. They %#ere also the ones who felt thattheir practices required that they give their children a broader,more general education than that given by the cheders and yeshivas.42To that purpose, I. Shaffer, I. Llpschitz and others broughtthe reknob/ned l.S. Adler to teach in X>avld-Horodok. He Intro-duced a new instructional system, and he laid the foundationfor a modern and Zionistic education.The other teachers in town attempted to adapt to the newtimes, and they began to teach Hebrew in Hebrew. These IncludedS. lAlchtman, S. Zagaradski and Y. Begun who were not the mosteminent of the Jewish instructors, but they were teachers whofelt that they had a nationalistic and Zionist mission to edu>cate a new Jewish generation. They %fere the carriers of Zionismin those days.The elders also tried to open a high school in town. Thiswas eventually opened as a government school. That was thetown school in the Russian language which did a good job inhelping the youth get into the Intermediate and higher instit-utions and thereby acc[uire a higher education.After the February revolution in 1917, a Hebrew school wasopened in David-Horodok under the directorship of the teacherManiavitch. With the assistance of the teachers I. Zaldin,R. Shaffer, I. Kashtan and I. Margolin, the school was establshedat a very high level. The school fulfilled a double purpose.It taught the children, and, at the same time, it was a centerfor Zionist activities and national consciousness.The Hebrew school existed until 1920. During the stormywar years when David-Korodok was passed from hand to hand, itwas impossible to carry on a normal educational system.After the Polish-Bolshevik war, when normal life was re-stored in the town, the first concern was to set up the school.In 1924, a Hebrew Tarbus (culture) school was founded anew underthe direction of R, Mishalov.There is not enough space in this book to fully detail theblessed activities of this Tarbus school in David-Horodok. Itstarted with three classes, and in time a seven class folks-school, one of the best in Poland. Until its closing in 1940,there were eleven ceremonies which graduated hundreds of children.It was not easy to strengthen the Tarbus school to a pointwhere it could stand safely on its own feet. The school didnot get any subsidy from the government or the municipal agencies.The various expenses of the school proper were laid on theshoulders of the parents of the students. The teaching personnelexisted only on their wages from tuition. Remembering thegrave poverty that ruled the town, we then begin to understandthe great difficulties with which the school struggled everymoment. It was a credit to the remarkable commitment of a groupof concerned Individuals in the town, to the loyalty of theteaching staff and to the national consciousness of the parents.43The parents were almost 100 per cent in sending their childrento the Tarbus school despite the fact that they had to paytuition, when at the town polish government school they wouldnot have had to pay a groschen. These three factors, theconcerned group, the teaching staff and the parents are res-ponsible for the existence and thriving of the Tarbus school.The second director of the school, the teacher AvreshaOlshanski, elevated the school to such a high level that itbecame one of the best Tarbus schools in all of Poland.After finishing the Tarbus seminar in Vilna, he first asteacher and later as director devoted his entire energy andtime to the school, leading it from year to year higher andhigher. He was the one who in 1931 founded the Bnei Yehudah(Sons of Judah) of Oavid-Horodok, the H^rew speaking youthof Poland.Afterwards the movement spread to other cities and towns inPoland, but nowhere was it treated more earnestly than inDavld-Horodok.It is worthwhile dwelling briefly on the Bnei Yehudahmovement in Davld-Horodok. It was begun through the initiativeof the director of the school, Avresha Olshanski. He persuadeoseveral school children that pupils of a Hebrew school whoplan on aliya to Eretz Israel ought to speak Hebrew not onlyin class but also at home and in the streets among themselves,with their parents, brothers, sisters, neighbors, friends,and, in a word, with everyone. From a small group of children,the movement spread to all the school children.A child who had Joined the Bnei Yehudah movement wasobligated to speak only Hebrew at home, in the street or inthe shop where he would b\jy a note pad or a book. A BneiYehudah would always speak Hebrew to a Jewish companion.Understandably, at first it was very^ifficult for the parentswho did not understand Hebrew, and it would often tax theirInterest long before the parents, the shopkeepers and thegrownups in the street began not only to understand Hebrew,but also began answering In Hebrew.Christian servants in Jewish homes also began to understandand speak Hebrew. Newborn children were taught Hebrew fromthe beginning.Once Davld-Horodok was visited by Yosef Barats. Before hecame to town, he had heard the %#onder of the *ial.Aviv ofPolesye* as David-Horodok was called because of the spokenHebrew. He could not believe that it %ms really true. Todemonstrate to him that it was true, they took him out intothe street. When he happened to meet a child, he would,address the child in Yiddish, expecting that the reply wouldalso be in Yiddish. No matter how many children he met,everyone replied in Hebrew.44A child who belonged to Bnei Yehudah always got a "5« (verygood) for his grade in Hebrew class, no matter how bright hewas otherwise.At first, the children organised a special intelligenceunit whose task it >vas to verify that the new members of theBnei Yehudah were keeping to their oaths to speak Hebrew ex-clusively. The intelligence officer %iould sneak into the newMmber'shone and lay under a bed for hours in order to ascertainthat the member was keeping his oath.The Tarbus school existed until the onset of World War II.When the Soviets entered David-Horodok in the end of September,Instruction th the school began once again but the language wasYiddish, not Hebrew.An unforgettable moment occured at the beginning of thatschool year. The director Abrasha Olshanski was forced, underthe dictate of a Communist activist who was himself a graduateof that school, to assemble all of the children. Sobbingspasmodically, he announced that the school would no longerteach Hebrew, only Yiddish. The Communist activist then gavea lecture that the children had been duped in the past. Hewanted to convince them that their Hebrew language was thelanguage of the Jewish counter-revolutionaries.Abrasha Olshanski until then had been the devoted and faith-ful father of the school, but now he could no longer bearteaching there. He could not ethically tolerate the change.He and his wife, who was also a teacher, moved to Bialystok wherethey found employment as instructors. There, in Bialystok, he,his wife and children met their death at the hands of the Nazimurderers.Through the initiative of the same A. Olshanski, a coursein Tanach (bible) was initiated. It went under the title of"Every Day a Chapter of Tanach". This course was intended forthe grown-ups in David-Korodok. These lectures %#ere extremelypopular* The course was attended mostly by the grown-up youthand the adults. The lectures would pack the large hall in theschool. The people who attended the lectures were from allsocial levels and from all political directions, both religiousand freethinkers.Teachers with a variety of beliefs taught the Tanach. Arabbi %#ould teach and give an overall religious Interpretationin his lecture. A maskil (adherent of the Haskalah) %rouldlecture, explaining the chapter with the use of the new exeget-Ical methods. There was a lecture from a member of the freeatheistic circles who interpreted the Tanach from a purelyhistorical-cultural viewpoint.It was most interesting that each lecturer's special pointof view was listened to with tolerance and patience.These lectures began In 1937 andning of World Var II.• •In 1927 the Mizrachl initiated aThis school did not exist for long,• eBesides the folks-schools, there«fell organised libraries.The teacher S. ZagarodsXi organized a library for childrenend school youngsters even before 1905.In 1917 the Zionist organizations in town founded a librarywhich developed very nicely. Unfortunately it was not activeduring World War I.Following World War I, the libraries in David-Horodokdeveloped vigorously. In 1925 the Po*alei Zion founded alibrary named for I. L. Peretz. In the last years before WorldWar II, this was the only active library for adults in the town.There was a large library for the students at the Tbrbusschool.Publications with Zionist and literary themes always had awide audience.There was also self-education groups in town, sponsored bythe various parties and youth movements.• • •David-Rorodok also had a long-standing amateur drama groupwhich would give performances from time to time. There had longbeen an inclination towards theater and acting in David-Horodok.Even in the time of of the 1905 revolution, such amateurs asI. Xfiganden, I. Cottlieb and Reiman would excel in readingsfrom the master^mces of Shalom Aleichem, Peretz, Bialik,Frishman, dtc.Later a group of amateur artists %ws trained, and they gavetwo or three performances each year for the Jewish populace.After the 1917 Russian revolution and later, after thePolish-Russian war, the drama circle developed somewhat more.Fresh forces arrived, and they would give a berious performancefrom time to time. The proceeds of the performances were forvarious charitable puiposes. At times they would use a percen-tage of the revenues for a variety of purposes.continued until the begin-*religious Yavne folks-school.closing after only two years.existed in Oavid-RorodokIn pnlse of the drama circle, it must be said that theamateurs had little Interest in how to divide the money. Theywere only Interested in artistic success.In 1936 another youthful amateur group was founded. Theygave several successful performances. Unfortuneatly, theoutbreak of World War II ended the activities of both dramagroups.It should also be mentioned that the children of the Tarbusschool would give a successful annual performance under theleadership of their teacher.• • •David-Horodok also had a sport club Hako*ah (The Strong)which developed a very good football team. The football teamcompeted for a couple of years, but it was disbanded aftertheir best players made aliya to Eretr Israel.4. The Orphanage.David-Horodok was ruined and impoverished after World War IThe ''giant”, which had begun its aide activity throughoutPoland, also opened a branch in David-Horodok. One of the«gi ant's" most important accomplishments was the founding ofan orphanage in the town.There were many orphans in town. There were 32 orphan chil-dren up to age 14 who were kept in the orphanage which was foundedin a comfortable dwelling with three bedrooms, a large diningroom which doubled as a lecture hall, and large courtyard wherethe children played a variety of games. The orphanage wassupplied with a good inventory such as comfortable beds, goocbedcovers and a sufficient quantity of food and clothing. Thefood was good, and the children were well fed and appearedhealthy.The entire maintenance of this house was paid for by the"giant”, fbe leecl<f6epU aeald be ef ee ssslstcnee esecptfor supplying teachers Who worked without pay.That %ias the situation until the Bolsheviks recapturedDavid-Horodok during the Polish-Bolshevik war. Then there %bsa radical change. The management of the orphanage was trans-ferred to a branch of the social service organization of Bevkom .They gave much advise but little practical Y^lp. There wereno food reserves in town. The children became hungry and beganto scatter.When the Bolsheviks left town, they evacuated the entireinventory of the orphanage despite the protests of the DavidHorodoker Jews.47After the Pollsh-Bolehevik %rar, all efforts to xe-establlshthe orphanage were unfortunately unsuccessful. Instead, anorphans conunlttee was founded which undertook to place theorphans In homes.The chief priority was to enable them to learn a trade.Through the committee *s efforts, the orphans %»ere %rell caredfor in private homes.The money to support the leork of the committee was raisedby selling flowers ("flower days")* special campaigns, andproceeds from performances of the drama circle. The main reasonthat the committee was able to exist was due to the supportit received from the Davld-Horodoker Women's Committee ofDetroit.This support was achieved through Itrhak>Lelb Zager who hadpersonal family ties with America. Thanks to his concern, thecommittee received regular support from America throughout itsexistence.The orphans committee existed throughout the period ofPolish rule in David-Horodok. In 1939, when David-Horodok wastaken by the Bolsheviks, the orphans committee was closed alongwith all other institutions.5. Bank and Credit Institutions.In David-Horodok, as in all other Jewish communities, creditwas a common problem. There were always Jews who needed cash- for business purposes, for a child's wedding, to build ahouse, or because of misfortune.In bygone days, there were the so-called usurers (The Yiddishliiord is vachernik because payment was due each vreek (vach )who woul3 loan money on a pledge and for considerable interest.Bach Friday the debtor would have to bring the usurer both theprincipal and the interest. The usurer was usually an influen-tial Jew with considerable authority in the community. If theprincipal and interest were not paid on time, he would nothesitate to keep a pledge which might have been as much as tentimes store vdLtiable than the borrowed money. Onderstandably,going to the usurer was a last resort when there %fas no otherway out.When loan and savings offices began developing in Russia,one such office opened in David-Horodok, and later a secondoffice also. These two offices had the same purpose but haddifferent names. One was named after the bookkeeper - ShlomoRazman's Office, and the other was named after the bookkeeper- Pinye Sheinbolm's office. Many merchants had accounts inboth offices.48The offices enjoyed the complete faith of the populace and%»ere entrusted with their savings. As a result, the officeshad enough cash for loans to those needing them.In 1909 the larger businessmen in David-Horodok founded aMerchants Bank under the management of Noah Grushkin. Thebookkeeper was Meir Alpiner. The bank developed very well.With the outbreak of World War I, all the financial instit-utions failed.After World War 2, when David-Horodok went over to the Polesand normal life had resumed, another Merchants Bank was formedin 1923 under ther management of M. Kviatni, and a Peoples Bankwas founded in 1924 under the management of 5. Papish.These banks developed very well, and they were a significantfactor in the economic life of the town.There was also a charity office in David-Horodok which gavefree loans to small businessmen and handworkers.The charity office was managed by a committee headed by I.Gottlieb. This committee would control the requests and setthe amounts of the loans.6. The Firefighters.One of the most useful institutions in town was the firedepartment which was 99^^ Jewish,David-Horodok, like all small towns, was composed of housesbuilt out of wood and with thatched roofs. These often fellprgy to fires. Fire, the unbidden and undesired guest, wouldpay a visit almost every summer and cause considerable distress.Homes were burned as a result of a variety of mishaps: careless-ness with fixe s setting out a hot pressing iron, going out atnight to the stable with a torch, throwing away unextinguishedcigarettes, children playing with fire, and arson.Fire was a nightmare for the masses. Summer was the mostbeautiful and the most interesting time in the life of the town.However, it was often spoiled by the frequent fires.In many homes they would pack up the valuables in summer,and carry them away to one of the tovm's few brick houses whichwere fireproof. An alternative %ms to keep the valuables athome in packs which wuld be easy to remove in case of fire.In order to fight this plague, even in former times afirefighters brigade %/as established. The town administrationthen built a large station to hold the equipment and thewater buckets. The town administrator levied a specialchimney tax with which to finance the building of the station.The Insurance companies also helped pay the expenditures.Almost all the Jewish youth «rere enrolled in the firefightersbrigade. They considered it a civic obligation to belong tothe firefighters. Even though the Christen populace %fas in thegreatest danger because of their thatched roof houses, only&ree or four were enrolled as firefighters.Zn summertime the firefighters %rould periodically holddrills. Zn the olden days this ms quite an event in the lifeof the town. Masai, the station watchman, muld go around allthe streets with a special bugle to signal that the firefightersshould come out to the drill. The firefighters %rould put ontheir special uniforms and gather at the station which was inthe center of the town. After a few csIisekeBlc estrelses. eaeof them was aecsstly sent out into the streets to pick out ahouse which was supposedly burning. He would then give asignal, and they would begin "extinguishing"the house. Thefirefighters would pick the house of someone against whomthey bore a grudge. After the drill, the firefighters wouldhave a beer.After World war I, the firefighters brigade expanded. Thetown council allocated more money to enlarge the inventory andto teach the firefighters better techniques of extinguishingand especially containing the spread of fires. However, whena fire broke out during a wind or in the vicinity of thatchedroofs, the firefighters were unable to localize the fire.That is what happened in 1936 when a fire broke out in mid-dayin the Christian part of town. One third of the town, alongwith the Greek Orthodox church on the hill, was burned down.Zn the last years before World War ZI, the town administra-tion directed the firefighters. The management remained inthe hands of Jews. The most active managers were 1. Yudovitchand M. Rlmar.7. The Municipal Government.The David-Rorodok populace had the status of town citizens(called miatchonas with more political rights than the typicalpeasants) since the time of the Czars. They would vote everythree years for a town council consisting of three peoplet anelder (starosta) and two assistants. One of the assistantsms a Jew. The election would take place as followst eachstreet voted for a representative, and the street representativeswould then vote for the elder and his two assistants.This election process was far flrcm democatlc, those whowanted to be elected took advantage of family ties, neighbors508. The Kehllla.Unfortunately, we have no reference sources on the activitiesof the Jewish Kehilla in David-Horodok. There are no remainingbooks or documents, either from the past or from the last yearsbefore the holocaust.There was an organized Jewish kehilla in David-Horodok justas in all Polish-Lithuanian cities and towns. Until the lastpartition of Poland, the David-Horodok kehilla was linked tothe Pinsk Great Kehilla, and they paid taxes to Pinsk.We do not know how the kehilla was organized and when itbecame independent under the czarist authority.We know only of certain sources of revenue for the kehilla.for example: the karavka (a special tax) on meat, the sellingof yeast which the kehi1la gave as an exclusive concession tothe rabbis, and the heyrei-kedisha (burial society) which wassupervised by the kehilla. The hevrei-kedisha was a well org-anized closed institution in which membership would pass byinheritance from father to son.The first world war abolished everything, and the variouskehilla affairs were taken over haphazardly by individuals.One would take care of the bath-house and the mikve (ritualbath)y another with the poorhousey and still another with thecemetery.The old cemetery lay at the edge of the Horin River, and thewater would often wash away parts of this cemetery. Every yearthey would have to spend money to rep&ix the holy ground. Theexpenses were covered by the hevrei-kedisha who had their ownspecial source of revenue.There was no official town rabbi in David-Horodok. Therewere several rabbis in town, about four or five in number, eachsupported by his own circle which had given him his rabbinicalchair. From time to time there %rere conflicts between thevarious sides, especially when it came to dividing rabbinicalfunds which flowed in from general sources.In 1917, after the Kerenski revolution, the first democraticelection to the Jewish kehilla was held in David-Horodok throughthe initiative of the Zionist organizations. However, thiskehilla could not accomplish anything because of the Bolshevikrevolution and the disruptive transfer from power to power inwar-time.In the first years of the Polish reign in David-Horodok,after the Polish-Bolshevik %rar, there was no Jewish kehilla inthe town. The nominated town-council representatives served assemi-official agents of the kehilla. These were Moshe Lachovskl,Shlomo Katzman and Moshe-Yehuda Lipshitz.51and good friends, with the CSnristians, a little whiskey helped.That Is the way things were until the revolution of February,1917. Then the town-council was enlarged. However, as a resultof the stormy revolutionary times and the frequent changeoverof ruling powers, these elections were also not very democratic.When the Bolsheviks appeared In town, they appointed a revolu-tionary committee (re\4c^), and the Poles appointed the town-council. During the entire period that the Poles appointed thetown-council, the Jewish aepresentatives were always the same:M. Lokovski, H.I. Lipshitz and S. Kattman.The appointed town-council managed the town until 1928. Inthat year elections for town-council were held throughoutPoland, and naturally in David-Horodok also.That was the very first democratic election for town-councilin the history of David-Horodok. The Jews took an active partin the election, and it was a vigorously fo ght campaign.Eight Jews were elected, representing 40 per cent of the town-council. They were Dr. Schalkver, K.I. Lipshits, K. Lokovski,I. Yudovitch, R. hiishalov, S. Reznick, H. Tsipin and I. Lipshitz.The Jews' hop>e that they could use the town treasury tosupport the Jewish institutions was shattered. Every proposalsuggested by the Jews to give financial aid to the Tarbus school,the Jewish libraries, or even the orphan-committee, wererejected by the Christian representatives and the one Pole whowas the chief representative.The only Jewish operated institution that received a subsidyfrom the town-council was the fire department. This was becauseit served the Christian populace as well.The town-council did finance the Polish public schools intown, paved the main road, and built the power station in 1929,providing light in the houses until 12 midnight.When the term of office anded for the town-council, newelections were not held. The reactionary movement had strength-ened in Poland, and the government %ras not interested in newelections. The result %ras that an agreement mis reached with-out an election, and a new town-council took office with onlysix Jewst Dr. Schalkver, 2. Yudovitch, K. Kviatni, D. Riemar,M. Lokovski and S. Mishalov.By then the town-council had no po%rer because the actualtown authority was the district administrator in Staline.During the scant two ^ars (end of 1939 to June, 1941) ofthe Soviet rule in David-Horodok, there was no elected town-council. 2t was run by appointed Bolsheviks sent by the commun-ist party.52As a result of a Polish government decree, elections wereheld for the Jewish kehillas in 1926. However, the electionordinances were quite reactionary. Only those over age 25had voting rights, and those over 30 had only a passive right.Women had no voice at all. The jurisdiction of the kehillawas severely restricted so that it had no responsibilitiesexcept for rabbinical matters, the bathhouse and the cemetery.In David>Horodok, where there was a relatively large numberof rabbis, the kehilla elections provoked great controversiesto the point of mutual denunciations which resulted in voidingof individtial votes and even entire lists. These elections%rere no credit to the David-Horodoker Jewish population. Themeetings of the kehilla were also a place for quarreling.There was a particularly severe quarrel over the choosing ofa chief rabbi for the town. There ears two kehi1la electionsduring the period of Polish rule: the first in 1926 with theelection of Heir Moravtchik as its head, and the second in1936 with the election of Kaplinski as its head.Years of Turbulence and Death1. The Eve of WarWhat will be? will the efforts of the world's statesmenavert war? will the great world powers such as England, theSoviet Union, America and France not succeed in curbing theHitleristic appetite, or will the world really bea dreadful slaughter?These questions traveled from mouth to mouth in the earlysummer sorths of 1939.The tension grew from day to day. The situation becamemore strained from minute to minute. The air smelled of gunpowder.Here there shines a ray of hope, and everyone walks aroundwith optimistic smiles on their faces; and just as suddenlythe sky clouds over, and the people walk around worried andgloomy allow again.What will be? - the David-Horodokers ask one another.They listen to the radio day and night, clasping at informationfrom the entire world. They search for a ray of hope, but thenext day invariably demonstrates the increasing hopelessnessof the situation.presently there is a breakdown in the talks between theSoviet Union and the western powers, and then comes the astoxmding information regarding the Ribbentrof-Molotov treaty.53A mobilization was declared in Poland. The questlm thatoccupied people's minds was not whether there would be a war,of that they were sure; they asked only when it %rould break out.One waited with fear and dread of that unfortunate day. whoknows what that day would bring with it?2. The Polish^German WarFriday, September 1, 1939. The announcement came over theradio like thunder. At dawn, the Nasi military forces had crossedthe German-Polish border, and attacked Poland without a priordeclaration of war.David-Horodoker Jews could not sit still in their homes.Where ever one turned there %wre groups of people with question-ing looks and worried faces, talking about the great misfortune.Intuition predicted that the outcome would not be good. Whoknows? Vtho knows how it will end?The town was proclaimed on war status. At night all windowswere to be shaded so that no light could be seen from outside.The electric street lamps were no longer lit. Darkness ruledthe street in the evening, just like the darkness in Jewishhearts both night and day.Economic life in the town died down immediately. They soonbegan to have shortages of products, the first being salt andmatches.One day passed and then another. There was no pleasing newsfrom the front. The Polish army was retreating. Entire armieswere surrounded by the German military forces. Rximors spreadof betrayal by Polish military leaders. There were reports ofextraordinary espionage Involving highly-placed Polish personal-ities. Despite the boasting of Polish radio, one felt thatthe decayed demoralized card-house was collapsing.One sought a ray of hope, waiting impatiently for Englandand France to honor their pledges and come to the aid of thePolish army.September 3, 1939. Everyone's face lightens. A ray of lightand hope appears. England and France declare war against Germany.Everyone imagines that now the situation vill ^lange. From nowon the Germany military will suffer defeats. Unfortunately,these hopes vanish. The murderous Nazi hordes advance, and thePolish military is crushed. Soon Warsaw is surrounded; thenthe Germans are in Bialystok, Grodno and Brisk. Hundreds ofJewish refugees begin to arrive in town. They describe thehorrors of the %rar. They fear the day when the Germans willenter David-Horodok. The heart portends evil.54What will be? From where will salvatien come? How can «•save ourselves? September 17, 1939, Rimors begin circulatingthat the Red army has crossed the Soviet-Polish border in orderto free the western region of White Russia and the Ukraine.Is this really true or is it, perish the thought, only arumor? Every Jew wants with his entire being for the news tobe true. They were afraid to talk of it too loudly while thePolish authority was still in town. They waited impatienllyfor the day that the Red amy would march into David-Korodok.Mo small matter. They would at the same time be rid of thehated anti-semltlc fascist Polish government as vfe 11 as avertthe great danger of a certain death under the rule of the Kazimurderers.The Poles began leaving David-Horodok, retreating towardsthe west, certain that the Red army was advancing from the east.On the night of September 18 until the 19th, the Polishmilitary detachments that were stationed at the Polish-Sovietborder began to withdraw.The Jews of David-Horodok did not sleep the entire night.They were afraid of acts of vengeance by the Polish detachmentson the Jewish population, Fortunely the Poles retreated with-out causing any harm to the Jews.At the dawn of September 19, after all their detachmentshad crossed the Horin River which divided the town in two, thePoles tore down the bridge, and they set up barricades on theother side of the river. Right behind them came the assaultforces of the Red army. At the river there was a brief exchangeof fire between the two sides. One Red army man was shot todeath and another wounded. The Poles quickly retreated. ASoviet sapper detachment quickly set up a pontoon bridge overthe river, and the Red army troops continued on their way.3, Under Soviet Rule (September, 1939 - June, 1941).Without question, September 19, 1939 was the happiest day inthe lives of the Oavid-Horodoker Jews in the course of the lastseveral years. After the shooting between the Poles and theRed army detachments had ended, the entire Jewish population(and not only the Jews) came out in the streets with happy smil-ing faces, and they received the Red army detachments who hadunceasingly attacked from east to %fest.Young and old, small and large, man and wife - all stood onthe sldevalk cf the min street throu^i whit^ passed the aery troops, withsmiling faces and waving hands, they greeted the Red army men.The Red army men, in turn, greeted the inhabitants in a friendlymanner.55One is reminded of how a high officer, who was at the headof a detachment, noticed the elderly Velvel Raishkes who stoodwith the others on the sidewalk. He called to him with thefollowing! "Nada zhit staritchak, nada zhitl*' (we must liveold man, we must live}•What an enthusiastic response these few words brought.That day everyone %!as singly intoxicated with joy and happiness.In the afternoon, a meeting was held under the free sky,and the representatives of the Red army made speeches in whichthey pledged a free and blissful life for the inhabitants ofthe freed regions of West White Russia and West Ukraine."Oppression, people-hatred and poverty will no longer be thedestiny of the freed brotherly people of West Ukraine andWest White Russia. From henceforth they will enjoy a favoredstatus, freedom, brotherhood, love, and they will work underthe rays of the sun of the greater folk-leader comrade Stalin."That was the quintessence of the speeches which were held atthat meeting.Understandably, the chief celebrants, who acted as if theywere the hosts, were the few Jewish communists in town whowere joined by several miatchanes of Davld-Horodok.All day, until late at night, everyone stayed in the streetsconversing with the Red army men about how the Poles had sup-pressed the national minorities and especially the i^bws.They were astonished at the approachabillty and simplicityof the Red army men. They %iere impressed by their thoughtful-ness and sympathetic expressions, and they were thus even moreencouraged by their promises and reassurances ttiat from thenon, the Jews would no longer know of such trouble.On the night of September 19, 1939, the Jews of Oavid-Horodok slept peacefully, blissfully and full of hope for abright future.The first %ieeks of life under the Soviet authority beganin Davld-Horodok.By edict, all the businesses %iere re-opened, and peoplebegan besieging them, trying to stock up on clothing, footwear,produce, etc.Especially conspicuous was the attitude of the vastatshnlkaswhich was the name given to the arriving Soviet citizens.They went from shop to shop, buying everything they laid theireyes on, paying whatever price was asked. They would comeaway from the shops with large bundles.At first It was thotight that they didn't bargain becausethey were accustomed to the fixed prices of the governmentstores. However,BO-one could understand why they bought somuch. Gradually it became apparent that they could not obtainthese things at home. This brought on an even greater buyingspree.The Polish zloti became of equal value to the Soviet rubleso that the zloti was not annulled and remained as cxurrency.The town authority was in the hands of local Communistactivists. The Soviets allowed them to run things in the firsfew months.About 6-7 Jewish and 3-4 Christian Communist activistsdominated the town during the course of the first few months.These few Communist activists inscribed a sad chapter inthe history of the town, on the one hand because of theirdenunciation to the NKGB (Soviet security organization) andsubsequent arrest of the majority of the Zionist workers intown, and on the other hand because of their inciting themajority of the Horodtchukas against the entire Jewish popul-ation.In the meantime, there were many meetings, entertainmentevenings and theater performances, and the youth did not bavea bad time.As a result of the large streeur of refugees from greaterPoland, the Jewish population of the town swelled, reachingabout 7-8000.Slowly the holiday mood dissiF>ated, and people began tothink about a livlihood, especially since the reserve supplieswere depleted prematurely.There were no fixed Soviet undertakings or bureaus as yet,and there were no jobs either. So people began bartering.Both Jews and Christians began trading. Everything was anitem of trades salt, cigarettes, matches, produce, clothing,shoes, etc.There was a tanique trade in Polish zloti. Inasmuch as thezloti was also currency in the part of Poland occupied by theGermans and was then worth more than the ruble, here theywould exchange two or three rubles for each zloti on the blackmarket, and then they «rould smxaggle the zloti to the Germanside. The refugees from greater Poland were particularlyadept at this business. They would themselves smuggle backand forth across the Soviet-German border.57The situation of almost free trade existed until the end of1939.Zn the meantime, the Soviets arrested and exiled severalPolish families who had not escaped in time with the Polish army.A Jewish family from a border village was also exiled, and atill-then Christian Communist activist was arrested.Over ten Jewish youngsters from town secretly left David-Korodok and reached Vilna which the Soviets had ceded to Lith-uania. Their goal was to go from there to Eretz Israel.In November 1939, there were two conferences in Bialystokand Lemberg, attended by elected deputies of west Belorussiaand west Ukraine. They decided to turn to the Vairkavni-Soviet(the highest chamber of deputies) with the raqxTest to of5c3annex the regions of west Belorussia and west Ukraine to theSoviet Union.r%iThey prepared for over a month to arrange these elections,with meetings, assemblies and entertainment evenings. Specialpropagandists taught the p>eople the Soviet constitution. Theelections arrived with great pomp and a holiday atmosphere.David-Horodok elected two deputies to the Bialystok (Belo-russia) conference, a Jew and a Christian. Understandably,they were Communist activists who were appointed by the Sovietauthority.These were the first elections in David-Horodok during thesoviet reign. Already at these elections,one saw the enmityof the Horodtchukas for the Communist authorities and the wileblind hatred for the Jewish populace of David-Korodok.Counting the ballots later, they found notes with the follow-ing inscriptions: "Down with the Soviet rule": "Death to theBolsheviks and the Jews";*'Long live Hitlex*: etc.Gradually the Soviets began to arrange and organize a nornellife in the Soviet manner. All the local Communist activistswho had run the town until then, were replaced by imported Sovietcitizens.The town president, the police chief, the leaders of thevarious economic, cultural and societal institutions were allreplaced by vastatchnikas. Also the other more-or-less respon-sible posts were occupied by Soviet citizens.The heretofore local Communist town leaders were then employedin second rank posts, and they were used by the NKGB to giveinformation about each and every inhabitant.These local Communist activists willingly took on this"honorable" mission, transforming into simple informers, devisingfalse accusations against their victims.58The first result of their calumny was the dismissal ofcertain people from their posts because of their social origin.Naturally the Jews were the first in line to be affected alongwith a few rich Horodtchxakas who were not overlooked. Thisaction was called ‘'nationalization*. The larger businessesand enterprises such as tanneries, the sawmill, flour mills,etc., were nationalized. The finat diel (financial department)took these over and the Jewish Communist activists managed thework with great zeal.Understandably the nationalized Korodtchxikas figured thatthe Jews were most to blaune for this, and hate for the Jewsgrew from day to day. They would say that a day would comewhen they would "pay back" the Jews in full.However, life in town began to normalize. All three tan-neries in town united and a single large tannery was created,employing over one hundred workers. Next to the tannery, ashoe factory was founded, employing over one hundred and fiftyshoe workers.The saw mill with its building enterprises which previouslyhad belonged to Mocha Rimar, was enlarged and employed over400 workers. Various cooperatives were organized. All thevarious Soviet organizations and Institutions began to function.A full-blooded and intensive life began to pulse in the econ-omic domain.There was also an intensification of work in the field ofculture.The schools resumed their classes. Instead of the twoprevious Polish public schools, two intermediate schools wereorganized,one in the Belorussian language and the other inRussian. The Hebrew Tarbus school was transformed into aYiddish-speaking school.All the existing libraries in David-Horodok were united,following which, all exceptional books %iere confiscated andreplaced solely by Soviet pxiblicatlons in Russian, Belorussianand a few in the Yiddish language.For the first time in the history of David-Horodok, a hospital'was established with a special maternity ward. Women no longerhad to give birth at home, but instead had a well organizedhospital with careful medical supervision.For the first time in the history of David-Horodok, there%ras also established a permanent movie theater in which thenewest films were shown every evening. Needless to say, thetheater was packed every night.They were proceeding to build a large modern-designedculture-house with halls for lectures, performances, recreation,«tc.S9The majority of the David-HorodOcer inhabitants settled downto wrk» A bare minimum took to speculation.2n order to frighten speculators, they arranged a show.trialfor the David-Horodoker Herrl Zipin who was caught speculatingwith %nirst, and he was sentenced to four years in prison. Thissentence made a strong impression on the town's inhabitants.However, life flowed on as the Jews began to adapt to thenew regime, not looking at the shortages in produce, clothingand footwear.The situation was calm and more or less normal untilsummer of 1940 when there was a political arrest.Yosef Yudovitch was arrested. Ke was the son of EaytzlYudovitch who was shot along with two Christian citizens at thetime of the Bolshevik revolution during the punishment expedi-tion. This first political arrest shook up the Jewish populationof Oavid-Horodok, and it forecast eventual further arrests.Many people were then called by the KKgb for "a talk". Laterthese people never said what the conversation was about.Shortly after the detention of Yosef Yudovitch, also arrestedwas Lazar Rankin, the owner of a tannery that was nationalizedby the Soviet government. Immediately after him, they arrestedYanye (Yosef) Baruhin, a revisionist worker.The mood of the Jews was very depressed. They understoodthat the NKGB used not only the local Communist activists butslso other disguised local agents and informants who gave theminformation concerning every single town inhabitant.In reality, there were those in town, including also upstandingand elderly Jews who worked along with the NKGB, giving theminformation and carrying out their assignments.Zn order to solicit these informants, the NKGB use the fol-lowing devices they i#ould call in someone who was above suspi-cion, who %ras subject to become an informer, reckon up his formersins, and propose that he be rehabilitated by working with themfor a period of time. Zn case of refusal, he was told that he mustsafBar for Ms sins and be arrested. Understandably, withoutthinking of the outcome of this conversation, the summoned in-dividual would have to sign an oath that no-one, not even hisclosest, must know about what the NKGB had discussed with him.Unfortunately, there %#ere those who surrendered to the threatsand accepted the proposed "work". Thus there were amongst theInformers people of various ages, political hues and social strata.No-one knew for sure who was working with the NKGB, and there-fore everyone was suspected of being a possible agent. Thismutual suspicion resulted in the fear of speaking a word in frontof others.60The culmination of these political arrests came on the nightof February 10, 1941 when ten workers were arrested. They wereHaim Barantchuk, Yasha Yudovitch, Berl Rimar and Shla Cantorwho were leaders of the General Zionists; Schmuel Tchatchik,Arke Lipshitz, Kapl Koravtchik and Mandl Kravtchik who wereFo*alel Zion workers; and Berl Kaftan, one of the most capableof the till-then Communist activists who was charged with workingfor the Polish security organization.These arrests had a shocking effect on the Davld>HorodokerJews. Ko-one was sure of his safety. The still-free ZionistVTorkers anticipated further arrests and waited fearfully fortheir turn. There was a mood of panic in town.People would avoid passing the building containing the K};G5bureaus. This building cast terror In the inhabitants, v.'hoknew how many more victims it would swallow up?Gloom and dread befell everyone. Several Zionist workersleft the town and moved to other places where no-one knew them.People stopped attending organizations. Everyone spent theafter-work time in the narrow circle of his family.During this time, several Horodtehukas were also arrested.The outcome of the political arrests of the thirteen David-Horodoker Jews is as follows: Five men, Shmuel Tchatchik,Yosef Yudevitch, Artchik Moravtchik, Mandl Kravtchik and KaplMoravtchik (now Yakov Koor) are now in Israel. Shia Cantor isin Poland, Kaftan is in America. Lazar Rankin escaped from theprisoner transport deep in Russia. He returned to David-Horodokwhere he was killed with all the David-Horodoker Jews. Fivemen, Haim Barantchuk, Yanye Baruhin, Yashe Yudovitch, ArkePipshitz and Berl Rimar starved to death in the various Sovietprison camps. Honor their memory I* * *Despite the fear and dread, there were no further politicalarrests or exiles until Just before the German-Soviet war.As things began to quiet down, a new mood of alarm enezged,far more horrible than detention by the NKGB. Rumors began tospread about the eventual possibility of war between Germanyand the Soviet Union.The fear of this eventuality was uaasaally intense. Thetown's Christian population, the Horodteh^as. became self-confident and waited impatiently fee the day when the Germansmarched into town. It became apparent that they wre preparingfor vengeance.61There then began the movement of large Red ariry detachmentsfrom east to west, giving the impression that war was approach-ing with giant steps.Just before the outbreak of war, several Jewish familieswere arrested and exiled.On June 22, 1941, Hitler's hordes treacherously attackedthe Soviet Union without a declaration of war, and therebybegan the sad horrible end of the Jews of X)avld-Horodok.Destruction and HolocaustThere was great panic. The Jews were frightened to death.The Horodtch\^as were confident. The Soviet authorities intown were agitated.The town's youth were quickly mobilized. However, noteveryone was taken into the army. Those who had unacceptablesocial status were later released.German airplanes appeared ovdr the town, and, althoughthey dropped no bombs, they created a terrible panic.The German troops continued onward with Immense power.The Red army retreated in disarray and confusion. The Soviettown leaders began evacuating.Hundreds of Jewish youth and entire families fled to theprevious Soviet-Polish border with the goal of evacuating toRussia in order to escape the murderous hands of the Nazis.Unfortunately, they encountered a strong Soviet guard atthe old border who only let those with special permits topass. The remainder were not allow d to cross over, and theywere forced to return to David-Horodok. The Soviet townauthorities were also sent back with orders to remain wtil thelast minute.The Germans had already captured Pinsk, Luniniatz, Lakveand Mikoshavitch; but they had not yet been in David-Horodok.The town was In fact without a government. Davld-Horodokwas not captured because it was not near a railroad line orhighway. The Horodtehukas could not wait until the Germanscame on their own, and they sent a delegation led by thefeldsher (medical worker) Maraiko to the German militaryauthority in Pinsk, requesting that the Germans speed uptheir arrival in town. They thereby declared the willingnessof the Horodtehukas to work along with Germans. They wishedto make a quick end to the Jewish population of David-Horodok.The delegation returned pleased with the "positive" resultswhich they had achieved.After the return of the delegation, the rumor was spread thatthe Red arny had begun assaulting and repelling the Germans.The delegation was terrified, and they fled back to Pinsk. Un-fortunately, in a couple of days, the news was proven false, andthe delegation returned to the town accompanied by the Germans.That same day, the Horodtchi^as, led by the above mentionedMaraiko, the brothers Tonio and Liovo Kosorev, Kulogo, Yavplovand others, arranged a meeting under the open sky in honor ofthe "great historic day".The Germans gave over the civil authority into the hands ofthe Horodtchukar. appointing Karaiko as town mayor and LiovoKosorev as commander of the civil police. The Jews were orderedto wear stars of David.On the 16th of 570;, an order was delivered that at sixo'clock the next morning all Jewish men over age 14 were to gatherat the marketplace opposite the Catholic church, taking shovelswith them. It was implied that they would take them to work.Early next morning, the Jews began assembling at the market-place which was surrounded by armed German SS troops and manyHorodtchukas.After all had gathered, the Horodtchukas spread around townchecking for holdouts.The brothers Issur and Hershl Gurvitch, who were found in ahiding place, had their eyes gouged out while being taken to themarketplace.All those gathered at the marketplace were led away on footby a strongly armed SS detachment, accompanied by hundreds ofHorodtchukas. to Hinavsk, a village seven kilometers from David-Horodok. fTiere the graves had already been prepared.Surrounded on all sides by artillery and machine guns, everysingle man was shot to death.The cries and screaming of the unfortunate victims carriedthrough the air and reached as far as David-Horodok.The gathered Horodtchukas fulfilled a triple mission} theymade sure that no-one fled from the field. They removed thegold rings, watches, clothing, shoes, boots and even tore outgold teeth. Finally, they carried out the Job of throwing thevictims into the graves, not looking to see if they were reallydead or still half-living.63Only two children succeeded In escaping unnoticed frotn thatfrightful slaughter. Wandering through the fields, they joineda partisan group and thus survived.Zn town the second part of the frightful tragedy took place.After the men %wre led out of town to the slaughter, the women andsmall children were ordered to leave David Horodok within an houz;The few men who had succeeded in hiding out and did not goout to the "vi^rk", among them Rabbi Moshele. Halm Moravtchik andothers, changed into women's clothing, and they went along withall the women and children. Ho%^ver. there were Horodtchvikasat the bridge checking for disguised men among the women.All the disguised men were regognized by the Horodtchukas.They were brutally beaten, and then thrown from the bridge intothe river.Thus a group of several thousand women and children set outon a horrible path of wandering, not knowing where to go.They wandered for two weeks over fields, roads and trails.Not one town would take them in. despite the efforts of the localJews. Only a few dozen women and children succeeded in gettingaccomodations with relatives in the surrounding towns of Lakve,Stallne and Luniniatz. The remainder %#ande zed for two weeks,suffering hunger, cold and the hatred of the peasants who wouldbeat and rape them.During those two weeks, all the deserted Jewish homes withtheir possessions were pillaged. Many Jewish houses were dismantledby peasants from the surrounding villages, bringing them back inpieces to their own villages. The Horodtchukas moved into manyof the houses.After two weeks of wandering, the women and children returnedto the gates of David-Horodok which "deigned" to receive them.It was understood that they were no longer permitted in theirown homes .and a ghetto was created for them on a few streetswhere there were gentile hovels.This ghetto existed for a year. Zn the course of that year,more than half died rom epidemics, "accidental homicides" andstarvation. Officially the ghetto inhabitants received 100 gramsof bread per person per day. but. infect, no breadat all «ms distributed at least two days a week.After a year of extraordinary suffering and frightful existence,all those women and children still living, including three or fairgrown mn such as Z.B. Velvl Kushner whom the Germans spared fronthe slaughter of the eea because he vae au expert la the repair of see aaehlnee,eere lad eat eu a certain day (mifertuaetelj Che date is uBkaaec) to the saneplace ehera Che aeB eere aeirdered the prerioua year, and they were shot to death.64Thus ended the close to 500 year existence of the Jewish communityin David-Horodok.a * *During the three year Nazi occupation of David-Horodok» a partisangroup paid almost daily "visits** in David-Rorodok, causing much damageto the Germans and many headaches for the Horodtchukas>The partisans burned almost all the Jewish houses in town so thatthe Horodtchukas would not benefit from Jewish possessions. They blewup the town's power station. From time to time they raided the town,killing both Germans and Horodtchukas. They kept the town under tensionthrough the entire period.In this partisan group, there was a Jewish girl (whose name and fateare unfortunately not known) who was distinguished by her extraordinarycourage and daring. In every partisan raid, she was always the firstto go in and the last to withdraw. With her heroic deeds, she threwterror into the Germans and the Horodtchukas, and at the same time gavecourage to her partisan comrades.* it itIn 1944 the Red army freed David-Horodok of the murderous Nazioccupation. Unfortunately, there was no longer a living Jew in thetown.A few dozen leaders of the Horodtchukas fled along with the Germanarmy.Several of the Jews were saved because they were in the Soviet Unionduring the war: Hershl Korman and his two sons Kita and Motas, nowin Israel; Itzl Nahmanovitch now in the USA; Mandl Krovtchik now inIsrael and after the liberation visited David-Horodok, encountering aravaged scorched town without one living Jew and an immense commongrave where the tortured David^Horodok Jews rested.In every Horodtchuka house they found Jewish furniture and possessions.In the marketplace, the Horodtchukas sold Jewish clothing with kaftans.The Horodtchuka women wore kerchiefs made of Jewish prayer shawls.However, they all had nothing to say. They laid the entire guilt onthe Germans and the escaped leaders of the Horodtchukas. They them*selves "know nothing**, ’’regretful**, "was not in to%m then", "alsosuffered from the Germans*', in a word: entirely innocent sheep - almostmartyrs.* * *Today there is not one Jew in David-Horodok. The saving remnant ismostly in Israel. Several remained in the Soviet Union, some in Poland,and a few immigrated to America.I. Lipshitz65From Childhood Years - David-Horodok 50 Years AgoMotl SlotzkiNew YorkIt is difficult to say how David-Horodok differed such from othersmall towns stuck in the deep marshes of Polesye. They had thesame style houses, streets, schools, shops, marketplaces and the samelivlihoods, troubles, cares and sorrows.David-Horodok produced no famous men by whose merit a permanentlight could be kindled in the history of Belorussian Je%7ry. Kaidonovwas renowned for the Kaidonover Rebbe, Avraham Reitin. Staline hadacquired a reputation with the Staliner Rebbe. However, David-Horodokhad no such luck.But for those bom and raised in David-Horodoker, the town had apermanent charm. The miatchinas would say "Horodok solodok", a sweettown.Even having departed as a youth, as did most David-Horodokers whonow live in America, one still carries a longing in his heart for theold home.No matter what different memories and impressions that each David-Horodoker brought with him from his childhood years, everyone carriedan exceptional love and memory for the Horin River which flowedthrough the middle of town.Not Yudovltch's wall, not the marketplace, the Olshoner Street,the marshes, the Alpiner Street, the Valamitcher Street, the schoolyard, nor the various streets and byways round about, not the hill butonly the river will be the subject of the first encounter and greetlng-"from which side of the river did you come from?"Wherever destiny takes you, whether to hot desert sands or to theshores of the Pacific or Atlantic, if you were bom and raised inDavid-Horodok, the river will follow you wherever you go the restof your life and take a prominent place in your memories.The Horin River is the true "woman of valor". She is the nourisherand supplier of almost the entire town. She makes many rich and otherspoor. For one it tears up his yard and cattle stall, and for anotheron the opposite shore, it deposits soil for an orchard and garden.The river carries ships, barges, rafts and steamers. It fills thefishermen's nets with the finest fish. It breeds flocks of geese whosemeat and fat feed the town's inhabitants, and whose do«m softens theirbed covers.How beautiful the river Is in summertime. On its shores there isceaseless activity, both day and night.Here they build the magnificent ships. Piles of lusher go on shipsto distant Prussia. The t%fo small steamers Viun and Strakaza aregoing, one to Nirtcha and the other to Vidivar-Staline. The steamersare the pleasant intermediaries between David-Horodok and the outsideworld.In the summer we swim and play in and around the river. We walkalong the large wooden bridge. We run to greet the incoming steamereven if there is no-one that we are waiting for.66At night the town’s youngsters strolled along the riverbank behindMordechai Selig’s orchard in Tchipovski Street; from there around thechurch hill, along the dirt path to the Kvuarsker vindmill and on to themarshes.We remember the town in its prosperous times. Famous for theirwealth were such affluent men as Yudovitch, the Bragmans, Lipman Lod*atzki, Aharon^Leib of Arli, Leibke Grushkin, Fesah Yashkes and manymore. They were the ’’eastern wall” Jews of the ’’great” and ’’richman’s” synagogues.The greatest Imprint on David-Horodok was left by Yudovitch. He haddone much traveling in the outside %iorld, and he brought back Europeanfashion to David-Horodok. He was less concerned with EuropeanizingDavid-Horodok, as for example Peter the Great with Moscow, as he wasinterested in making improvements in the town.I see before my eyes the two things that he built. Yudovitch’s two-story brick building with the spread eagle wings on both sides containedwalled shops on half the street, the Amalia Hotel and a large orchardsurrounded by a brick wall which gave the building the appearance of amedieval baron’s castle. A small bridge behind the orchard led toZladayavka. Yudovitch also built the Great Synagogue in the schoolyard with great style and taste. It would have suited a German cityrather than a town in the Polesye marshes. Yudovitch’s masonry onthe Alpiner Road produced bricks impressed with the letters ”YU”.The beautiful idyllic water mill, called the Alpiner mill, was anideal model for a landscape painter. Lastly there was Yudovitch him-self, a tall frame and a well-fed belly, his stem lordly face withcold sharp grey eyes. He had pointed thinly twisted whiskers whichreminded people of the Baron Hirsch Ginsberg with his top hat and thickcane with a staghorn handle.Yudovitch’s time faded away, and the Bragmans emerged on the scenewith the berlina business. The berlinas transported products fromPolesye and Belorussia to the Ukraine and Great Russia, and from thebanks of the Dnieper back to Polesye.The Bragmans built their warehouses from David-Horodok to Kramantchugand Yakaterinoslov. The berlinas transported wheat flour from Kiev,Poltova and Karkov; sugar, salt, barley grain, oil, coal and manyother products over the waters of the Prlpyet and Dnieper until theirvery ends.Their tugboat steamer Monteflore would visit the town once a year.In the fall, before winter froze the river, the steamboat would towa long line of high bellied berlinas, and leave them for the winteron the banks of the Horin River opposite Mache Rimar’s dockwhere they were built.With the berlinas came the owners Yosel, Yankel and Motel Bragman.Their expensive skunk furs lined with cat skin gave a special dignityto the eastern wall of the Great Synagogue. Even the Slonimer rabbiwith his long red beard in his nook, next to the ark, acquired a certaindistinction with the arrival of the Bragmans.Their time also passed and quickly faded. All that remained of themwas the glory of Yosel Bragman's beautiful daughters. Colde Bayne, ShifraSarke and, the prettiest of them all, Rlvkele Bragman.The subsequent tycoons who followed the Yudovltchs and the Bragmans, suchas Leibke Grushkin, Pesah Yashkes, Lipman Liadetzki and a few lesser people,were already Jews whose possessions were no longer as lavish as their pre-decessors.New frlnds began blowing over Russia, and they were also felt in our out-of-the-way town.* * *The turbulent months of the 1905 revolutionary upheaval pass through nymind like a kaleidoscope. The almost unlimited power of the wealthydisappeared. One then had to deal with the Eseravtzes. Iskravtzes andBundavtzes.After awhile, when the youth realized that they would never attain theright of direct and secret ballot, they resolved to leave the town. Theybegan the great mass inDigratlon to America after the Russian-Japanese war.Except for Mordecai Loptshavon who would on no account leave David-Horodok, all the other "brothers and sisters" began leaving the town.The town became impoverished, and, if not for the help of the sons anddaughters in far-off America, they would have starved to death.There were no longer heard the songs and laughter of the Jewish youthalong the banks of the river on summer nights. The orphaned ships stoodtied up at the river docks. As a boy or girl grows up, they go off toAmerica.An echo of the horrible pogroms which had raged through the length andbreadth of the Jewish cities and towns in Russia, also reached David-Horodok.A Horodoker miatchene named Zuchter murdered with an axe an entire Jewishfamily of seven souls in the nearby village of Arli. The murder wascarried out at night when everyone was sleeping. Terror fell on the townand the surrounding villages. Everyone prepared for pogroms, and thehorrible murder was regarded as a "down payment".1 remember as if it were now,the frightful funeral: the wagons with themassacred bodies and the blood soaked bed clothes. That tragic night withthe wagons and bodies is engraved in my memory to this day, like a horriblenightmare.68David-Borodok had many laborers» butchers» teamsters and naturally*peddlers, shopkeepers, fishmongers, brokers and religious article dealers.In those days the butcher carts stood in the middle of the market-place where the church now stands. The sticks fastened to the edges ofthe stands on which hung the carts made the marketplace similar to agarden of babbling.Even now I can hear the clamor, cursing, screaming, the dull clangof the cleavers in the butcher stalls and the wild skirmishing of thedogs for a bone, a piece of meat or for first claim on a butcher stall.The butchers would come into our house for the evening prayers. In-stead of a towel or handkerchief, they would use the window curtains towipe their hands. After they had finished praying and left the house,the curtains remained hanging like pressed-together horses tails. How-ever, we couldn*s complain too much because, had they wished to wipethemselves on the lapels of their kaftans or on the sleeves of theirjackets, they would on no account have succeeded. Their hands, coveredwith fat and blood, wuld slide off their clothing and remain as wet asever.Saturday night they would come to our house in order to settle up thejointly owned merchandise that they would purchase and slaughter duringthe week.The large black table in the dining room was covered with chalk marksof lines and circles. The corner of a half circle %ias erased with afinger,and a cat's ear placed above it. Such was the arithmetic whichonly the butchers understood. Often there would be a sudden shoutingand dispute which would end in a fist fight. When they fought, theywere not joking. They would try to hit each other on the full body,and more than one butcher came away from such a fight with a bruisedchest and a nasty cough.My father would buy the hides and the unkosher meat from the butchers,and send it to the regiment for the soldiers.The teamsters were frequent visitors in our house. They would transportthe hides and the meat to the ships, steamboats and the train at Lakve.The teamsters were divided into groups. Each group had a monopoly ona certain route. Thus there were •'Lakver" teamsters, •'Staliner","Turover" and •*Pinsker” teamsters. One group would not trespass inanother's territory. Besides these, there were ''market teamsters".They wuld make deliveries from the wholesalers to the shops such asa sack of flour or a cask of gasoline, or they wuld transport a Jew toa neighboring village.The town's butchers and teamsters were not what you would call "easternwall sitters". For that reason, they were the only ones who were re-spected by the town and village gentiles.69If a gentile became drunk and unruly cowards a Jew, whether in a cavernor in Che marketplace, it ms enough for Ezra the butcher to come overand lay hia huge butcher hand on the nape of the gentile's neck, and allbecame quiet and peaceful.At the time tfhen they anticipated pogroms in town, the butchers andteamsters comprised the greatest part of the self-defense organization.The teamsters prepared themselves with cleavers, revolvers and lead pipes.They had resolved that in case of a pogrom, the gentiles would paydearly for such an endeavor, and they would no longer start up with theJews. The end result was that, despite the incitement of the priests,the gentiles did not venture to start a fight.David-Horodok was rich in smiths %d>o were divided into various categories.There were smiths who worked in ship building at Mahe Rimar's dock. Theymade skobkes, zhobkes, yarshes with heads like loaves of bread and shvaranesfor Che rudders. There were chose who made bells for the horses, knivesfor the gentiles, knives for the house, cleavers, door handles, hingesand iron doors for walled stores and cellars. There were smiths whoonly worked with copper. I remember one of Chen, Eizel the smith.Besides his work at the forge, he was an ouscanding bal tefilla (prayerleader). There were ocher smiths who would also belong to the burial society,and catch a drink of whiskey at a burial, which was almost a daily eventin town. Even in normal times, the town had more funerals Chan marriages.Fortunately, David-Horodoker women understood the situation and cried tocompensate for the losses. A David-Horodoker woman who had no more Chana half-dozen children was considered barren.The town carpenters would work with copperware. They would travelon Che roads,and sell the copperworK chests to the peasants. However,most of the carpenters produced furniture, doors, windows and otherhousehold items.In normal times, drillers and sawers worked at Mahe Rimar's dock, build-ing barges. Other chan this, they usually worked for the town only aftera fire. Fires were frequent occurences in our town, and, if occasionallya fire was a little delayed, there were those who would "Invite" this"guest".Cobblers worked both for high style and for second-rate. There werethose fancy shoemakers who worked with very expensive leathers, and otherswho worked with cowhide.The tailors were also divided into categories. There were tailors forthe wealthy and for the poor. There even those who hardly earned thegrain to put in the water for barley soup. The poor tailors earned theirlivlihood by remaking the clothing of older people for youngsters, fromwomen's garments to men's, etc.There were hatmakers who sewed caps, one of whom I cannot forget untilthis day. Besides being a hatmaker, he served as the "town clock". Whenone heard Moshe the hatmaker*s coughing as he came from the marketplaceeven before the cock had crowed, you knew that it was time for Jews to get70up for the first sdnyon.The ODly Jewish pecker in town was Elye, son of Aharon Hoshe thedoctor. The old father Aharon also helped work in the yard. They wuld•ake various containers. Including long barrels in which they wouldpack red raspberries which the peasants would gather by the thousandsof pounds in the forests of Polesye each fall season.Masons and sone cobblers had extra jobs to supplesent their incoises.Thus several cobblers were at the same tine the town ausicians. The"siusician of ausicians" bad to auppleaent his incoae by working as abarber and photographer. The clarinetist of the band was a aason.The amall trumpet, the large truapet and the druamer would aake theshoes for the bride and groom before playing at their wedding. Thedrunmer also helped to carry shalak stones (Purim gifts), act ascaller, etc.The watchmaker also was occupied with the production of galoshes.Once he was almost burned to death when the gasoline suddenly ignited.David-Horodok was rich in rabbis and ritual slaughterers, almost asmany as Mazir or even Pinsk. No town was more renowned than David-Horodok for starving so many rabbis. Why the rabbis picked just thistown to conduct their fasts, God only knows.Two of the ritual slaughterers were also cantors. The synagoguecantor Reb Shmarel prayed in the large Choir Synagogue with a choirthat he trained, and Reb Leibe was the cantor at the Great Synagogue.* * *David-Horodok had its own dynasty of "good Jews" (euphemism forHasidic rabbis). This was the family of the Alter Rav. Rabbi IsraelYoseph tfho had come from Volin, from Koretz.The street around the Alter Rav's study house was occupied by hissons and daughters. They lived in want, but warmed themselves under thebroad but cooling rays of the bygone star of their grandfather, theAlter Rav.In contrast, there was joy and llvliness In the Staliner shtibel.They still talk about when the Staliner Bebbe visited. Then even themisnagdim (scholastics who were anti-Rasidic) would go into theirstudy houses on the side streets and stick close to the walls infear of receiving a smack in the neck and throat from a tipsy Stalinerhasid. At that time the Alter Rav’s hasidim felt particularly abasedand dejected.David-Horodok was the capital for Rav Israel Yosef just as Stalinewas the capital for Rav Ahralan.71Rav Baruchl had his own study house and his own hasldltn. Rav Bar-uchl's hssldln were not rich Jews. They were snail shop owners andlaborers, but they did not let their rabbi down. Indeed, lookingat the stateliness of Rav Baruchl, his beautiful long grey beard, hisIntelligent large deep eyes, his patriarchal Abrahaa-like appear-ance, no town would have allowed such a personage to go hungry allseven days of the week.* * *Betwe«) Minha (afternoon prayer service) and Maariv (evening prayerservice) In the Great Synagogue, the shadows would lengthen, and dark-ness settled in. One hardly notices the nan standing at the podlun.Only his voice is heard, with its own peculiar sad-sweet sounds filter-ing through the twilight. It is Yosl the butcher singing the Psalas.Later, after the Maariv service, Berl the sexton teaches a portionof Talnud for the public. Then the eastern wall loses its privilegedstatus. The wealthy, the nerchants and the laborers nix together.Honor belongs to the one who can learn.Indeed they all sat together, hand-in-hand, the aristocratic look-ing and affluent Pesah Yashke's, Yenkl Shashe Gitl's, Velvl Ester Haye's,Moshe Noah Leib's, along with the butchers Hertzl Pravik, Izik Leibele’s,(^tzl and the Jewish teamsters such as the two brothers Volf andAlter Artchik's.It is Bunner. The Pinsk teamsters drive to Pinsk with their sleighsonly in the winter-time %fhen the steamboats are Idle. The brothersVolf and Alter earn their suasner livlihood pulling lumber out of theriver at Shloma Feigele’s dock %>here ships are built. The most theyearn is 20 kopecks a day. In truth, this suffices only for sandy^lack bread, perhaps for a little barley to sMke soup or a pieceof kishka. It was really a difficult and poor livlihood, but allwas forgotten in the evening at the Talmud lesson; for then one waslearning Torah!The tom of Slutzik took away Berl the sexton who became theirveshlva headmaster, and Rabbi Dudl took over the job of giving thepublic Talmud lesson.Nosh Piahas taught Ein Yakov (a collection of legends In the Talmud)at the Alter Rav’s atudyhouse. The school teacher studied Bible andRasM (biblical coaBentar7)vlth the Jews at the culture achool. OnlyIn the Stallner ahtlbel did they revel, sing and dance because they"did not believe in sadness".Soon the summer Is over, and the High Holy Days approach. Thesexton knocks at dam, summoning people to arise and say Selihos(penitential prayers). I go with ay father to the Nagid(Tich man)Synagogue. At the podium stands Yenkl Yeshia's. His hoarse tearfulvoice begs, demands and pleads. The congregants repeat after him withtears pouring from their eyes. I look at the Holy Ark, and it seems72CO Be that Che cover flutters as the Holy Spirit in the Ark cries andbewails the bitter lot of the people of Israel.* a *A very good Jew arrived In town from abroad. He was dressed aristo-cratically with a cape, a soft hat and a cane in hand. His handsomeface was encircled by a broad black beard, and his black eyes BadehiB look like Dr. Herzl.That was Yashl Adler. He came from Rrinki in the province ofGrodno, and he opened a school in David-Horodok where he taught thechildren Hebrew-in-Hebrew.Instead of the old familiar children's teacher with hie whip, Adlertypified the modem Instructor who organized the school in the modemstyle - clean, neat and disciplined.After a while, there arrived in town the "lame elephant"- Halfont.That was the real name given to the nan who later became famous underhis literary pseudonym A. Litvak.With Halfont, the Bund arrived in town. Thanks to the Bund, David-Horodoker boys and girls became "brothers and sisters". Studentsarrived in town to deliver speeches. There were organized an Illegallibrary, conspirational gatherings, and there developed rifts betweenthe various doctrines of socialistic and nationalistic thought. Inone word, things becaae very lively in our sleepy Polesyean town.Those were the years of the 1905 revolution.On a cold wintry Sabbath, Halfont was taken away from us by sleigh,accompanied by a strong police guard to a distant prison or Siberia.* * *It is difficult to leave the town where one was bom and raised.It Is especially difficult to leave the beautiful river. This iswhere we played, bathed, floated in boats, slid on the ice, playedpranks with friends for which we were spanked and poked by ourfathers and teachers, and beaten by the gentiles in the daily warsthat we waged with them.It is still deeply engraved in our hearts for an entire lifetime.Sabbath Evening(Pictures of a Town)byBerl KeumanThe clock strikes twelve. The day is half gone. The sun is inttid-sky. The aroma of the pletzlach (flat rolls) and fresh bulkas(baked rolls) has long since dissipated with the wind.73A new odor now csanates from the chimneys. Like the music ofa stringed instrument, the aroma rises to the sky, and the heavenly ser-vants carry the "burnt offering" aloft on their wings to the Master ofthe World as a Sabbath gift. Thus the Industrious housewives let theoutside world taste the aroma of their cholent and noodle kugel.Moah the blacksmith (he was a righteous Jew) had long since closedup his shop, and walked home at a rapid pace lest he be tardy in wel-coming the Sabbath queen; as it says in the verse: "delay the end of theSabbath and hasten its coning".In the marketplace can be heard the clanging of locks and bolts. Athalf-closed doors the shopkeepers stand around, glancing up and downthe empty marketplace, and one after another unhurriedly (perhaps anothercustomer will come at the last moment) close up the shops.When Nishka the proprietress begins to close her shop, Lipa thedriver rubs his back on the wagon post, shrugs his shoulders to concludehis back-scratching, gi^es a broad resounding yawn, slowly climbs offthe wagon, and his white skinny little horse, blind in one eye, barelydrags its feet."Neigh" says he, and the horse seems to understand that the day ofrest is also arriving for him, and he joyfully plods along.First Lipa and then Izlk "the goat" on one side, "the brilliant" andhis son Itzel (both in one wagon) on the other side, overworked Jewswith hunched shoulders and formalized outfits, separate themselves, onefrom the other. This is the way teamsters part, separating at the brickwall of the church on the way home for Sabbath.On the other side of the marketplace, near Koplinskl's apothecary, theesteemed drivers returning from their trip to Lakve begin to gather.They represent an entirely different world. The horses are healthy,well-fed and large. The wagons are tall with containers in the rearfilled with fragrant hay. They were outfitted with padded comfortablecovered seats for the convenience of their passengers.Arriving from the road, they stop to grab a quick chat.Shalke "the Kaiser" begins to tell of the "wonders" of his trip ashe pulls bard on the reigns of his horse which at that moment begins towhinney as if it understands the conversation."With my horse I don't have to be ashamed", says Benjamin the driverwith a quiet voice, giving his horse a tickle under the belly with hiswhip. It appears that the horse is pleased with his owner’s compliment,and he rears up and industriously digs a hole in the ground with hishind legs.74Asherke '*the deafV with his black playful horse **Fupike** vhich vastied vith a rope. Jumps down vhile holding up his pants. He does nothear the conversation but pokes his vay into the middle^ staring vitha pair of Jovial sparkling bright eyes. He shrugs his shoulders, pullshis right ear to the side and asks quietly, venting to participate inthe conversation: '*Well? Vhat? Are you talking about something**?**liothing, nothing**" says Yosl the blond %rith a muffled voice,"Leibkedoesn*t mean you; he means the horse*'.The resounding laughter of the drivers reverberates through the halfdeserted marketplace.However, Asherke is not dismayed, lie twists around, cracks hiswhip in the air, and laughs good-naturedly together vith all the othersThe old David Tchesnok, who is a little late, comes along the road.He stops his horse and wagon awhile, and, without getting down fromhis wagon, he says vith dignity: **Jevs, it is already late. There isno time. It is already Sabbath ave. We must give our horses someoats and drive home".Meanwhile, his horse takes advantage of the opportunity, raiseshis tail and empties his bowls. He swishes his tail right and left,driving away the flies, and he is ready to go into his stall for theSabbath•The drivers decide that it is definitely time to drive home whenthey see from a distance Shlomo Pinhas hurrying to the bath housewith a pack of white linen under his arm.There vas a certain charm about the David-Borodoker bath house. 1can see before my eyes the long building vith red bricks, the highnarrow windows with the small square bracketed panes.In the first anteroom, a pile of branches lay prepared. The ovenvas heating up so as to warm the water in the steam-boiler which wuldconvey the hot water through pipes into the two large casks whichstood on high iron railings near the ceiling.The dark corridor led into the first wardrobe room where, on theleft side, stood a closet containing cubicles for the clothing. Onthe opposite side there were wooden benches for resting. From therea door led to the "thrashing bath".The "thrashing bath" or, as others called it, the "sweat bath",constituted another world. The door opened with great difficultybecause of t%^ heavy stones bound to it vith rope which held it back.Not everyone could go in there because some could not tolerate theheat. Every once in awhile someone would pass out, and they would75pour m cask of cold water on hin, and lead him by hand into the coldrooB where they would lay hin on the cool concrete bench until he caneto hiaself.It Is really no wonder. The thick stean was Intemlngled with theatanch of dirty underwear hanging fron sticks inserted in the overlyingrafters. Not every heart could endure it.Indeed this is the reason that such a frail Jew as Baruch *'the planter”never experienced the sest of being steaned‘>out in the Jewish David-Borodoker "sweat-bath”.The only one who felt better there than at hone was Moshe MordechaiZelik's "the fat”. The heat was never enough for hin. When he gottogether with Meier Hershlin the butcher, then things really werespirited.First Kaier Bershl shouts in his husky voice: "throw on another bucket!”To pour a bucket of water on the boiling hot stones in the oven requiredgreat skill, and Moshe "the fat" was an expert.One bucket after another, the heat increased. The stean could becut with a knife.as it was thick enough to simply choke a person.At this point they both clinb up to the highest step, and their workbegins.They raise and lower their branches to clear away the stean on allsides. One thrash and then another, and a third, a fifth and a tenth."Ah, ah, ah", cries one of th«n with great pleasure - "a little higher...there, there, there...harder...even harder...good...good...ah"JNov the other one lies down, and the first one gives hin a double■easure.Thus the two beaten Jews leave the "sweat-bath", red as beets, buthealthy. "Oh was that a bath! Since I've been alive.,,"JAnd where do Jews go after the "sweat-bath"? - to the nlfcve (ritualbath). In the nikve-roon it was a little quieter. Only the screaningof the snail children who had polluted the water disturbed the silence.Fron the nikve-roon a door led to another roon which contained a rowof white tubs t^ich were Intended for the gentry.Aftd now we see entering the nikve-roon a tall broadboned Jew. ThisIs Mordehai Leib "the general". Be confidentally descends step by stepuntil he renains standing in the alddle of the nlfcve with the waterreaching his chest. Be puts his hands on his head, bends down, turnsright and left in order to make circlets of waves which draw off theleaves still stuck to his body after the sweat-bath. Be Imnerses himselfthree tines; then gets up and stretches his entire length and straightenshis long yellow beard.76After hln cones the old Rebbi Wolf Hillel's with careful steps,bent over slnost to the ground. Before he descends the lest step, hecovers his ears, nose and eyes vith the fingers of both hands. When heleaves the last step, he stands in the water with his head barely visible.He is iameraed as he stands. Nevertheless, he bends three tines, and,barely catching his breath, he cones out cautiously wiping his face vit-hone hand.The day doesn't linger. Tine flies. The bathhouse enpties. Thestreets becone filled vith the Sabbath spirit.Through the windows can be seen the glean of the braes candlesticksand the covered hallahs on the clean white tableclothes.Washed and outfitted with shining shoes, the snail children wanderabout the streets peeling kernels which their nothers put in theirpockets in honor of Che Sabbath.Girls with braided pigtails on their radiantly shanpooed heads, shovoff to each other their pretty Sabbath clothes.With white pressed shawls on their heads, the grandnothers go out onthe porch to wait for Velvel Ralshke's who walks along the streets witha stick in his hand, knocking on the shutters, and announcing that itis tine to bless the candles.The sun begins to sec. The day departs, giving way for the town'sheartfelt friday evening. Fron the synagogues, one can hear the nelodyof "Cone, let us sing to the Lord; let us shout with joy to the Rockof our salvation..."My Grandnother Told Me(Menories)byBerl NeunanLong Teves (Decenber-January) evenings. Outside, the frost was burn-ing cold. The wlndowpanes sprouted various snow-capped nountalns andthick deep birch forests through which you could barely see the street.In the house, by a snail flickering kerosene lanp which threw shadowson the walls that children were afraid to look at because grandnotherhad said that one nust not play with shadows because denons can givethen nightnares, on such an evening grandnother sat on a short foot-stoolnext to the stove, aurroimded by her grandchildren, and looked into thefire which danced cheerfully, throwing tongues of fire into the blackaooc-filled chlaney. Fron tine to tine grandnother threw a long thinpiece of kindling into the fire, causing it to crackle, throwing sparksonto the wooden floor which was grooved with shadows.Fron tine to tine could be heard the scraping of feet on the white77frozen snow, slowly receding Into the stillness of the night.Zn such s dark Idyllic silence, grsndnother Bsshe told her grand-children that once...s long tlae ago...her grsndnother had told her...that the Borin River had been far...very far away fron the town...and year in and year out, the river with its ice floes slowly cutthe banks, and,with the slow pace of generations, it neared the town...And the grandchildren swallowed the enchanting tale word by word frongrandnother's nouth..and little children's heads could not understandhow the river could nove.The rectangular clock with its ancient flowered dial and longbrass chains with heavy weights which propelled the shiny pendulun backand forth with its never tardy tlck-tock...tick-tock, put the childrento sleep in grandnother's lap, dreaming sweet dresns of water-fairiesand with the question "how could it be..." on their lips.* * *The years fly, and children grow up in naive, content and quietly dig-nified slapllclty. They grow up in streets where the puddles never dryout during the entire year, not having a chance to look, even throughthe snallest window, at the wide world, and not knowing what is eolne onout there. * ^It Is really no wonder that we grown children could not imagine a«»•" i" th. worldCould there possibly be a better shnura-natza baker than Shmerl Seize's?And where could you find such a hearty singer, psaln-reciter sndhakofes-distributor than Avrahan Teasel?flhat town in the entire %rorld possesses a better cantor and choirboysthan Shaerl Lanski and his choir?And who can conpare to the piety of Malahel who never conplained,enduring the tonents of Job with a constant anile?Vhat Jewish conaxmity was blessed with such a saint as Rabbi Dudl?Who else had the honor to taste the pleasure of a hasidic melody ona Sabbath afternoon at the rebbe's table when Tossl Kalouzshni wouldroll his eyes upward, and, with a thin voice, he would fill the air ofthe hassidic shtibl with Sabbath songs?Who else could dance with such fervor at the rebbe*s table than Shla?78Or does there exist anywhere a cleverer cobbler than Aide "Tchupt-chik" and a better tailor than Toaael "Pudrik"?and sore...and aany uny sore Jews, of blessed »caoTy!...That is hov "far" children looked and hov very auch they understood...happy, naive, hearty childhood years.* * *On spring days, when the sun would cnerge fron its wintry aantleof clouds,and vara up the winter-long cake of Ice which had reachedthe open nouth of the street well; when the yellow icicles hengingfron the straw roofs tfhich were shaped by the winter into variousartistic foms would begin dripping rapid drops into the container^ich would also serve as a sitting stool on suoDer nights - on suchspring days, children with happy sailing faces would go out to theHorin River and watch how the river outgrows the banks and, with linnenseforce, pulls hunks of ice which are split with a frightening noiseand are drawn into a pile, one on top of another, later to slide offand disappear into the deep abyss only to later be propelled to thesurface where they are eventually sliced by the ice-cutters whichprotect the bridge froo destruction.Also torn along by the powerful current were bones fron the gravesof the old cenetery and wooden beams which were ripped out fron thefoundations of houses along "Egypt Street", leaving the houses pre-cariously close to toppling into the water.The river tears at the high bank, making deeper and deeper inroads,and then the children understood Grandmother Bashe's story of the past...that once...a very long time ago... the river was far away... very far...* * *Were it not for the dark black Hitler-clouds which covered theskies of the Jewish conmunltles, wiping them off the surface withoutleaving even a memory, then grandchildren in David-Horodok wouldstill be telling their children today that once... a very long timeago... there was...Kay G-d remember their sacred souls..!* * *Berl NeuaianWould you like to become acquainted with our town? Would you liketo get some of its flavor?In the books of Shalom Alelchem and Mendele-Mocher-Seforim, you willfind a large part of what our town possessed.79Afc«r allt vhat didn't our town possess? Poor people, sextons, syna-gogue trustees and ordinary community workers; money-lenders, providers oforphans and ordinary benefactors; a poorbouse, a bathhouse, a ritual bathand above all...mud! A aea of mud! It seemed as If there was no spotin the entire world that was free of mud. Hud In the street, in the yard,on the sidewalk and mud right up to the house.Vhat wasn't done to try and get rid of the mud? In my time, I recallthat they fixed the streets three times. And who doesn't remember howthe gentiles would lay a thick cover of gravel along the length of thestreets, and then overlay it with dirt? Do you think that it really helped?Forget it! (literally: A yesterday day!)After all the gravel and dirt laying, when one had to cross the street,for example near Moshe Yude Llpshltz or Tudl Shatzkl or Shimon Lalchtman,it was truly deadly dangerous!And if one of the residents was good-hearted enough to lay a couple ofboards across the street, do you think It was already an easy statcer(literally: torah noodles)? Mow you cross with dry feet? That Is not theway It begins, and that is not the way it ends. As soon as you put a footon a board, it slides forward and sinks Into the mud as the other end ofthe board rises up into the air, and you remain stuck In the mud with yourshoes. You lose your composure, no longer regarding the presence or absenceof a board, and you wade In the mud to get to the other side as quicklyas possible. When you finally get to the other side, you look around tobe sure that no-one Is looking, and you anguish over your shoes and longtrousers vrhich are now covered with mud up to the knees.Around Gittel Yonah's house. It was truly chaos! If you recall, herhouse was next to the marketplace. There, at the marketplace, all theDavld-Horodoker Jews ran In the morning, and there was really reason to run.There were plenty of good things in the marketplace: pokers,water troughs, kneading troughs, shovels, tubs, palls, soaking dishes,shoes and boots - ask what not?Today who talks about food? - whatever the mouth could desire! As,for example, Eizl "Luibitch" loved big fish... Mendl the "Brotzker"also would only indulge hismelf with small flat cakes - so he alsoran to grab a pile of flat cakes.Very early, at dawn, the two brothers Irak Beroshes and Shmuel Michlare already walking on the street. They are coming from the firstminyon with their prayer shawls under their arms. Where do you supposethey are going? To the marketplace!One buys a bundle of hay for his cow, and the other purchases aball of plain thread to sew the clothing of the peasants.Many Jews would often love to go to the marketplace and observe what80vas being bought and sold, and perhaps they too would grab a bit ofa bargain!Just as an exaaplc, Moshe'le ••twitch-lip’* sivply loved to go out withbis cane and derive pleasure fron everything; he always had plenty oftloe» blessed be the Name. 8erl •’pistol” also didn't Bind such pleasures.In fact, when they Bet each other at the Barketplace with eapty stomachs,they would pick out a convenient strategic spot and trade witticisms,laughing at the world*.•In such a manner, the entire town was there, some running and somewalking.Haye Leah Shmaiha’s ran to sell fried goose skin and fat; ShashkeKorman ran to sell fresh bagles; Nahe Sarlnka^s ran with a wagon ofapples and Nahe Katz vent with quick steps, perhaps to buy some boarbristles.Just as in my father's vineyard, there flourished Simha the ’’Japanese”,a broad shouldered and big-footed man with a pair of fisherman boots pulledup to the armpits, a rope tied around his coat from which hung two endson either side like a hasid’s gertl (belt worn during prayer) - he wouldwhirl around the marketplace looking for a livlihood.It seems that he had large lips while his nose was always a bit swollenand his speech was a little slurred. However, this didn’t prevent himfrom carrying a sack of potatoes on his shoulders for someone, orFagel Baytzl’s basket into her house. In truth, he was cut out to be ateamster, but he had never acquired a horse.* * *God forbid, I am not consumed with jealousy, but the women had itbetter than everyone. First of all, a Horodoker Jew loved his wife,and, secondly, she did not work hard.A sack of potatoes, a cask of cabbage and berries, and a keg ofsour pickles with dill were stored in the cellar; millet, beans, barley,buckwheat groats - everyone kept a supply; a kneading trou^ of breadwas good for an entire week.•• Milk? What David-Bordoker Jew did not havehis own cow in a stall? Veil, besides bringing In an armload of wood,heating up the oven, warming up the food and sweeping the house, therewas nothing to do. There was plenty of time to stand at the window andlook at who was passing by in the street.Mother stands at one window; daughter stands at another window; andthey gossip about the street.If the cantor passes with a few people, the daughter says: ’’you seemother, someone is probably having a bris”; Yossel the smith %rith his patchedeye passes by - ’’mother, who died?” If they saw a policeman approachingfrom a distance, they both disappear, mother and daughter, quickly away81froB the vindovs, rushing out the back door with brooms In hand,•nd they begin -whether they need to or not - sweeping the street,because they are sure that he Is cosing to give them a citation.There passes Elia Yafa*s with a charity box, shivering from the cold.Israel "the lazy*', a hat-aaker by trade, carries a pair of hides tocut out warn Jackets for the gentiles for winter. He drags himselfalong, bent over like a barrel.Moshe'l Laser's springs along continually shrugging his shoulders.Be snorts and spits and talks to himself.Velvel Kushner strides along with his long legs, raising his headhigh. He hardly says good morning to anyone. He carries his fiddlealong, and goes to entertain Rivele Yudovitch with a concert.Then Sarah-Leah "the bride" passes by with a large pack under hershawl. She walks carefully, step by step, as if she were countingher footsteps. Her son Zelig follows her. He walks straight as astring on a violin, as if he had swallowed a stick. He doesn't bendat all. You could put a glass of water on his head.And so they pass, yoimg and old, men and women. Idlers and workmen.Moshele Menahem's with a tool box and saw in his hands; ShlomkeBen-Zion's carries a suit to take measurements on someone; DavidBelike's hurries to the steamboat, and the old "boy" has already puton his black winter overcoat with the yellow womout skunk skin collarwhich dates back to ChmieIniiski's times, sidling along with his handspushed into his sleeves,and shaking his head.Understandably, there was something to say about each one: Halm-Yankl "the honey strainer" is too short; Issur Gurvitch is too tall;Abrahaml Levine is too fat; and Shmuel "the patchmaker" is too thin.It was a unique and beloved occupation to stand at the window,and it wasn't bad even standing there for hours.Occasionally the window-watchers would be saddened by the sight ofDr. Shalkaver running past with hurried strides. Probably someone isgood and sick.In all we bad only one doctor in to%m. Vhat do you think? Ve hadenough. First of sll, God had bestowed him with strong legs - so hewas always running in order to satisfy everyone; and, secondly,everyone knew what to do for their sick.If one of us became sick, we knew that the first thing was towithhold food.If he became weaker and feverish, the second step was to placean ice bag on his head.82As the patient becane even maker from hunger and properly chilledfrom the ice cap, then the neighbors muld mix in vlth their advice,that ve ttust apply leeches that was step number three.After the leeches had sucked up the last drop of blood, and theangel of death was already standing at the head of the bed, ve vouldthen run to the synagogue, and knock on the holy ark, and beg for mercy.Afterwards, they vould run to the doctor, and ask him to save themoribund patient.Nevertheless, Horodoker Jews were generally healthy and satisfied.Most of the illness was caused by the *'evil eye*'. Ve had a special•'doctor" for this - Felgl the blacksmith. She would continually talkand spit, snort and spit, and her incantations really helped. Notonly that: if someone had a swelling on the eye, a sty or some othersuch sore, Feigl the blacksmith vould lick it with her tongue, and herlick \K>uld really help. Nowadays who talks about exorcising a rose?For that, there was no-one like her.Whether it helped or not, the important thing is that they believedit vould help. Horodoker Jews were believers!Did not Horodoker mothers believe that there was a kind-heartedSarah sent down by heaven to protect the Jewish woman in childbirthand her newborn infant? And really %diy should one not believe it?It is clearly written in the Yiddish bible!And one also believed in the devils camp. Heaven protect us, thatvould try by various means and tricks to entrap the child in sin.Indeed, there were Horodoker Jewish mothers who vould routinely distri-bute goodies to small schoolchildren in order to encourage them tosay their nightly prayers without fail. In addition, they would hangplacards containing psalms on each window and door in order to preventthe entrance of imps and evil spirits.Horodoker Jews believed in everything except for one thing. Theydid not believe that there could come a time %ihen beasts in the form ofpeople wuld rise up against them and ruthlessly murder them.Good-natured, naive, friendly Jewish mothers and fathers, childrenand old folks, merchants, artisans, laborers and toilers!With "I believe" on their lips, they were led to the mass-slaughter.How great is the calamity when ve must write of them in the pasttense.David-Horodok Until the WarItzhak NahmanovitchDavid-Horodok was a small town, a small island of culture in theblack and remote sea of Polcsye. Near to God and far from people.83getting there was no easy matter. With the wagon from the train station.It was a 25 kilometer journey over muddy roads, or with the steamboatfrom Pinsk In the summer. It was a 14>18 hour voyage through the wilddream-like forests and swamps of Polesye.A new arrival would notice nothing special. Small houses cling tothe mother earth as If they wanted to unite with her. Incidentally,there was a street popularly called "Egypt Street" where the houseswere sunk halfway Into the ground.Outwardly, the town had nothing to recommend It. But when one ofIts own people looked at It, an Inhabitant who had experienced the localway of life, the sweet kernel under the external gray husk, the life ofthe small houses with their cares and joys, appealed to him with aspecial zest.In general, David-Horodok was a unique and Interesting town. Therewere about 18,000 Inhabitants of which about 7000*8000 were Jews andthe remainder Belorussian with a small number of Poles.A hundred years would go by with many assaults and battles with vari-ous gangs who would pass, and the life of the town did not change. Ingeneral, the relationship between the Inhabitants was not bad. DuringWorld War I, when Balakavitch and his band entered town, the Belo-russians saved the Jews from death, hiding them In their own homes.The solidarity of the people was also demonstrated when the Red armyarrived and wanted to requisition the cattle of the Polish landowners.The Jews and Belorussians opposed this, and they set up armed resistance.The town was then visited by a punishment expedition which shot to deaththe most distinguished people in town. This Is how Baltzl Yudovitch,of blessed memory, was killed. Later, when the first Poles came Intotown, also "fine young men", the Polish inhabitants hid many Jews.Thus many years passed. Lands were wiped out; regimes changed; butin David-Horodok life flowed on without alteration.Calm reigned - a pleasant calm. Even the "gods" lived at ease...next to the church stood the Jewish synagogues and study-houses, andall was normal.If there were positive qualities in Jewish community life, thesewere found in David-Horodok.Politically active but with ethical content, all parties and organi-zations were permeated with feelings of brotherhood. The Mizrahistand the Communist would meet in the synagogue on Yom Kipur. Therewere no great "leaders" - all were equal; young and old stuck to theirjobs. Everyone knew his place. It is truly a shame that ShalomAlelchem was never there because he could have found as many originalfolk themes as in Kasrilevke (Shalom Aleichem's fictional prototypeof a shtetl). Each and every Individual was unique. Each one was aliving Noah Pandre (heroic fictional character penned by ZalmanSchneour) with many similar examples such as Abraml "the bastard".Shia "the emperor", David "the brilliant", Yud "the scholar", etc., etc.Simple, unassisBing, poor but always cheerful, each with his ownwit and mannerisms, one could write a book about them.One cannot overemphasize their uniqueness and modesty; the most pious%fore no earlocks or kaftan; the most intelligent spoke the mother>tongue.There were two valuable libraries with the newest books which were readafter a hard day's work. Work and culture went hand in hand.An exemplary youth was brought up in the excellently organizedTarbus school - all in the Hebrew language.After the eight classes of the school, many of the graduates wentelsewhere for higher education. In Pinsk and Vilna, some 100 David-Horodoker youth went to intermediate and high schools. That is theway it was until the war.3. Rabbis and Community LeadersThe Horodoker DynastyFrom the book On Hassidism by Dr. Rabinovitz (to be published)About the beginning of the nineteenth century, there was foundedan independent haisidlc dynasty in David-Horodok which is near Pinskand even nearer to Staline. Its adherents were known in the vicinityof Pinsk as "Horodoker hassidim" (to distinguish them from those ofRabbi Menahem Mendl of Vitebsk who went by the same name). This wasthe smallest branch of the hassidic dynasties in Polesye, and it hada small circle of hassidim in David-Horodok, Lakve, Luniniatz, Pinskand Kozanhorodok. Just as the Labashier hassidim found their placewest of Pinsk, between Pinsk and Kobrin, so did the small group ofHorodoker hassidim east of Pinsk, between Pinsk and Lakve. Thefounder of the dynasty was Rav Uolf who was called by his hassidimRav Wolftsl (Glnsburg), a son of the tsadik Rav Shmuel Balevi ofKashivke, a town in Volin not far from the well-known hassidic centerof Nasvlzh. Rav Schmuel was a close friend of the renowned tsadikof Volin, Rav Mordehal of Nasvizh. This can be seen from a letterwritten by Rav Asher of Staline sometime between 1802 and 1826 in-dicating that both tzadikim were on friendly terms and were in-lavs.There is no information as to how Rav Volf founded an independentdynasty in the center of the Karlin realm. The only hassidic sourcethat mentions Rav Volf refers to him as ^ Bet Din (head of therabbinic court). It is also popularly believed that Rav Volf was firstdesignated as a rabbi in David-Horodok, and later, probably becauseof his lineage, he became a rebbe (hassidic designation of theirrabbi). Details of his personality, life and the exact year of hisdeath are not known. There are various popular legends regarding hisdeath which testify to his popularity and authority. The legacy ofhis rabbinical seat went to his son Rav David. It appears that he hadno great Influence. For example, Rav David is not mentioned in theshort family biography kept by hassidic sources. Subsequently,65Rav David's son, Rav Israel Yosef Halevi, became a central figure inthe small hassidic branch, and he was their rebbe until the end ofthe nineteenth century. He was a renowned scholar, and he led hissmall congregation of Jews autocratically. Both his fellow towns-men and those from surrounding areas regarded him %d.th great respect.In contrast to the Barazner hassidim who were mostly coanon rabble,his hassidim Included many aristocrats, even some from misnagid (rationa-lists who were usually antagonists of hassidto) homes. For example,when he would journey to the Borodoker synagogue in Pinsk, his"table” tfould be visited by the then Hashuber rebbe. Rav Hotis, thecooBunlty heads, cultural leaders and others. Rav Israel Yosef hadpersonal dealings with the renowned tsadik of Volin, Rav Itzhak ofNasvizh. From the letters which Rav Israel Yosef wrote to him (in1856, 1861 and 1864), one can see his spiritual dependence on RavItzhak of Nasvizh. With the expression: "I pray and Implore that hisholiness (Rav Itzhak) not forget us in the future...so that I may restpeacefully in my house..!' He refers undoubtedly to the controversybetween his hassidim and the Staliner hassidim who regarded theHorodoker hassidlra as inferior. The liturgical melodies in hisHorodok synagogue which was called "the rebbe's studyhouse” were similarto the liturgy in Volin. Rav Israel Yosef died in 1899, and a commontomb enclosed his grave along with the graves of his father andgrandfather in the Horodoker cemetery. His descendents had a certainrenown such as his grandson Rav Itzhak who died in 1908. RavItzhak's grandson, Rav Aharon, belonged to the last generation ofthe dvnasty. He occupied the position of rebbe in the neighboringtown of Lunlnlatz. A second grandson, the last Horodoker rebbe.Rav Moshe, was a student at the yeshlvas of Volozhin and Lida and agifted preacher. Be was close to the Zionist swvement and was heldin great esteem by all. He died a martyr at the hands of the Nazis.Of the writings of the Horodoker tzadlkim, nothing remains except thefew letters mentioned above. The establishment of a dynasty probablyresulted from choosing the son of a hassidic tzadik as rabbi who thenbecame both rabbi and rebbe together. This is similar to the mannerin which the Libasheier dynasty was established. The small branchof Horodoker hassidim were bound together solely by the personalitiesof the tzadikim Rav Volf and Rav Israel Yosef who enlarged the smallnumber of hassidim In that narrow comer of Polesye. They resulnedthe only disciples of the hassidic movementItzhak Leib ZagerThere stands In front of my eyes the small studyhouse on the"synagogue court" in which I. L. Zager was raised and lived.A loving warmth trould permeate you as you entered this little house.His simple parents would receive you with a permanent smile on theirlips.The peacefulness, quiet and cleanliness; the love of thepeople would make you forget that you were in a small lowly house.You would get the feeling of spaciousness.His father, a blacksmith, vas a scholar like many other laborersin David-Horodok, and he sent his only son to the yeshivah.He became Instilled with the Zionist ideal along with his fellowyeshivah students such as P. Nuvak, S. Reznick and others. When theyorganized the first group of the Ze'lrei Zion movement in David-Horodok,1. L. Zager proceeded to join them. His boundless devotion and enthusi-astic activities soon put him at the head of the movement trtiich he leduntil the last day of his life.l.L. Zager's activities in town were not limited only to the ideal-istic Ze’lrei Zion movement and later the Poalei Zion party. There vashardly a social institution in the town in which he vas not an activeleader. In such manner he devoted much time and energy to the publiclibrary named after I. L. Peretz of which he vas one of the founders.The Keren Kayemes fund, the charity boxes and especially the orphans'committees were able to exist until the last moment thanks to his tieswith America and the trust they had in him.1. L. Zager did his communal work with no expectation of reward. Hishonesty vas renowned throughout the town. Characteristically, in allthe institutions where he vas active, they gave him the office oftreasurer. Everyone had complete trust in his notebook where he wouldinscribe with tiny Rashl script (biblical commentator who invented hisown Hebrew script) the revenues and debits of those institutions.1. L. Zager knew everyone in town, and everyone knew him. Peoplewould confide in him, and they would come to ask him for help. Hewould manage the free loan funds, and he vas always ready to help whenhe was convinced that the Involved individual vas in a critical sltuaticr.He always knew who vas really needy and who not. He vas not a talkerbut a doer.When in 1938 there vas a local election in town, the natural candi-date for community leader vas 1. L. Zager. The Poalei Zion party andthe artisans vent to the polls with a joint list at the top of whichwas I. L. Zager. His popularity in town Insured the victory of thatlist in the balloting. Everyone wanted to see him bead of the coimnunity.Uofortimately, certain circles paid off the proper people and thelist was Invalidated on the basis of the infamous paragraph 20, withthe resultant ai^itterment and displeasure of the great majority ofthe Jewish population.In the last years, he worked on steamships as agent of his brother-in-law in America. Even here he was the treasurer to the great sat-isfaction of the partners.He died at his work. He drowned while swimming in Nirccha on Sabbath,August 1, 1939. Hie death caused great sadness throughout the town.Immediately, a funeral committee vas organized by all the politicalparties and conmunal institutions. The funeral took place on the nextday, Sunday, August 2, with a large procession composed of the entire87Jewish population of the town. At the synagogue court, eulogieswere given by representatives of all the parties and conniunalInstitutions. Bis grave was in the sane section as all the departedgreats of that generation in our town.The organisational funeral cossnittee selected three people whodevised a plan to perpetuate his name by building in his naae ahouae for the orphans coonlttee and the I. L. Peretz public library.At the end of the thirty day aoumlng period, on September 2,1939, they proclalaed the campaign to accomplish this goal.Unfortunately, the outbreak of World War II on September 1, 1939nullified all their plans, and they were not even able to erect astone over his grave.Perhaps it is symbolic that such a pure honest soul ws notcontaminated by the murderous nazis and local criminal hands.I. Lipshltz and S. Zazik4. Eve of the WarM. RappaportMy Visit to David-Horodok on the Eve of the Outbreak ofthe Second World WarI had a great longing to again see my town; visit my parents,relatives and friends; again stroll the streets and byways in thetown of my birth; and meet face to face all those with whom I wasraised, educated, and worked many long years.I had the opportunity just before the outbreak of World War II%ihen I was visiting Poland.It was at the end of August, 1939. All of Europe was permeatedwith terror and fear of the approaching war. Polish Jewry wasespecially filled with anxiety and dread. Ho-one knew what the nextday would bring. The military cenaors were very strict, and theJewish press was barely able to inform with hints between the lineswhat might happen. No-one*s heart could have predicted how near wasthe holocaust and how complete the calamity which was approaching.We obtained more details at the English consulate in Warsawincluding a stem warning that we must leave Poland within 24 hours.These instructions came as an unexpected blow.I asked myself what to do • to return without seeing ay home, ayparents, ay friends and acquantances, or to go the dangerous pathand realize my dream to see all those that I love and treasure.1 decided on the perilous course, and I ventured to spend a few88hours at hone.It was dark when 1 arrived in David-Horodok; 1 left before dawn.1 will never forget those few hours when ny parents' house sud-denly becane the focal point for all the David-horodoker Jews. Sontecame to greet a relative or friend; others cane to hear news of theland (Israel). We all felt as if the floor was burning under our feet,and a bitter laaent was beard fron all assembled: what next? Bow doesone escape and where?I recall how every face beamed hearing a living greeting from theland, concerning our efforts and struggles, concerning the light andahadows that go along together, concerning ai^itious construction work,everything that was being created in our land. In my conversation,there was a touch of reproach to all those whose place should havebeen with us in our land but who, unfortunately, had made shortsightedmiscalculations which decided their fate.It was a night of watching. Everyone talked and everyone asked,beginning with Rabbi Shpira of blessed memory, a devoted and faithfulZionist worker who lived to see the land, and ending with many others.Every little detail interested them: the economic situation, currentevents, etc.It was very difficult for me to answer all the questions. The excite-ment finally subsided when I promised to take part in a meeting thefollowing day when I would discuss all the questions in greater breadthand depth. Unfortunately, this meeting did not take place, just asthe best dreams and aspirations of my dear countrymen were neverrealized. The meeting did not occur because I received a telegram atthat moment from my wife and from my home authority which said brieflyand simply: "because of the strained situation, return imraediately."* * *There is no solace or compensation for the great calamity, for thekilling of all these industrious people, toilers, people of religionand culture, of Initiative and boundless devotion to Judaism andZionism. They were cut off like young twigs by the foreign murderoushands.The only consolation is the living monument which was establishedIn our land - in Israel - the hundreds of families of David-HorodokerJews who were saved with their wives and children and who well upin full-blooded life in all the comers of our land. They work,create, and serve together with all Israel citizens, like a livingsturdy wall for the renewed state.My Last Days in David-HorodokM. Shuri AmiThe Soviet occupation force had divided the inhabitants into three89classes:1. The trustworthy class. Ex^cossBunists in whom there were foundao deviations, and those others who openly declared their aynpathyfor the Bolshevik authority with no-cne denouncing then.2. The enesdes of the regiske, the wealthy and the Zioniat activists.3. Ordinary inhabitants who would require prolonged re-educationwith the hope that they would becoae future citizens of the SovietOnion.Ihe majority of the David-Horodoker population belonged to thesecond and third categories. People in the second category who hadmot been denounced and had not been the subject of an official orunofficial complaint, were automatically transferred to the thirdcategory.In the months of March and April 1941, hundreds of young peoplewere mobilized into "work battalions", and most were sent to constructevacuation centers near the borders of Belorussia, as for example inKabrin and Bialystok. I belonged to the Kabrln group.On June 20, a Jewish lad happened to stand watch at one o'clockat night. He was five minutes late. Quickly the commander of thedetachment, a Soviet citizen named Gur, alerted the entire detachmentand rebuked the lad publicly: "Traitor! If the war broke out tomorrowtfould you still be sleeping? In three days you will stand trial."In 48 hours, the German-Russian War flared up.Air raids and artillery shelling accompanied us on our way backhpme. I tried to always be with other Dsvid-Horodokers. The confusionwas great. We were given contradictory orders. Wherever we turned,there were Germans. We could not retreat during daylight, and wewere forced to lay in the forests and swamps, and run at night.We had only one goal: home.On June 26, 1941, friday evening, I arrived in David-Borodok «rlthmy unforgetable friend Moahe Shecter, David's son, and Volf thenewspaper salesman's grandson. I did mot recognize the town. WhatDavld-Rorodoker does not recall the hours before the Sabbath.The shopkeepers rush to close their shops and the laborers end theirwork. The Sabbath candles are lit on all sides, and everyone goesto the prayer-house with the children. And now it Is like the eveof Tisha B'Av. It Is pitch black la the streets, and on the face ofevery Jew Is the dread of the approaching Germans.We were soon surrounded by familiar faces, and before we couldchange our filthy clothes, we had to answer all of their questions.They had thought that the entire mobilized group had fallen. Thefollo%/lng day, on the Sabbath, others began arriving.My family was no longer at home. It turned out that they had fledto the Russian border along with a few dozen other families. The follow-ing day, on Saturday night, they returned because they were forbiddento cross the border.The town filled up with refugees from surrounding towns. The fearwas Intense. The gentiles taunted us; "Jews, your time has passed!The Soviets are leaving here.”Confusion reigned everywhere. One day the masses were mobilized,and the next day they were all set free because of a lack of conmunlca-tlons. The last mobilized group was sent on June 28 to Minsk.We friends met to decide on where to go next, and the opinions weredivided. Moshe Shecter was among those who decided to stay. ItzhakCaiman and I decided to go. We Informed our families and our formercompanions of the Zionist youth whose attitudes had not been swayed.The majority refused to go.On July 6, the last Soviet officials left town. With no pre-arrangement, we 20 boys and girls found ourselfs on A1shiner Street.Along the way we met several other youth who did not want to join us,saying that "the Germans are no worse than the Russians. We willalso adjust to the new regime.”When we reached the border, the guards refused to let us pass. Noargument would help. Several became demoralized. Itzhak Caiman, MiriamFrenkl, Zirel Bagun and Shoshana Elzenberg returned home.One of our group who was born In a border village, agreed to lead usby back-roads and cross the border at night. Barely men, we went to thesouth of Mallshov. At night we encountered an armed patrol whichhappened to contain former officials from our town. The patrol com-mander was Raklln who had been the Conmunlst party secretary InDavid-Horodok. He wanted us to understand that he would agree to giveus a place near his camp, and he promised that he would give us a solu-tion In the morning If he could get weapons for us.It was a night of horror. We could see fires In our town In the dis-tance. The Germans had already been there and had begun plundering.In the morning, the droshke returned from Turov with the partisans.We were soon called to the coitinander. ”I could not get any weapons”,he said, ”but you may pass. The matter has been arranged with the com-mander of the border guards."We rushed forward, and we did not encounter a single living soldier.Hearing the German advance, they all ran away. Within sight ofTurov, we could see In the distance a truck coming towards us, loaded withsoldiers and machine guns. We did not know If they were Russians orGermans. There was a cemetery to the left. We hid amongst the gravestones. After the truck had passed, we set forward again. By night-fall, we had arrived In Turov, on genuine Soviet soil.915. The Last Days and the Last HoursOn July 5, 1941, the Germans entered David-Horodok. Several weeksbefore the capture of the town, local Christians headed by Maralko,Kulaga and Latun, may their names be blotted out, succeeded In creat-ing the Impression that the town Jews were waiting for the Red army toreturn. As a result, the Christians received permission from the S.S.headquarters In Pinsk to handle the Jews at their own discretion.On August 16, at 4 o'clock In the morning, all the Jewish quarterswer« surrounded. All Jewish men and children eight years of age andolder were brought naked and barefoot to the concentration point Inthe courtyard of the Catholic church - and from there to their lastJourney.Yakov, Aba Gartzulln's son, the only Jew who had been foi*ewamedby a Christian of the fate of those who were being sent away, tried toescape. A murderer's bullet stopped him, and he died on the spot.All roads were blocked, and there was no possibility of escape.From the concentration point, the Jews v^re sent to two connongraves which had been previously prepared.When the Jews came to the ditches, they were Instructed to undressand climb down into the ditches where they were shot to death withmachine guns.A group of Jews was spared from the murder, and they were used tosort the fallen bodies in the trenches. Afterwards they were alsomurdered. After the murder, the trenches were filled in by the localpeople who took part in the killing,Only a few managed to hide out by various means, but eventually theytoo met the same horrible fate.Nahman Yanush, Yosle's son, Itche the milkman's grandson, succeededIn escaping through the village of Baroshnye, and he reached Stallne.He hid In their ghetto for a year until he was killed along with theJews of Stallne.Yakov Litman, Kalushin's son, Moshe Alaynik's grandson, hid forseveral days until a Christian informed on him. They dragged him tothe gestapo, and tortured him until he was finally relieved with abullet.Rabbi Aharon Slomlanski, who had been hidden several days by aChristian, was forced to leave his hiding place because the Christianwas afraid they would kill him for hiding a Jew. Having no other alterna-tives, Rabbi Aharon decided to return home. As he crossed the bridge,gentiles grabbed him and threw him Into the river. He drowned Innedi-ately. Thanks to his wife Rachel, who exerted super-hianan efforts, hewas burled In the Jewish cemetery.Simha, Moshe Aharon Mishalav's son, hid for two weeks In his cellar,but the Christian servant gave him over to the gentiles. They draggedhim out of the cellar, and they murdered him in his house in front of92his vlfe and children.laser, Nisan Curvitch*s son, hid in a clothing closet. The localcitisens found him, pulled hin out and dragged him into the market*place. They beat him and tortured him viciously, and put out his eyes.Bis inhuman screaming was heard from one end of the town to the other.He pleaded with the murderers to end bis life.Rabbi Kahas, Rabbi Sander Balahusher*s son, and Rabbi Moshe, RabbiAvraham Earuhin the Karamsker*s aon, hid until 1943 in a nearby villagewith a Christian peasant. They dreamt that Rabbi Moshele, the Stalinerrabbi, was yet living. They crawled out of their hiding place, andthey went off to Staline. Gentiles killed them along the way.Reuven, Haim Kalushnye's son, hid in his yard. The gentiles foundhim, killed him, and threw him into the outdoor privy.Baruch Yossel, Moshe Katzman's son, and his two sons hid out some-where. They had nothing to eat, and so they presented themselves to thegestapo. There they were told that the gestapo had no liquidationdecree concerning them, and they could go where they wished. However,the local citizens beat them to death with sticks in the marketplace.Itzhak, the son of Shloma the Azdamitcher, remained living thanks toa Christian who hid him after he promised to marry her. When the Redarmy returned, he fulfilled his promise.a * aAfter the mass*murder, on a cold and rainy autumn day, they also drovethe women and children out of the town. The local citizens chased afterthem for several kilometers with shouting: "Get out! Ve don't needyou!"Amongst the women, there were several men who were dressed in women'sclothes. One of these was Rabbi Moshe, Rabbi Velvele Ginzberg*s son.The local citizens, who were examining the faces of the refugees, re-cognized him. They pulled him out and murdered him.Leah Vigdar*s, Rabbi Moshe Ralushne's wife, no longer had the strengthto go on with the exiles, and she sat down next to Haim Baruhin's house.She was killed on the spot.Haye, Rabbi Asher Tudavitch*s daughter, seeing what was happening,picked up her child and jumped with him into the Borin River.Faygele, Baytzl Yudavitch's wife, Rivka, Motle Bregman*s %rife,and her daughters remained almost to the end. But as soon as they hadgiven up all their gold and silver, they were chased to the Alshinerbridge, and they were murdered there.A portion of the exiles arrived at the ghettos of Lakve, Staline andVisotzke. They had drunk their cups of bitterness, and they wereliquidated along with all the Jews of those ghettos.93Three veeks after the vomen were driven from town, they wereallowed to return. Into a newly created ghetto which existed for oneyear. Afterwards, they were sent to the saae place where the menhad been killed, and there they were wurdered.Described by Bas-Sheva Kushner and Gunn Pllavln.Itshak NahnanovitchThe year 1939 arrived. The town was taken by the Soviets. ManyJcwlah refugees fron western Poland then foraed a hone In Davld-Horodok.In 19A0, they began arresting and exiling Zionists and others.The town shuddered. The wood was strained. Still there was the■otto: "All for one and one for all."Then July 6, 1941 arrived. The town was captured by Hitler'stroops. Many Jews wanted to save theaselves in Russia, but theNKVD and the border guards «iould not let then pass, and so they wereforced to renain under Mazi rule.Then began the horror, and then was shown the nurderous face ofthe Belorussians. They began catching Jews in the streets and forcingthen to do labor.Many of Hitler's troops passed through the streets of the townheading east. A few days later they returned because of the badroads. Intending to find another path through the narshes. Intown It was runoured that the Germans had been driven back by theRed army. This was exploited by the newly proclalned mayor, thevillainous feldsher (paramed^ic) Ivan Maraiko who went to gestapoheadquarters in Pinsk and reported that the Jews were spreading therumors and that they, the Jews, were attacking the German army. Thisvile calumny brought on the bloody 17th of Av of 1941, about one■onth after the Germans had captured the town. In the beginning ofAugust, about 50 SS murderers arrived unexpectedly. At 4 o'clockin the morning they surrounded the town and later began their bloodywork with the help of the local Belorussian underworld who had en-listed as police. Anticipating abtmdaat booty, they began drivingtogether all the Jewish men. They gathered everyone at the courtof the church and accompanied them with frightful beatings with sticksand guns.There they were forced to remain on their knees with their handsupraised for an hour until all the houses were searched. Whoeverwas found hiding was shot to death on the spot. That was the fateof the brothers Issur and Hershl Gurvitch, two healthy sturdy youngmen who «mre pulled out of a hiding place. As they were led away,their ribs were broken and their qyes gouged out.After all the men were assembled, they were arranged In columnsand led out of totm. No-one knew where they were going. Theypresumed that they were being led to work. However, the questionwas quickly answered.Three kilometers beyond the town on the Alshiner road on a hillof aand» the peasants had prepared a freshly dug trench. It was al-ready too late to consider resistance. Besides, in 1941, there hadnot yet been any mass murders of Jews, so that quiet respectabledecent people could not believe that such a thing could occur. ButIt did happen..• the last word belonged to the machine guns... andthen, with a last breath, each sent a curse*.•A policeman tried to pull the ring off the hand of Laser Kankln,thinking that he was already dead. But the latter was able to raisehimself up and spat In the murderer's face. With a curse on his lipshe fell dead.So did the mother earth take in and hide you in eternal rest.Honor to your memory, my brothers!For your unassuming, difficult but decent lives, the '’civilized**world has rewarded you with a "quick death."* * *That same afternoon, after the murderers had completed their"little Job", they again went to "work".All the remaining women and children received an order thatthey were to immediately leave town.In this particular "holy" work, the entire Christian populationtook part. Young and old, all like wild specters, they went to theJewish houses with sticks, and they drove out the housewives andchildren with beatings, expecting to rob them of their possessions.They drove them out of town with beatings and verbal abuse."Despised Jews", raged the aroused looting crowd. Many of themstood at the bridge, checking each Jewish woman to see If theycould find a man disguised In women's clothing.In such fashion they discovered several men in women's clothes,including Rabbi Moshele, Berl Mlgdalavltch and others who werebeaten viciously by the wild mob, and then shot to death. The womenand children were accompanied with beatings until they reached theoutskirts.The unfortunates went as far as the first village Karamsk afterwhich they strayed through the fields, hungry, beaten, exhausted,many of them pregnant, sick and old women with suckling babies,tom away from their husbands and fathers, desolate and forsakenin a land of wild animals. One of the better peasants wouldoccasionally give a piece of bread or a potato.95SoBe of them went to new towns such as Stallne, Lakve, Visotzkand others. There they shared the bitter fate of those Jewish In-habitants. The remainder strayed and wandered over the dirty muddyroads of Polesye. There was the constant danger of encounteringfurther mental humiliation and physical abuse.Autuan arrived with Its damp cold weather. Many women and childrendied along the roads. Every bush and tree along the way knew oftheir aufferlng.Finally, at the end of autuan, they were allowed back Into Davld-Horodok where a ghetto had been created for them. Life In this ghettowas appalling.The entire population of the ghetto received ten kilos of breadper day, and most of then had to %fork for the German army. Theywere forced to do a variety of jobs.Many working women and children were overcome by hunger and In-human conditions, and they died. Those that remained hardly re-sembled human beings.They were Isolated, swollen with hunger, encircled by barbed wireIn a small part of a filthy quarter, guarded by the murderous policewhich was headed by a creature with a rotten soul - Liava Kasarov,may his name be blotted out. He worshipped many gods... but he wasparticularly attracted to "shiny buttons" for whom this beast In theform of a person was prepared to do anything.So the ghetto existed until the eve of Rosh Hashona in 1942. Onthat day, the ghetto was liquidated.All the women and children - the number was no longer very great,no more than 1600 souls - accompanied by beatings from the policeas well as a special group of SS horsemen, were driven to the sametrench on the Alshlner hill. There everyone was stripped naked andshot to death.Once again mother earth opened her arms and received for the mentheir wives and children.Thus was the innocent Jewish Davld-Horodok taken from the earthand ceased to exist.The abandoned hones were taken possession by their "new owners",but not for long. For later, when large partisan bands began operatingIn the vicinity, they assaulted the town a few times and burned mostof the Je%rleh houses.***I cam to ]>avld•Borpdok in August, 1944. I found aouads orcr*grovn with grass In pises of tbs bousss. Instssd of Jopous laughterand childish playful screaming, places that once beckoned vlth theglow of their homely warmth, now presanted a fierce and frighteningpicture.Every remaining bouse, every tree that stood like a solitarywounded limb - cries, screams, laments and anxiously asks: where arethe grey respectable old folks who would rest In our shade? Wherehas the happy laughter fled, tender feelings, the curlyheadedchildren? Why Is all that was beautiful and loving gone? Andmany many more whys?Ho answer cones. I cannot find It. From dentist Edel's houseto the church hill - not one remaining house, only wild grass...mounds and grass.Someone appeared... moving about like a wild apparition...hedoesn't look me In the eyes...with dirty bare feet In a good blackpullover with silk lapels...he doesn't speak...no-one here talksnow...they know nothing... they did hear about something,but theydon't remember exactly...What's the use of talking? It Is better to be quiet In a ceme-tery. ..A woamn sells second-hand children's clothes In the marketplace.The woman keeps silent, but the clothing cries, cries with pitifultears...I cssm to the holiest place for me in the entire world- to themass grave. A amooth sandy field... four years later, four longyears after fire and blood. Tears of homaslckness close by; forfinally coming to the home which was so near... where are the lovingmother's arms? Where are the coveted friendly faces • gleamingwith pleasure at each encounter?... no-one kisses... no-otie shakesmy hand... 1 stand shattered, dlsmsyad and waiting... but In vale...In this small arid field, a town Is hidden... mo markers, no monu-ment tablets, mo Inscriptions, no flowers • s strange heartrendingallanee.It remains a secret of nature, hew much huaan beauty and dignity,how much love and friendship, how much creative Initiative and talentwas so cruelly, murderously and prematurely transported to sternalrest. Here th^sands of women, man and children released their puresouls, and under the noise of the murderers* msehlne guns they senndcdtheir last protast - a curae • a curse on the ''culture" and tbs beadsof the aurderers as well as on the leaders and presidents, socialistsand democrats, in uniforms and In dress coats... a curse on the headsof those who traveled to Munich, london, Farls or Moscow In whitegloves, selling children's souls and trading with the blood andflesh of innoeent people.e * *The 17th of ^1 Today Is the sad day of your downfall, siy David-97■orodokt Tour life va» vnaaauaing and full of aaroicc, and parhapathat la «hj jou vara *'ravardad" with a quick dataiae. You vant likea pionaar to tha aaeriflca on the altar of the paopla. Tha nuabarof pour fortuitoualy aparad aona la aaall. Thara ara approxlaatalp100 aaB who ara now widely aaparatad. In hitter aplrlt aia knaal andhew our haada In deep aorrow for yeu» our halaoad wnforgattahla Darld*■erodok.Dear aartyrat Itothara, fathera, alatara and hrothera aa wall aa yourhalowad ehildraal Iba 17th of ^ la angralnad deep Into ay heart, aararto ha forgotten. On that day, no aaila la aaan and Joy wanlahaa froatha heart. Ify alod huma with tha reallaatlon of halplaaanaaa and theloot opportunity for a full rawanga.laat forawar ay dear onaa.Hay your holy aaaory ha forarer.(Editora note: Itcak (Etrl) Mahaanoritch was in tha Soviet Onion dur>log World War II. Imedlately after tha war'a and, ha Tlaitad David-Borodok aa a lad amy aoldicr, and ha aav the daatruetion of the townwith hia own ayea. Be now llvaa in the Onitad Stataa of Aawrlca. Theabove deaeriptlon waa written la 1946, on the fifth annivaraary of thedaatruetion of David-Borodok Jewry. At Oiat tine ha waa wiaitlng theCanaan eoneentration caopa, and In Septenbar, 1946, he publiahad in theTlddiah paper "A Bone". We ra-publiah thia deacription with aaall dele-tlona.)a a aleportad by Heiar Berahl KoraanBaa-Sheva Lin, Halar-Eliyahu Kuahnar'a rad-haadad danghtar waa theonly one of all tha David-Borodokara idio 1 fond la David-Borodok •returning froa Inaala after loah Baahona S705.The water carrier, who had werkad for aa for four yaara, did notroeognlca aa. Bar h^a waa filled with Jowiah gooda.The water carrier cant aa to a oocoad gantlla who had taken poaaaa-aloa of Lltaaa BahaaBovlteb'a houaa. Tha Bantlla told aa that theDavld-Boredekar gantilaa had mcalvad awards froa the Caraan ovChorltlasfor their part in killing and ostaralnatlag tha Jowiah population.On tha following day, X mqooatod a heat froa the local mtheritlas,•ad Whan thay awggastad that I llwa in a Jowiah honaa, X rajactad theidaa, and X roqwaatod pazalsaloo to llwa In ay foraar hutchar ahop.Ify raqnaat waa rajactad. Bet Inowlng this, X flMd wp ay hatcherchop as a hawe.. Later tha autheritlas helped we to aat wp a food shop.Later, Boah, tha son of Bacalal Todsvlteh, cans to Dawld-Borodok.Be had bean wounded and want on crutches. Ba raeaivad watarlal and■adical help fron the Soviets, and he helped ws personally.Later on, Eav, son of Shalon Lakovski, and Moshe, sen of Israellasaiek, ratumad to Borodok.98Ibe first Jewish wietia lo David'Horodok was Mslr Eliyahu KvshncrlAo had lived in Bsditeh. After tbej had driven hia oot of hia house,the Borodtchukas attacked hia end aurdercd hia in the aarketplaee Inthe aiddle of the day.The second vietia was Zev Crunye Kunds, a grandson of Velvel theblsekaaith. The gentiles aurderod hia on Alahiner gtreet next toghloM Flaishaan’a house.On the 17th of ^ 5701, the Jewish aen were concentrated In frontof the church, and they were sent froa there to a piece where the■orodtchukes had prepared a coaaon grave.It is very difficult to laagine the brutal acta and the savageatrocities that the Borodtchukas carried out against the Jews in the lastainutes before they aurdered them.They stripped the clothes off of the victiaw, aaashed heads, cut offliabs and slaughtered with whatever cane to hand: sticks, stones. Ironbars and guns. Aftezvards they threw then into the trenches and buriedthem alive. Throe days after the aass>aurder, the ground still stirred.The leader of the pogroa was the feldsher Ivan Moraiko who made aspecial trip to Pinsk in order to bring back the SS.Before traveling to Finsk, be gathered gold and silver froa Jewswho entrusted hia to hide their valuables.After the "action", the gentiles began searching for Jews in hiding.The first to be discovered was Avrahaa Slutski the driver, and nestwas Mendl the Bratcker's son who had hidden in the garden aaongst thebeans. They were both isawdiately mirdered.Beuven Kalushni hid in the closet of his gentile neighbor Markovitch.He was aurdered on the spot and reaained there.Baruch Katsaan and his two sons were found and killed by DaitriFuxik.Issur son of Bisson Curvitch had his ayes gouged out by the Borodt-chukas and his liabs aevared one by one.Tahoshua Zager of Turi, irtio had hidden in an oven, was pulled ootand Burderad.Aharon Loaianaki was thrown into the Borin Kiver. Thanks to theefforts of his wife Bachel, he was pulled out by hired gentiles andaerited burial in the Jewish ceaetery.Ily two children Bracha and Baruch who, thanks to a gentile woasn,had fled to the Dublnitc forest, were returned to town by the gentilesand were cut to pieces in the aiddle of the aarketplace. Ify sonTakov succeeded in escaping.99Slah« Klshtlov hid four aonths lo hi* ovn cellar. Rla textile aaid fedhla the entire four aoocha. She then infomed on hla, end he vaa aurderedon Crablia Street. Before hla eoul returned to God» he vaa heard to cryout: "Scoundrcla, vhat are you tfoins?"A eon of Berl Shuts, vho vaa dreaeed like a voaan, vaa recognlted bythe s*Btllea and aurdered by thea.After the aen had been elaushtered, the Jeviah veacn of Davld'Horodokvara driven out of tovn. A portion died alons the vay. fbe rennant thatlater returned to Borodok, vaa aurdered by the s*Bbllea one year later,and they vere thrown late the aaae trenchea aa the aen.Ihe daushter of Babbl Moahele becaae a partlaan In the Vlaotskl foreat.She fell In battle.Celde lachel. Heir Ellyahu Kuahner'a vlfe, hid In the shrine In thevlllase of Koraaak where ahe was later killed.Shauel Katsaan, a aon of Lelbl Kattaan, and hla alater aoved about Inthe foreat of Aril for four aentha. The s*ntllea caught then there andhacked thea to pieces.Nlahka, Bala Klrahner's vlfe, along with three other woaen, hid them-selves In a stable, and that la where they vere killed.Leah, Moahe Kaluahne'a wife, vaa killed by the gentiles on the Grebllyebridge. The gentiles planned to kill ae. One night a representative ofthe gentiles caae to kill ae. I began acreaalng, and the police sooneaae and saved aa.At last t could no longer atay In Davld-Horodok because of the hatredof the gentiles, and I ran away f.iom there.6. Fartlaan StoriesBala Bochaan1. Colonel Satsnovskl.Ve find ouraalves In the vicinity of the village Krlpna, net far fromrinak, la thick forests.Ve have been prepared for a^ny days to aove to another spot, but naan*while ve do net aave.Vbere are ve aovlng, and, aoat iaportant, vhat are ve waiting forT Thisapparently la the covnander'a aacret.Our vouan officer, for when I an the driver, tells ne the deepest secret,that we are waiting for an airplane coning here fron Moacow with Inportantpeople. They should have been here four days age, and no>000 knows whythey are late.What haa happened? Did they aeet vith eone aiafortune?A fev houra after the lady offleer told mt thla atory, our detachnentbegan to aove out.We traveled the entire night, and by day «e renained la a large thickforeat containing deep nud.Tbia waa our proviaional headquartera and reaidence.Ve received the order to aet up cabina, and although it waa already lateautuan (a nonth after Suceaa. 1M3), we were net allowed to light a fire.The officer, huaband of the lady officer with her child, cane to ourwagon and told ua that the paraehutiata had finally arrived, but theyhad net with nlafortune. Three of then died on their way to Join thedetachnent. A peaaant fron the village of Tarablitch had betrayed then.The foreat In which our detaehnent now atood, waa near the largevillage of Karateke'Valya. The population of the village waa friendlyto the partiaana, and headquartera gave pemiaaion to light firea duringthe day for cooking and baking.That aane day there waa an aaaehbly, and the connander of the detach'nent. Colonel Satanovaki, gave the partiaana and the refugeea inatruetionsconcerning their behavior.The chief directive waa that, with the exception of thoae partiaanawho were aent on terroriat actiona againat the Gemana, no'one waa toleave the area. Whoever diaobeyed the eonnand would be ahot on the apot,without a trial.Before finiahing theae inatructiona, be turned to the aaaenbly:"Conradea, whoever conea fron or la faniliar with the region of David'Borodok, Stalina and Turov, let hin report to ne In ny headquartera afterthe aaaenbly."I went into ataff headquartera and reported to the coanander that 1knew David'Borodok well, aa well aa a little of the vicinity."Tall aa coarade Bochaan, do you know where the villagea of Acdcadtch,Tarablitch and Karatitch arc located?""Yea", I anawer.Ba aaka ae to atand aaidc, and he Intcrrogatea the aacood partiaar.who had entered headquartera right after ae.'Vhere are you fron coaurade?""Fron the village Bukteha", anawera the partiaan. "It la far fronDavid'Borodok, but we peaaanta often went there, and that la why I knowthe region.""Why did you Join our dctachaent?" ^ continued the coeataline of queationing.nder In hia101"B«c«u*e I vant to fight the CcraBna", vaa the partlaao'a anavcr.*1,18tan. eoaradef**, aa the eoanaodar tvrnad to the partlaan, **pcrhapatbarc la a Jaw in our datachaiant who kaowa you?"*^t in our datachaant", again rapllad tha partlaan» *^1 thara areJawa in Fyodorov*a dctaehaant nearby, who know ae fren hone. Aak thenabout ne.*'Quickly contact vat nade with Fyodorov* a detachaant, and the anawerraturead that the partlaan waa a flna wpatandlng nan and that there waano danger of hla being a traitor.After a brief Interval, there cane 10 young nan Into the conmander'aheadquartera. They were atrong Jovial partlaana. Later Gcman battleunlfoma were brought la. All the partlaana, except for ne, took offtheir partlean clothee and donned the aparkllng new Geman battle unlfoma.They even did not forget to put croeaea on their necka. One of thepartlaana put on the ualfom of a Geman officer. Be waa one of theten who had cone fron Hoacew, and he had perfect coanand of the Gemanlanguage.All the weapona • rlflea, nachlnc guna and grenadca • with which theae"Gemana** were amed, were Ceman-nade. Even the clgarettea were Geman.1 dreaaed up In traditional Jewlah clothea, concealing a mvolver asdaeveral hand grenadea.The **Gcman officer" gave ne the followl*'* d^rectlona:"In caae we encounter Gemana or police along the way, we will aay thatwe caught you hiding out In the foreat. After we beat you up (algna ofthe beating were laaaedlately provided. They cut one of flngera andaneared the blood on wj face and hair), you are taking ua to the placewhere nany other Jewa am hidden."The comnnder ordered ua not to leave headquartera, and not to ahowoumelvea to anyone.Balfway thmu^ the night, we am mady for our Journey.The Teaman officer" tuma to na with the following werda:"Conrada partlaana!**A abort tine ago we wem boarding an airplane In Moacow to cone andJoin your partlaan detachnent. Along with the pilot, we were thirteen nen."Rear the Frlpyet liver, net far fron Mlkaahavltch, we were chaaed andahet at by Geman alrplanea. When our plane waa aet on flm, we jtnipedout with our parachutea. Lncklly, we all landed aafely near the villageof Tarablltch. After we aaarchod and found each other, we went Into apeaaant'a hut In the village, and we aakad bin for the way to the hanletof Malrlln. The peaaant ahowed no the way, aaaurlng ua that there wereno Gemana or police In the entlm mglon. While we were checking the route102with our Mp, it turned out that the peaeent vaa at that wonent in-feredng on ua. Ve started along the road, thanking and blesaing thepeasant and bis fsodly.**ln half an hour, we were accosted by wen who called out **Bslt; putyour hands up"; they began to about at ua.''Three of our coaradea were killed on the apot.'Ve laaediately opened fire, and we heard the acreaedng and groaningfroB the wounded on their aide.'Vith that ended the clash In the aBsll foreat. Crawling on all fours,we tried to reach a different large foreat. Along the way, we atuabledon a body who was choking with pain caused by one of our bullets. Rewas wounded in both feet. This wounded policeman irately cursed thepeasant Karp who bad awakened the police from sleep and chased after thepartisans along with them."We choked the policeman to death", continued the "German officer","and, after several days of wandering through awamps and forests, wereached your detachment, exhausted.""Mow", proposed the "officer", 'Sre are going to bring that peasantback here."We must take revenge against such a cowardly dog!"In truth, there are more li^>ortant targets for our partisans", notedthe "officer", "our entire energy must be concentrated against the accursedGermans, but we are consumed with resentment and anger, that one of ourown peasants, flesh of our flesh, spilled the blood of his own brothersand betrayed his own people to the German murderers like a aervile dog.'Ve will bring him back here Co the detachment. We will bring him backhere dead or alive, that traitor ^murderer, ao that partisan blood will notbe apilled wantonly."Following these words of our group leader, we set out on our way.For three nights we wandered through forests, swaa^a and fields untilwe arrived at the village of Karatitch.After our T^ermans" found out that there were only five policemen inthe village, we all vent into the police atation.Our "officer" informed the policemen that his group was specially selectedto effect the liquidation of the remaining Jews who were hiding in theforests.Feinting to me, the "officer" said that this captured Jew would shew usthe place where many Jews were hiding.In order to undertake such a holy task, they would have to mobilise thepolice of Karatitch, Tarablitch and Asdaadteh.103After atl the policeaen of Keratiteh had been auatered tofether, ve allwant to Tarabllteh.IB tbe Tarablitch police atation, which vaa In a private heuae, ell theTereblltch policeaen were aaacabled, inclading Che peaaant Karp.IWo policeaen were dlapatched bp the '*effleer" to Asdaalteh with orderato return with that village'a police.The "officer" talked Kuaslan aaongat the policeaen, and he aeolded themfor their lack of vigilance."Zt eppeara", he roared with a thundering voice, "hew la It poailble thatwithin 10 klloaetera or ao froa pour poata, that there could be ao aanpJewa atlll bidden? Mo eaall thing • to aanp Jews", he repeated.Concluding his talk to the police, he turned to hla 'HSeraan" coaradea,end talked to then In the Geraan language.The 'Armans*answered froa tlae to tlae with a "p***'f "good", "all Inorder" - they didn't know any ether Geman words.The policeaen began to reply, saying that It was not their fault thatthere were still a few living Jews hidden here or there. Bach one of thenhad done his utaost to exterainate the hated Jews. They hadn't restedday or nl-ght, searching In every comer, catching woaen, children and aen,aurderlng all without aercy.Then they described a litany of gruesoae acts idilch each one had perforaed.Each story was aore horrible end eppalllng than the preceding.In such Banner, listening to these vile tales of Birder, we passed thetlae. Tbe night was dark and cloudy, but It was coalng to an end.Ve partisans shivered; the ground was burning under our feet. Ve werenoxious to get back Into the forest before they found out that we werepartisans. Everyone held his weapon tightly In his hand. Everyone wasrestless and Inpatient.Only the "officer", the oldeat of the group, was csla and in no hurry.■e alone was saoklng, and he offered cigarettes, Geman cigarettes, to allthe police. Be listened patiently to all of their horror stories, keptconpany with thea, and, at the aaae tlae, he threw In "lonocent" questions:*^ell, and what have you been doing about partlsansT You oat, drink andsleep, and you don't catch any partlaansT ghaas on you!"Then the peasant Karp spoke. Be told hew approxlastely 10 days previouslyhe delivered a group of partisans Into the hands of the police."Onfortunately", he said, "there were not enough police, and only threepartisans were killed while the others nsnsged to escape into the forest.Four policeaen fell In this battle."As for ayaelf", boasted the peasant Karp, X barely escaped with ny life.104I hid in a ditch, and laid there until the partisans had left.***'For this deed of nine'*, he explained, "I received a beautiful rewardfron the tom commandant in David-Horodok: two nilk^cows and nuch clothingfrom the dead Jews."Outside, daylight appeared. The peasant woman was already up, andher children were beginning to awaken. The peasant woman took a potof soup out of the oven, and she and the children began to eat.I stretched out my hand to the woman, and begged her for a littlesoup. She poured a full bowl of warm soup and gave it to me.Just as I began to eat, the eldest of the group, the "German officer",came over to me, pulled the bowl out of my hands and said: "Did the goodwoman give this to you? In that case, eat!'* Having finished speaking,he poured the entire bowl of soup over my head.The '*G€rmans** and policemen responded to this "heroic** act with shrilllaughter. There was indescribable joy and cheer. All were pleasedwith this "brilliant** occurence.Abruptly we heard the sound of voices 3e. The door swung openand the two messengers entered along with luc eight policemen fromAzdamitch.The policemen greeted each other joyfully. They shook hands, chattedand eventually told the story of how the '*German group leader** had pouredthe bowl of soup over my head.I sat in a corner, covered from head to foot with the remains ofthe flour and potato soup. My face and hands were streaked with blood,and 1 made myself cry...Our group leader, the *'officer**, whispered secretive orders to thepolice commanders and the peasant Karp...The peasants of the village, learning that we were going on such aholy mission, to catch Jews, brought us considerable food such as eggs,butter, pork, bread, and a considerable number of whiskey flasks.The '*officer'* ordered us to begin our journey.Each man quickly packed a share of the food into his rucksack and beganwalking along the road which led to the right of the woods of thevillage Kalk.Ve went through thick forests of small trees. Along the way, the policeasked me about the hidden Jews. They were interested to know if therewere any rich ones and if there were any young women. They were greatlyencouraged and pleased by my answers. I told them that they would findeverything there: much money, gold, jewels and especially youngbeautiful women...105After Mrchlog three luiure, our "officer” told ue to otep. "We eRiet''.he sold, "here o root end o bite to eat."All the weapone were atacked together In pllea of three. We eat downood began to feast.They Ate and drank whiskey without ond, and, "out of the goodness oftheir hearts”, they even gawe m plenty to eat.Meanwhile, the "officer” took out a wap and ahewed the already half*drunk pollcewen the place where they would find the Jews with their cabins,naturally, this place was wary wary near...Encouraged that they were wery close to their goal, and IsMglnlng the"juicy aorsel" that awaited then, the pollceaen again renewed their drinking...At the end of the repast, the polleesan laid down to rest on one side,and all the "Genssns” on the opposite side.The peasant Karp and a conpletely Inebriated polleewan were sent toguard mt and the weapons...In a few adnutes, all the police fell Into a deep sleep.The "Cemans” quickly awoke froa their "sleep"; they took up the loadedguns; and in seconds all the policemen were shot to death. Only one personwas "spared”, the peasant Karp.He was to be broiaght back allwe to the detachamnt in order to hand himever to the parachutists whose three cosipaolons were killed through Karp’streachery.On the tenth day we returned to our detacfaamnt. The sane day that wereturned, Karp was hung.Searching his belongings, we found a pocket watch with a bebrew Inscription.The inscription read: "In aenory of the wedding of Dov Parber." This watchwas a wedding gift to Berl Farber from his father*ln*law.* * *The detschawnt coaaander Satanovakl was happy at our return. Be receivedus joyfully, end he said that he had a premonition that our adsslon wouldsucceed.Be said that our group leader, the "officer", was "ome of our best andcleverest aona of Ibiasla. Be knows ten languages, including a perfectGerman; he la an able diplomat and well>quallfled for auch missions."**Tet", said comMnder Satanovakl, "during the entire ten days .thstyou were away, X was restless and could not sleep. Who knows; war Is warand anything can happen!”"Friends", ended our commander, "you are tired from the strain and fromthe journey. Eech of you three days furlough. Bovever. I alsoglTlBg you the following order: Ro^one la to know where you've been andwhdt you've done. For dlaobeylng thla order* you will receive the aevereatwat'tlne yunlahaent."2. Koah Hashana of 1943 In the Partisan DetachnentThe Polish partisan detaehannt "Kastluahke”* which nonbered about 300Poles and 8 Jews* was In the vicinity of the large village of Hultahitch(about 80 klloaetera fron Plnsk)* in large thick forests and deep swaapa.The detachnent had under its protection a caup of relatives consistingof about one hundred Polish faullies who had fled the slaughters causedby the Okrainians. There were also a nunbcr of Jewish souls in the canp,unfortunate reananta of the tens of thousands of Jews who were cruelly■urdered by the Geraans along with the Okrainians and Belorussians.I was appointed by the staff to act as driver for the fanilles of thepartisan fighters.The detachsunt wouldn't stay In one place for very long. Ve would oftenchange locations In the forests.On the eve of Bosh Hashana 1943* a canp Jew cane to the cosBonder of thedetachnent with a request that they be allowed to hold coownal serviceson the following day In a nearby bam In the forest.The conaander was a young healthy and handsoate aan who spoke and wrotePolish well, and who had arrived by airplane from Moscow a sonth earlierwith the ten other Polish parachutists.The coussander spoke little and was unusually stern. Ho-one had yet seena sulle on his hsndsoue face. Bis orders to the partisans as well as to the.canp refugees were always brief and curt. He had traitors and inforwersshot without uercy. Ve Jews began to notice a good streak In his characteras aeon as he arrived at the detachsunt. That is, he ordered that his foodand kitchen overseers should net abuse anyone by lessening their food rations,to that tha Jawish refugees would receive just as such as the Polish andBusslan refugees.On the ■oming of gosh Hashana. the cosnunder sent for th« lews who hadasked bin for pemissien on the previous day to pray together in congregation,■a answered with a anile that had not been seen on his face since hisarrival:*'Xf you think that your god will help you as a result of your prayers,Chen go entreat hia. **)ly god", said hs holding his wsapon against his heart,"is ^y gun and ay grenades. The Cecnan aurderers understand that languagebetter, and it reaches then faster. Tour pleas and prayers reach your godjust about as such as they reach the Cerasns. But pray, and entreat your godas noch as your hearts desire. I have no right to hinder your religious feellniPray as nueh as you like, but let it be quiet.*'All the Jews, escept for the Jewish partisans on duty, cane to prsy. therewas only one tallls and one aahsor which a Platnltcer Jew had taken along with107hia when he fled from the slaughter. He wrapped himself In the tallis andprayed while the others • the rexanant of tens of thousands of Jews who weremurdered» slaughtered and buried alive • were choked in tears, poundingtheir heads against the walls and sobbing in violent spasms.Human words are too poor to describe these heartrending scenes, whenclose to thirty unfortunate Jews - men, women and children -* desolate, lonelyand orphaned - vented their tears and their rage over their great misfortune.Many Polish refugees from the camp and partisans from the detachmentgathered around the barn. Many of them cried along %rith the Jews.Who knows what was oppressing them? Perhaps they were regreting whatrole they may have had in helping the Germans kill the parents, husbands,wives and children of these Jews that were praying here now.When the cantor, a good singer with a hearty voice and a pained heart,began saying the Hlnlnl ha-oni prayer, the tears literally flooded the barn.At that moment, the detachment commander. Colonel Satanovski, came ridingup quickly on his horse. He requested a short intermission in the prayers,and, seated on his horse, he said the following:’'Comrades! Why are you crying? We are still alive; so what is there tocry about? The Germans are retreating thanks to the severe beatings renderedby the brave Red army on all fronts. It %ron’t be long before Russiansoldiers will be strolling the streets of Berlin, over the entire accursedGerman land and over the dead bodies of the German murderers. The day ofvengeance is near! However, our partisan situation today is not better,but somewhat worse than before. We must increase our vigilance. The Germanwill be hard to displace. We and all the other courageous partisan detach-ments have destroyed all the bridges and railway lines. The Germans findthemselves in a desperate situation. They know that the partisans are nowtheir greatest danger. Therefore, they have dispatched special divisions todestroy us. Also from the west, from Germany, they have sent out Germandivisions to help. We are in the middle. However, all the roads are blocked.For the time being, they cannot get to us. Every night, large Russianpartisan groups are dropped off by airplane. They are mining the roadsin the path of the retreating Germans. They are being tom to pieces inthe fields and In the forests. As long as we don’t fight them in open battle -the brave Russian army is doing that with great success - we can avoid greatcasualties. Whether all of us who are here will survive, is hard to know.Perhaps we can hope."The Germans have burned do%m everything from Pinsk to Mazir and Zhitomar.We have a directive from the highest command in Moscow to destroy withoutmercy all German followers and traitors. In my refugee camp, we uncoveredan entire family of German spies. Over ten of my dear partisan lads werekilled because of them. Tonight, the entire family of eight will be hung.Although only the daughter was actually guilty, but the entire cowardlyfamily knew about her treachery. Let us hope that we will endure all hard-ships. Long live the Red army!"After finishing his speech, the consander turned to the cantor wrappedin his tellis. and he said the following: "Listen now, continue your pray-ers. Say what you were saying before I caae to the barn."The cantor covered his hesd with his old shredded tallis, leaned his thindried hands against the eastern wall of the barn, and he began to tearfullyintone the words of Hinini ha*oni.The coomander got off his horse, snoked a cigarette, leaned his leftshoulder against his horse, looked the entire tine in the direction of theforest, and, with quiet attention, he listened to the sad tearful nelody.1 noticed that tears were in his eyes...* * *The war was over. 1 returned to ay home tom and encountered destructionand a huge mass grave. All was lost.I was sent to Ravne where there was a job opportunity.In the administrative office of the tom commandant, I met a man dressedin a handsome black suit with carefully combed hair. He was conversingwith the commandant.I could not take my eyes off of him. I had seen that nan somewherebefore, and 1 couldn't remember where. The man noticed that I was look-ing at him with special Interest, and he abruptly asked me:"Don't you recognize me comrade?""Well, my friend", he said, "if you don't remember, it doesn't matter.It is not necessary, my friend. Everything evil must belong to the past,to history."When he left the administrative office, the tom commandant of Ravneasked me: "Citizen Hochman, were you in his Polish detachment calledKastiushka during the war?"I didn't let him go any further: "Tcs, yes, that's right! He is thecoMander of my detachment, the Polish colonel Satanovskl!""Mo, no", interrupted the Ravne tom covandant, "no, not the PoleSatanovskl, but the courageous hero of the Soviet Union, organizer of allthe Polish partisan units on Soviet soil, who is now decorated with allthe highest medals by comrade Stalin himself and who is now a frequentguest, along with all the other distinguished personalities, in the Kremlina colonel and heroic partisan, the Jew Moshe Satanovskl!"Hlriam Bragman Tells of her Partisan ActivitiesIn Bid-July 1941, towards the end of the week, when the Gexvans hadbeen in David-Horodok for several days, a ruBor spread that the Russianswere returning. The Gensans retreated along with their town helpers.The Murderer A. Maralko, who stood at the bead of the local authorities,fled to Pinsk with his cohorts. When they asked hlB why he abandoned thetown without an organized Banagement, he replied that he had fled becauseof shooting from the Jews and Russians. Sunday the Geraans returned, bring-ing the Burderer and his henchmen with them.They soon ordered the Jews to wear a blue star of David on a white bandon their sleeves. That same day they took the Ben "to work" beyond thetown. Several hours later, we heard shooting from the direction that theBen had gone. Who and what, no-one knew. Ve hid our father in the cellar,and when the gentiles entered to look for Ben, ve created an uproar todivert their attention.That same night, in a pouring rain, I suddenly heard crying. I sawthrough the window women and children with sacks on their backs.In reply to ay question, they told me that all the Jews were beingdriven across the bridge and out of town. My father quickly put onwomen's clothes, and we all stood together in the crowd: my isother, myfather, ay sister Faigele and I. Along the road we were encountered bya gentile who was inspecting the crowd, and he recognized father. Wordswere of no avail. He returned with him to the town.The rain poured. The women and children were brought to a sianor alongsidethe river on the way to Stallne. They assured us that they would return ushome just as soon as they had completed their search for weapons in ourhouses. Meanwhile, the gentiles from the vicinity arrived, and they beganto plunder and grab whatever came to hand. One of them struggled with me,threatening me with a knife if 1 wouldn't give him my coat. However, Idid not give it to him, and he left.At night the murderer Maraiko came and took away Rivka, Tossel Yudavitch'swife; her two daughters, Molle and Yentl; Leah, Elya Bragman's daughter;and Malke the pharaaclst, Yashe Yudavitch's wife. Be also wanted to takeBy sister Faigele. *^niy ahould she have to suffer here", he said. ButI refused to part with her under any conditions.In the Bomlng, Vanke and a band of cohorts drove us off the sBnortowards Stallne. They shot Into the air, pushed and chased us. The olderones could not hold up and fell along the way. When we were not far fromStallne, they turned us back toward David-Horodok.One kindly gentile who had known my Batemal grandfather, Hertzl Luriathe timber merchant, took us away to his farm at the time that the otherswere returning to David-Horodok. 1 learned later that they were cranoedinto a ghetto in the town which they had surrounded with barbed wire.110According to his plan, Faigele and 1 would work in the field and nother wouldstay in the house.Be treated us very well. However, two days later, when he vent with usinto the field, a neighbor from the village passed us."How that you've been seen, you can no longer remain with me", said thegentile, "because my life is also now in jeopardy." He brought us tosome relatives on another farm, and he vent alone to Staline to get yellowpatches which was his usual routine.When he returned, he drove us in his wagon through the forests nearStaline where be let us off. He took our belongings in his wagon andtransported them to Staline. We walked the rest of the way to Staline.The gentile refused to take any gift or money from us.•In Stsline, we hid several days with Ester Blizshovsko, but our goal wasSame. My aunt, my mother's sister, lived there. We walked to Dombrovitz,and we drove from there to Same by wagon. Ue stayed in Same five monthsuntil they established a ghetto in the Jewish quarter. It is noteworthythat certain Same gentiles did not want to leave the border region ofthe ghetto. Ifost of the Jews survived in the ghetto by selling theirbelongings and utensils. We did not want our aunt to have to support us,so we moved to other lodgings which were provided by the communalcommittee.There were several David-Horodokers with us in the ghetto: GoldeFinkelstein and her mother Yently, Zelda Finkelstein and her daughterSara, and Haike Finkelstein with her two daughters, Kanie and Rive.Golde Finkelstein had her personal problem to add to the general woe.During the days of the holocaust, she gave birth to a daughter on hertwelfth wedding anniversary.All the Jews were required to register on tiro separate occasionsover a six month period. At the second registration they established aghetto for recently arrived Jews from Dambrovitz and the surrounding region.Then the killing began. Every day, five hundred men were transported tothe trenches which had been prepared in the forest outside of town.When our transport arrived at the spot, we all began running away fromthe trenches towards a hill over near Same • a splendid target for theGerman guns.Ify sister Faigele was wounded. While running 1 heard a voice: "Rundaughter!" To this day I don't know if that was my mother's voice. Inany case, I never saw her again.We came to a stream, and I washed Faigele's foot. Ve spent the entirenight alone in the forest, terrified by horrible visions. In the morningwe discovered a small house in the forest, and we went inside. Faigele’sfoot had become swollen, and so she laid down and quickly fell asleep.I went outside to look around and to try and find aome Jews. When 1Illreturned to get Feigele, people In the bouec told mt that she had gonewith the ahepherda. Later, I learned fro« the village teacher that Palgelehad been dragged Into the woods and forced to lay on the ground while theydrove hack and forth over her with a bicycle until, with terrible pain andauffaring, ahe gave up her pure innocent aoul.1 went off on the pathway crying bitterly until I finally dropped offinto an exhausted sleep. A gentile awoke sw, brought mt Into the forest,and succeeded in finding mt a hiding place. Early nest neming I set offwalking again until a wagon stopped and gave ae a ride to a nearby fans.1 went into a house and asked for a drink. I found two Jews there. AfterI ate and drank, the Jews showed ae Che road and warned ae to hide awayfroa wagons. I went on, but suddenly 1 heard the sound of an approachingwagon. I quickly hid in the bushes. To aqr great terror, the wagon stoppednear ay hiding place. )fy soul nearly left ay body before I realired thatthe wagon contained isy friends froa the fara. They drove ae in their wagonto the faaily of a Jewish doctor who lived in the forest. I stayed with themfor a aonth. At night, we would go to the gentile houaea to beg for food,even a dry crust of bread. The trees served as hiding places during thenight.One gentile woaso treated ae very kindly and invited as into her hooaonce a week. There 1 would wash ay hair. She gave ae a cooking pot andsome salt, a very scarce coaaodity.The pot had two advantages. One was that I could cat warn cooked foodafter wandering for weeka through the cold forest. Most iaportant wasthat potatoes, which were half-burned when roasted over a fire, could nowbe eaten entirely without any waste.Another gentile woaan hid ae in the forest when the Geraans appeared once.Afterwards she brought ae back to ay friends. One night, while we werewarning ourselves by a fire that we lit in the forest, a aan with a gunsuddenly appeared and said: "1 an a partisan. Vc have a wounded nan."By the light of the flanes he exaained each one of us until he caae nextto aa and stared at ae. Suddenly we heard a shot and a cry: 'H^t going!"Everyone ran away, but one by one they returned. The doctor calledhis daughters to cosa back, saying that they would *'take care of hin" ifthey would not return. Afterwards they all searched for as, calling aeby naaa again and again, but I laid Che entire night hidden in the bushes.In the noming, I returned to Che group. The doctor praised ae and said:•^u were aaart not to ceae...**That is how things were for several nonths until the outlaws, lAoac leaderwaa Bandcro and who called thaaaclvea "Bandcrovtses", began catching Jews.At that tiae the partisans showed up. 1 begged then to take as with then,but they refused. Then I said to then: "finiah ae off if you won't honorny wish."Finally they consented. At the beginning, I worked for several aonthsin the aedicine section, accoapanying the wounded in wagons and nursingthen. Later, when Z had proven nyaelf courageous and bold, I was assignedto the infomation service. My Job was to go to the villages, find out112the Buaber of Gcraan soldiers In esch piece, how sMny vespons they possessed•nd vhere their coonsnder vss locsced. When I brought bsck the sccursteInforastlon, the psrtlssns would attack each place and destroy It.Thera was a landing strip built near Zhltoasr where the Sowlets landedairplanes of the led aniy, ewacuatlng our aewerely wounded and presiding«a with aupplies and weapons.The airplanes would cone at night, and we would light fires to guidethan In their landing. Once an anesqr airplane circled oeerhead. Thinkingit was one of ours, we lit the fires. The airplane weered off and headedtowards Klew. A few hours later it returned and gave ua a *'preaent*' ofboohs.In one of our raids, we overran the village of Anlltshana near Zhltoanr.The retreating Gemans were convioeed that they were opposing soldiers ofthe led arny. While we held the village, we ate and drank ceaselessly.We followed the aysten of "take fron this one and give to the next one."We would take fron one person and then repay hin with what we took fron thenext person.One of ay jobs was observstion. Once, while I was sitting at ay post,I didn't notice that our people had left the ares, and the Geraans wereconing up. However, I wasn't abandoned. A horse and rider were sent toretrieve ne, and we succeeded In escaping in the last ninute before theGemans awrehed In.This was only one of the nsny nirscles that happened to ne.After we had extricated ourselves fron Aodltshsna, I was again assignedas an observer. About a klloanter away from ne, deep in the forest, ourpeople were stationed with a cannon. I was to warn then when the eneayapproached.To lose a cannon was for us a far greater tragedy than to lose one ofour people, and I was no exception. Suddenly I heard the sound of horseshooves.*^lt", I ahouted. *Vhe's thereT", and 1 whispered the password, tfyaltnation was Intolerable. Whoever did not carry ont his duty, even whenguiltless, the penalty was death. With ny lock, they were our nen. Inmeognltlen, I was given a wedal.One night we were riding our horaes near a train station. We watchedover ear horaes as if they were our own eyes because they were our nostii^ertant nsans of connunleatlen. Ve handled then properly, as best weaottld. When we saw that their strength was exhausted, we would conflscstcfresher and atrogger horses along the way.At crossroads we would separate and ride In various directions back andforth la order to confuse the eaeny. At that tine that we passed the trsinstation, 1 becane separated fron ny unit In order to change ny horse. When1 returned, no-one was there. Indeed I had acquired a fresh horse, and I hada gun. lot I was alone.I wandered for a week without aeelng e single soul. I was so weary that113the gun became too much of a burden for me« and I parted with it as a "friend**.On the eighth day, I came to a village. 1 entered a cabin and asked theresidents if they had seen horses and riders in the vicinity."Yes, yes! I saw them", answered the man of the house. "Sit a while.Relax. 1*11 come right back.’*I decided that he was a village official, and I used the moment of hisdeparture to get out of there. I left my horse and all my belongings.Later 1 vent into several bouses and ordered the residents to give mefood and to do me no harm if they didn't want to deal with the partisanswho were coming after me.At last 1 vent into a small house and again asked if they had seenhorses and riders in the region. After 1 had promised a proper reward,the resident went with me to show the way. On the tenth day of my wander-ing, 1 was re-united with my people.Once we were surrounded by the Germans, and they shot at us from allsides. Our situation was hopeless, and we began to say farewell to eachother. A portion of us succeeded in breaking through the enemy's lineand escaped, leaving the wounded behind. We were soon given the order toturn back and rescue the %^unded. Many fell in the renewed skirmish.Many of our people also died at Brod, especially a number of Jews fromDombrovitz.The enemy had a widespread espionage network. Not infrequently we wouldarrive at a certain place and come under attack by enemy airplanes. Wewould always withdraw in the direction taken by the enemy airplanes.In Lemberg we came in contact with the Red army. 1 was appointed head-nurse for a transport of wounded and typhus victims to the rear area. Anumber of them were laying on the ground. 1 fulfilled this function for theRed army for one week. That same week we dug a grave for a partisan whohad survived many battles but died in an accident. I said a short eulogyover his grave. After that, 1 resolved to leave the partisans and dosomething for myself. At the time we captured Amiltshana, I became aclose friend of one of the village girls. Nov that the region had beencleared of the enemy, I came to her house. We were Joined by severalwagoners and young people who were going the same way. My girlfriend’shouse had remained intact, and her family unharmed. I was there scarcelya month until I began working in the office of a large sawmill. 1 had tochange my residence, but I returned each Sunday to spend time with mycompanions.So I spent several months until 1 heard the news that Pinsk had beenliberated. 1 decided to return home. 1 procured a passport and traveledto Same. 1 wanted to continue on my way to David-Horodok, but I metfriends in Same who wouldn't let me go because "there is not even thememory of a Jew there.'* Reluctantly I remained in Same and took up theoffer to work as a clerk for the commisar of the military stationed in114Same. The NKVD also offered ae a job which I refused. A short timelater, when I was ordered to the front with ay military unit, 1 decidedto rcaain with the NKVD.1 vas awarded the rank of an officer, and I was quartered next to theresidence of the cooB&isar. Before I started working, 1 vas given thelongest detailed questionnaire I had ever seen. 1 kept that job forseveral months. During that period there were still marauding bandswho pillaged and staged pogroas.The NKVD unifora protected ae. I was also saved by the fact that Ioften appeared together with the cosmisar, just the two of us, andeach such appearance had a powerful impression on everyone, especiallythose who planned to harm ae.Hy closeness to the public prosecutor also enabled ae to arrest severalgentiles who I recognized as murderers of Jews.On a certain day, I decided to travel to Aailtshana for a farewellvisit. Since 1 could not afford to travel on ay salary, I was forced tosell paper at a high price to cover ay travel expenses. However, I wascaught and arrested.An NKVD employee who was arrested for a similar crime, was punished bytaking twenty five percent off of his wages until he had completed hisobligation. 1 was freed after much effort, and a report was sent concern*ing ae to Same. When 1 returned to Same, I again enjoyed the coamisar'strust, and he never deducted a groshen from ay wages.The transports of supplies and troops all passed through Same whichalso served as a military camp. When a troop train would stop, I wouldput two or three bottles of whiskey in ay rucksack and go to the stationto trade with the soldiers for clothing which was plentiful on the trains.Once I came there, and the railroad NKVD policemen surrounded the trainand started a search. Before they searched ae, I succeeded in gettingrid of the whiskey. When they brought ae to ay coomtisar, I feignedignorance, saying that 1 vas there as an NKVD officer.A half*month later, I requested a release froa the NKVD and an emigrationpermit. Ify cooslsar reminded ae of my arrest. Nevertheless, he sentae with a letter, whose contents I do not know until today, to the coaaisarof lavne.The guards would not let ae see him, and they tried to get rid ofme with various excuses. I would not be put off, and I vent in.Be read the letter and sent me back with another sealed letter whosecontents were also unknown to ae.I gave this letter to the coamlsar of Same, and all the obstaclesin ay path were set aside.I drove to freedom.115The Horrible Ghetto Slaughter in Rublye, David-Horodok and StalineA Letter to DetroitMichael Nosantchuk of Rublye describes the horrible events in a letterto his brother Rerl Nosantchuk of Windsor. The letter^vriter escapedfroa Rublye, joined the antl^nazi partisans and later joined the Red army.The letter was published in The Forward by Yakov Nosantchuk of Detroit.The letter-writer is the only one of his family that was saved and oneof the few survivors of Rublye, David-Horodok and Staline. He escapedin the midst of the slaughter as if by a miracle, and he joined the ranksof the partisans. Later he joined the Red army.Mr Yakov Nosantchuk gave us two letters to publish. The first lettergives us a general overview of the conditions that the Red army soldierendured, and the second letter describes the details of the horribleslaughter.He writes in the first letter:"Today is the happiest day of my life. That is how I feel, reading aletter written in my brother’s hand. How many days and nights did 1think of only one thing, that you should only know of the dark fate thathad overtaken us. Escaping from the dark ghetto, from the murderous handsof the Germans, wandering around in the mud, swamps, woods and marshes aloneand forlorn, worse off than a dog, I had only one thought - how can 1let my brothers and sisters know? Will someone in my family even know ofmy death, of what 1 endured? More than once I wanted to end my life.But remembering you, 1 encouraged myself. I kept up my hope and, with allmy strength, 1 endured everything. My only aspiration was to get hold of agun and take revenge. It was not easy for me to decide to join a partisandetachment. From the detachment, 1 went on to join the Red army. 1 wasin Lithuania, Latvia, later in the front lines outside of Warsaw, and Iended in the darkness of Berlin. 1 took revenge for our Innocent spilledblood. But the great wound will not heal."In the second letter, written five days later (January 15, 1946),the writer gives the following details of the bloody slaughter:"In 1941, around the 16th of ^ (I remember it was a Sunday), thehorrible slaughter occured in David-Horodok. With the pretext that they,were being sent to work, everyone was gathered outside of Horodok and shotto death."I was in Rublye at that time, unaware of anything. I had a passion forfishing, and so 1 went out to the river. Yakov, our Guide's husband, satat home around the table with his fellow hasidim. I called for him tocone with me. But he only joked that he would come later with a wagon toget the fish. I went alone."Around five o'clock in the afternoon, 1 heard guns shooting, one afteranother. 1 settled deeper in the bushes and waited until someone came fromthe village. The first to announce the bitter news was the shameless Marko.116Just cvo hours earlier, everything was peaceful. Everyone sat at his work,whether at the forge or at sewing. Suddenly everyone was dead, includingYakov. A short tine ago he was telling jokes, and now he lays dead. Why?Fifty three nartyrs were aurdered with Banale's father and Gitle'ahusband aaong then."Before he died, Yakov aaid a few words. They had taken then out boundtogether In groups of three into bams, and there they ahot then. Sooncaae the realisation that all were gone in Horodok as well."I managed to get away unnoticed to Avdal in Baresha. The murdererssoon realised that I was not amongst the bodies, and they began searchingfor me. However, Avdal knew how to hide me. In Staline, the black SSwere not yet active. They had seised only David-Horodok. In Rublye,Che perpetrators were local gentiles. I received a message from our HosheHain, may he rest in peace, that I should come to Staline. 1 went there.The unfortunate wonen of Horodok and Rublye had been driven out of thevillages of Harisha, and they were robbed of their belongings before theireyes. The gentile Nikolai Pusiks pulled Yakov's boots off the feet ofHaye, our Golde's daughter. (Later I saw him while with the partisans,and we killed him.) The unfortunates then wandered through the Breznoforest. Nowhere would anyone let them in."They created a communal organisation in Staline, and, with much moneyand sacrifice, they worked to allow the unfortunates to enter Staline."On the second day of Rosh Hashona. I sat with our brother Moshe Haim.Suddenly two thugs burst into the house and took Moshe'le away for ever.Three days later we learned that they had tortured him to death. Theyhad stuck him with prods and tore pieces from him. On the second day ofRosh Hashona, 1941, at 12 midnight, he gave up his holy soul in a Stalinejail. 1 found his body six month| later, and I burled him wrapped in histails, near Aunt Golde's grave."Liave, covered with tears, said the graveside kaddish. Zelig Fishmanwas with me. He helped me. The face of our holy brother was alreadydecomposed, but I recognized him anyway. Frumke, Ganye, Haye and Rachelalso came running to help. Ve made the funeral without the knowledge ofthe Germans."After Noshele's death, I began a different life. 1 became a part ofm family of orphans and widows. 1 would look at the children, especiallyAviva*Ic, and my heart would nearly break. Aunt Golde held out well, butthen the light began to go out. At Hanuka she breathed her last in ourhouse. All the Rublye widows wept for her. Ve made a quiet funeral be-cause the Germans forbade funerals."But we didn't have much time to think of the dead. The great burdenof all the orphans and widows fell on me. I turned in every direction try-ing to keep them from starving. We had a mlnyon in our house. Father,may he rest in peace, would say kaddish with Liave. The first kaddish wasfor the Rublye martyrs, next for our brothers, then for Aunt Golde. Fatherwould say little, just bite his lips and keep silent. Often he would scold117the vossen when they began crying^ and then he would begin to ahed tears.1 was forced to play the role of a hero, but at the aaae time ahed my owntears.**One could not appear on the street after seven o'clock in the evening.Ve would ait behind closed shutters. Often Canye and her children wouldcome through the garden, and we would sit together. Not infrequently wewould calk about you, whether you knew what was happening here and whatyou would think when you found out."Thus we sat in the house the entire winter."On the eve of Pesach, 1942, they drove Canye out of her house, andthen us too. At that tiise Zelig Fishman, may he rest in peace, gave usconsiderable aid. Then there began rumors that they would make a ghettoin Staline. How many trials could we endure? How many tribulations? Theywere flaying our skins."By the eve of Shavuos, they had completed encircling the ghetto witha fence of 13 vires, one post every two or three meters."We received the order to move to the ghetto. It is impossible todescribe the picture. Everyone carried what they could - one must live •father, may he rest in peace, took his cane and went into the ghetto.We were assigned a small room • myself, Golde's Shia, cousin Yakov’s fiveyear old son Michalke and our parents. Not far from us was Canye withher children and Frumke."In the ghetto it was forbidden to take anything in or out. The deathrate reached twelve a day. People became swollen. I would look at mother’sfeet, and I would shudder. We talked of nothing but eating. We foundways of smuggling food into the ghetto. Then came the terrible knowledgethat they were shooting all the Jews. We couldn’t believe it. What doesit mean? How could they? Small children? Old people? It cannot be!"Until the black day came on the eve of Rosh Hashona, 1942, there hadbeen 7000 souls in Staline, and all were killed. The graves were prepared.They first stripped naked, then were forced to lie down in the gravesand then shot in rows."I will never forget the last night in the ghetto. 1 stayed withmother until three o'clock. We kissed and kissed, cried and cried -your photographs pressed to our hearts, ve said our farewell to you.Father recited the confessional prayer. Mother bathed and put on cleanclothes, preparing for her death. She then drove me out of the house:'Co away from us! You will survive. Hide yourself. Don't stay with us!Perhaps you will be able to avenge us and tell of our fate.'"At that moment I didn’t believe mother's words: how can I survive whenwe are surrounded on all sides? 1 went away with the idea that our parentslast minutes would be easier if they thought 1 had survived."So 1 left the dearest and most treasured, forever. A thousand timesI cursed that moment when 1 left. I often wished that I had lain downwith then and cabraced then, as all the aartyrs did before they died.**! stayed in a cellar with Valyen Malatchnlk for 18 days after theslaughter in the ghetto. I thought of everything, looking for ways to8«t out. My heart told ae that if I could only get out of the ghetto,I would know how to get along. I tried to get Valyen to go along with■e. However, at that tiae his wife was also alive and in hiding. Otherswho were still alive included Bela Malatchnlck, Missl, their daughterBashele, Shaloa Durtzin with his wife and child. Their faaily was stillintact, and I was already an orphan. I would aeet thea at night and tryto convince thea to try to find a way to escape with ae. They decidedto wait for a airacle, and they reaained there."I began to search for a way out by ayself. On the 18th night afterthe slaughter, I groped around in the dark ghetto > doors, windows, allbroken. All the houses were vacant, and I thought I had stuabled overthe dead body of a aartyr, and ay hair shuddered. I had only one thought -life, life! How to get out of there?At that aoaent, I encountered another living person. I quickly wentover to hin. I thought that he was another unfortunate like ayself, try-ing to find a way out. How shocked I was to see a tall gentile standingbefore ae - the biggest thief in Staline (he now sits in jail), and he ledae out of the ghetto.“Valyen, Bela, Nissl, Shaloa - they were found and shot to deathseveral days after ay escape.“Then 1 began to live ay golden days - a lone survivor in the world,wandering about. I owe gratitude to Saltis Avdain, Kvadok and LavoninHalak Maaonovltch - they helped ste out until I could fend for ayself,that is to say, 1 joined a partisan detachaent. I will not describe ayfurther experiences - they are not iaportant.“I believe that what I have written will give you a aore-or-less clearpicture of what happened to us.“He have with us here froa Rublye Avrahaa Shulaan the Levi’s two sons.They are longing for their Aunt Edel Shulaan in New York, and they do nothave her address. If you can, dear brother, find out her address froathe Rublye people, and let her know about the two boys. Let her write tothea to ay address."119My Small Revenge for the Heinous Crime(A Chapter from my Memoirs)byAharon MoravtchikMay, 1946.The transport that drove the repatriots (Polish cltlsens who spentWorld War II In the Red army). Including aie, to the Polish People*sRepublic stopped at Rlatrk, a small town in Lover Silesia. There veall had to climb out and begin to build a new life.Should I anchor myself here, or search for a more central town?Was it more important to be here or in a large city? Naturally Iwas lonesome and forelom, without a relative, a helper or a friend.I decided to settle where fate had led me, and I stayed in that town.I had in my possession the list of names of the David-Horodokermurderers which 1 succeeded in acquiring while riding in the transport.From time to time I took out the list and read through the names ofthe murderers who had killed the Jews of David**Horodok. There was thename of the father of sinners, the most to blame and chief murderer -the feldsher Ivan Maraiko, may his name be blotted out, and after himhis trusted accomplices: the lawyer Ivgeny Yavplov and his wife Marusya,Kasarev and his three sons, Siamyon Rulaga and his eon Grigory, DamyonMaraiko, Staraiko, Hantshl, Krim Levkovski, Polukoshka, Kazalovski,Gritzkavitch and more and more, may their names and memories be blottedout.They are probably even now going about,these murderers, free as canbe in the Polish People’s Republic, and they are comfortably enjoyingthemselves with the robbed possessions of the Jews.That thought would not leave me alone. I resolved that I must find andunmask them at any cost. Jewish blood must not be spilled wantonly!I must be the blood-avenger for my David-*Horodoker brothers and sisters.A few weeks after my arrival in Poland, the Kaltzer pogrom brokeout.Turmoil seized the survivors, and the Jews began a mass exodus fromthe country whose soil had absorbed the blood of millions of guiltlessJewish victims and was still not sated.It was ’’natural” for me to be carried along by the great stream ofsurvivors. My friends tried to convince me to go. However, a hiddenpower would not let me leave the place.1 stayed to search for the murderers despite the fact that manyof my friends thought that it was a ’’madness” in me.e * *120I decided to get e Job In the dietrlct alnistry where they bed offeredBe a responsible post. In a short tise 1 had won the trust of the directorhlBSelf.The Binistry director was a Biddle-aged Ban with authentic Polish bus-tache and whiskers. He was easy-going and direct. Every «rord that castefroB his Bouth was first considered, welded and Beasured. Hie relationswith people, as well as his general appearance, was ayapathetic. TheBan was highly honorable, a devout cooBunist and an outspoken idealist.His pure Aryan outward appearance, his authentic Polish fasiily naae, hiswonderful Polish literate speech and his pure Polish accent all indicatedthat here was a Pole of Bany generations. It is interesting to note thatlater, and under different circumstances with this "authentic Pole", Ifound out that he was a good-hearted Jew.One Boming the director Invited me into his office, and he requestedthat I travel with an expert to Breslau to purchase a taxi for the ministry.He added discreetly: "1 know that you are a Jew, and 1 am sure that youwill carry out this mission successfully".1 thanked the director for his confidence in me, and I willinglyaccepted the mission, hoping, without any foundation for it, that Imight find traces of the Davld-Horodoker murderers in that large city.* * *I carried out my mission in Breslau, purchasing the taxi and itsnecessary accessories, and I had to wait another three days so that 1could take everything together back to Klatzk.I decided to utilize those three days to search for traces of themurderers.Wandering through the streets of Breslau, I chanced to run into myfriend Avraham Moshe Greenberg, a Jew from Lamzshe who was now thecoBBunity leader in our new town.He told me that his object was to purchase poultry in Breslau for thekaporas ceremony for the Jews of Klatzk. He suggested that I come alongwith him end help him buy the poultry. I took up his proposition trithpleasure, thus becoming a partner in a good deed.He vent to the marketplace %ihlch was filled ifith thousands of peopleand hundreds of kiosks with their proprietors.•I recalled the time when there were millions of Jews in Poland,and I imagined that same marketplace filled with Jewish merchants andpeddlers, without whom it would have been impossible to conceive of sucha market day. Who would have believed, I thought, that this all haddisappeared so quickly?Walking at Greenberg's side and absorbed in ay thoughts, the unbe-lievable suddenly occured: a gentil'e, who was selling herring at his121stand, began staring at ne. Instinctively our eyes aet. Abruptlyhe asked ae in Russian: "Are you a conpatriot'*? A fev seconds laterhe added: "Are you Moravtchik"?1 was startled as if by an electric shock when I unexpectedlyheard my fsally name spoken in the Russisn language in a foreign cityaaongst strangers. 1 thought 1 was dreaming or that I was hearinga voice from another world.Fortunately I did not lose ay presence of aind, and I quicklyreasoned that this person aight have soaethlng to do with David-Horodok, and perhaps he was one of those I was seeking."And who are you?" - I asked him in Russian.Instead of a reply, the unknovm person began to draw back and stam-mer: "Excuse ae. Perhaps I aade a alstake. I didn't mean you"."Say who you are", I began to shout nervously, "just nov you calledae by ay name. You certainly know ae from before",A crowd of people gathered. My agitation grew from moment tomoment as I continued to demand that he tell ae who he was.The unknown man remained silent. He bowed his head as if he weresearching for something on the ground. He realized that he had giver,himself away."Militia, militia", I began shouting in a shrill voice which Imyself did not recognize.In a few minutes, two militiamen arrived. 1 explained to them that1 suspected that person of collaborating with the German occupationforces during the war and participation in the extermination of theJews of David-Horodok.The allitla-aen ordered the gentile to lock his stall, and theytook us both to the police station. After inspecting his documents,it became apparent that he was one of the David-Horodoker citizenswhose name figured in the murderous regime.At the time of the first inquest which vas made on the spot inmy presence, the murderer turned to me and said: "Moravtchlk, whoare you arresting? I had an unimportant position with the Germans.Why don't you arrest Ivan Maraiko tfho was mayor of Davld>Horodokunder the Germans? Be was responsible for the killing of all theDavld-Horodoker Jews,and, despite that, he is now a free man inWarsaw".Thus I vas set on the trail of the chief murderer Maraiko, and1 understood that this beginning would eventually lead to the arrest122of all the remaining murderers who were on Polish soil. I do noasaggerate to say that this day was the happiest day of my life sincethe beginning of the war In 1939.I had lived to see the fruition of my dedicated work. I was proudof ay achievement even though 1 knew that the vengeance would notreturn my dear David'-Horodoker brothers and sisters to life.At the same time, I took stock of the situation and realized thatthe basic groundwork would have to be done first, and that it wouldnot be easy.Ify resolution to carry out the holy work to the end became evenfirmer, and the beginning gave me the courage, strength and enduringvigor to continue my efforts to find the remaining murderers.* * *The feldsher Ivan Maraiko, who had many Jewish clientele, hadimmediately put himself in the service of the Germans, and he wasappointed by them town mayor.From the first day, a terror campaign was waged against the Jewishinhabitants.One of the most valuable men in town, the dentist Itzhak Edel,was shot %rlth his son Gedaliahu on that day.Aharon Slomionskl, a respected hasidic Jew, was thrown from thebridge into the Horin River.Simha Misholov and Motl Kviatnl hid themselves with their "goodfriend" Ivan Maraiko who took plenty of gold and silver for his services.A few days later, Ivan Maraiko drove them out of hiding, ordering thecitizenry to kill them. Simha Misholov was killed before bis ownhouse in front of his wife and children.The Finkelsteln family, who were valued by the citizenry - especi-ally the Christian shoestakers, were murdered along with all the otherJaws despite their having paid a huge ransom and despite the pleasof the Christian shoemakers to the authorities to let them live as**good Jews".Rabbi Moshele demonstrated unusual courage and selflessness on behalfof his coBBunity. Every day he would come to intercede with the murder-er Ivan Maraiko and try to effect the repeal of the decrees againstthe Jews. Finally, he was driven to the slaughter along with all theother men. Wrapped in hie tallis and tefilin. he gave a sermon tothe doomed Jews before he was killed with them.Banish Yosef Katzman and his sons managed to avoid the execution byhiding in a bam. They had provided themselves with food for two weeks,123and they hoped that they could escape into the forest.Two weeks later» when the food had run out, they cane out of hiding.Afraid to go to the local gentiles for help, they went straight to Ger*nan headquarters which was in Tudovitch^s house.They explained to the Germans how they had managed to hide, and theypleaded with the Gemans to spare their lives.To their great surprise, they received the follo%Jlng reply fron theGermans which was characteristic of German *'precision*':"Ve received the comnand to kill the Jews on August 10. Since thatdeadline has passed and we have no further orders, we will do you noharm, and you are free".As soon as Katzxnan and his sons went out of German headquarters,they ran into the drunkard and murderer Elia Stavro (Stadnik) on thestreet. He took an iron bar and murdered them on the spot.It is interesting that, the saine night of the murder, he went berserk,set his own house on fire, and was burned alive.Ezra Solomionek also hid from the slaughter. A couple of days later,his neighbor Yasip Dubok (Matusiavitch) discovered him and murdered him.The "most important" work of the murderer Maraiko was his provoca-tions against the David-Horodoker Jews, that is, against his patientsfrom whom he had earned a living all of his life.He and his accomplices had hidden iron bars, axes and several revolversin the large synagogue, and he then reported to the German headquartersin Luniniatz that they had "uncovered" a weapons arsenal in the syna-gogue with which the Jews were planning an uprising against the Germans.On the basis of the provocation, the Germans ordered that all theJewish nen of David-Horodok be killed.Over 3000 Jews, all the nen over age 14, were nurdered on August10. They were buried in large naas-graves which had been preparedahead of time along the road between Binovsk and Alshon.In the last noment before the horrible slaughter, Haraiko pretendedto intercede, letting it be known that he was working on the Germans toallow the Jews to ransom their lives with money or valuables.Many of the unfortunate victims believed him, and they led themurderers to where they had hidden gold, silver and other valuables.After several crates were filled with Jewish belongings, the Jewswere led back to the place of execution %»here they were killed alongwith all the others.Maraiko personally took part in the killing, shooting the Jewswith a revolver.It la said that the cries of the unfortunate victlns were heard■any kilooeters away. The covered aaes graves were seen to sove forthree days because sany of the Jews had been buried while still sllve.The wonen snd children remsining in town were driven out of townby the surderers on the night after the ■sss-surdcr. They were notAllowed to take anything with them. There were cases where wonenwere driven out of their hoskes in their nightgowns.After driving the women and children out, the local cltleens andpeasants from the surrounding villages plundered all the Jewish be-longings left behind.* * *The arrested Davld-Horodoker citizen did not know the current War-saw address of Ivan Maraiko. Finding his would not be an easy task.1 traveled to Warsaw several times to search for him. Unfortunately,my efforts were not crowned with success. I had almost given up theidea of finding him. However, as luck would have it, on one of mytrips to Warsaw I met a Jewish secret agent (Yehudah Spivak-Slnger,now in Israel) on the train. On learning of my mission, he took up-on himself the task of finding Maraiko.After long efforts and searching, he finally found him in a smalltown near Warsaw where he was working as a doctor using a falsifieddiploma. Maraiko had grown a beard so as not to be recognized.. 1 was overwhelmed with Joy when I received the telegram fromSpivak-Singer with the happy news of Maraiko's arrest.A short time later, his wife Darya came to me in Klatzk (to thisday I am puzzled by how she got my address) to beg for mercy, forgive-ness and pardon.l|y encounter with her was rich with dramatic moments:"Get out of my house, murderess. I don't want to see you, and Idon't want to hear about your husband", I said to her, spitting inher face."I will not take offence because I was expecting such a reception",she replied, adding at the same time that it was worth it if only Iwould listen to what she had to say.At that moment the idea occured to me that maybe it really wasworthwhile, to restrain myself despite my aversion, for the sakeof the benefit i#hich I might derive from my listening to the murder-ess. Perhaps that way I could get her to give me the addresses ofthe other murderers.I told her to go down and wait for me in the street. I did notwant to have that defiled perscm in my home.Her entire conversation was an atteBf>t to idiitewash her husband ofall sins, and thereby to convince me to drop my charges against him.Among other things, she told me that her son Misha had returned toPoland from Ei^land after the war (he was an officer on the Polish shipPilsudski during the Polish-Geiman war, tdiich was sunk in battle), andHe brougHt back with him a very charming Jewish woman who he had marriedin England and ^om Darye loved like her own daughter. Later I establishedthat the information was unfortunately correct, that a Jewish woman hadmarried the son of the murderer of the David-Horodoker Jews.She contended that her husband, "unfortunately", had no choice,and he was forced to take the post of David-Horodoker town mayor bythe Germans.Acting as mayor, "naturally" he tried to find ways and means of re-voking the decrees against the Jews.In general he, Ivan Maraiko, was "conpletely innocent", though hewas forced to carry' out the orders of Ivgeny Ya\’plov vho was appointeddistrict conmissioner by the Germans.patient listening encouraged her, and, in the course of the conversa-tion, she let me loiow that she understood that I was in difficultmaterial circumstances, and that, as old friends, they were prepared tohelp me.Her ijipertinent proposal so upset me that I began to shout, and Ispat in her face again as I started to go back into in>' residence.She began to run after me with apologies, pleading with me that Ishould listen to her again.In the meantime, I reminded itself that I had not yet accomplishedin>' purpose in this conversation. I had not a single address of theremaining murderers, and so I remained listening to her again.The conversation lasted six hours. They' were six painful hours forme becaitse I did not forget for a single second that I was conversingwith a beast in hunan form, yAiose hands had dipped in the blood ofthousands of m>’ dear brothers and sisters, including my beloved wifeand my four dear little children.Yet the entire effort had been worth %Aile because I came awav fron;the conversation loiowing the place of residence of Iveny Ya\’plovand his sadistic criminal wife Marusya.* * *Before the outbreak of the Soviet-German''■ar, the murderer Ivgeny126Yavplov vas arrested by the Soviet authorities for his white guer.- -.ast,and he was put in prison in Brisk.Uban the war between Geraany and Russia broke out, the Russians evacu-ated the prisoners in special trMsports deep into Russia. Re and LaterRankin escaped the transport. A few days later, after their arrival inDavid'Rorodok, Later Rankin was killed by the local cititens by order ofbis prison nate, the sane Tavplov.Arriving in David-Borodok, Tavplov innediacely placed hinself in theservice of the Geraans who appointed hin district coenisaioner.In revenge for his arrest by an NKVD officer who happened to be Jewish,be detenined to kill ell the Jews in town. Bis wife, the sadistic surder-ess Harusya, right after her husband's arrest threatened in wy presence that"there will cone a day when I'll take revenge on the Jews because a Jevarrested ny husband." Both Yavplov and his wife Harusya fulfilled theirpledges.In a letter sent to ne in Poland by Mikle Stollnan-Russman «id herdaughter Nina fron Detroit, there is a precJ»e description of theruthless acts of Ivan Maraiko, Ivgeny Yavplov and his wife Harusya.Harusya particularly "stood out" because of her sadism. Shemurdered Yakov Gartzulin by herself when she fo\ind him hiding. Shethrew living Jewish children into the Borin River.The arrest of the Yavplovs was accomplished with great difficulty.Sensing that the ground was burning under their feet, they fled the townof Zialano-Gora where they had lived, and for weeks they hid as fishermenin a small secluded village.Secret agents watched their house in Zialano-Gora, and at long last theywere arrested.At the time of the inquiry, a hoard of gold, silver and valuables was foundand confiscated from them. Of course this was all stolen from the David-Borodoker Jews. Amongst other things in their possession, there was aphotograph of my two children Sara'le and Itshak'l with a Polish Inscription.This was written by my little girl in her childish handwriting to theirdaughter Zosye who had been her girlfriend before Che war. In the sevenyear period before the outbreak of World War II, Yavplov and I had workedtogether in a bureau for pleas, translations and other office work.The murderess Harusya wanted to use this photograph to ahow me whatdear friends we had been, indicated by her having kept the picture withher the entire time «rlthout destroying it, and she tried to work on me tocancel their arrest.She also told me that she knew that the Christian Alexandra Agradzinskahad hidden a Jewish girl, and she had not informed on her to the authorites.However, when I took out the material in my possession which detailedher and her husband's "fine activities", the murderess said not a word.127My turn had cone to innlgrate to Israel. Unfortunately 1could no longer delay ny departure.With pain in ny heart I was forced to tear nyself away from■y personal involvement and leave the finishing work to the Polishsecurity organization.Before 1 left Poland, 1 visited the secret police in Warsaw where1 knew that all the arrested murderers were detained and were await-ing extradition to Davld-Horodok (which was now in the Soviet Union)where they were to be prosecuted at the site of their crimes.The investigating magistrate Meier Plantkovskl offered to takeme into the prison or to bring the murderer Ivan Maraiko into hischamber so that I could confront him. I did not avail myself ofthe opportunity, not wanting to look at his murderous face. Intruth, there are times that I regret not taking advantage of thatopportunity to see that murderer at the time he was sufferingpunishment for his sins.At the same trip to Warsaw, 1 paid a visit to the Soviet embassy,and they promised me their full support in handling the case.1 would like to take the opportunity to stress the unusual interesttaken in the case by the Central Committee of Polish Jews in Warsaw,who provided legal (they supplied two lawyers to assist) andfinancial support,1 would also like to bring into the open a fact that shines aray of light in the vast darkness that encompassed David-Horodok.A Christian with a noble spirit, Alexandra Agradzinska, was theonly one in town to hide, at risk of her own life, a Jewish girlnamed Golde Kuzniatz (now in Haifa) through Che entire time ofthe German occupation.This fact is particularly noteworthy because all of the otherChristians of David-Horodok, without exception, were crueler thanthe Germans toward the Jews. Alexandra Agradzinska was the onlybright spot in the vast black blot that was the tragic David-Horodoker reality of those tistes.I would like to take this opportunity to express our sinceresppreclation and thanks. Mrs. Agradzinska still lives in Poland.In gratitude, I have sent her the gift of a crate of orangesfrom Israel.* * *After my arrival in Israel, 1 proceeded with the case. Igot in touch with the Polish ei^assy in Tel-Aviv, snd I receivedverbal and written clarificiatlons from them.At my request, the Warsaw prosecutor sent a number of affidavitforms to a court in Tel-Aviv in order to get the testimony ofwitnesses that were now living in Israel. In 1953 the testimony128And I? I began looking at the photograph, and I could not takteyes avay fron vy dear children. I recalled that I had lost ay entirefamily, ay wife, ay four children, ay parents, brothers and sisters,the entire Jewish cosnunity of ay koae town, all those who had beenand had died so tragically. I looked and cried, cried and looked, a torrentof tears flowing unceasingly from ay eyes.After a while I found out that the mrderess Marusya was trying tofool the Investigating judge by pretending that she was gravely ill,hoping to get a aedical release.I iaaediately traveled to Zialano>Gora and showed the prosecutor theletter from Mrs. Mile Stollaan-Russaan and her daughter Nina which de-tailed the sadistic activities of the murderess Marusya Tavplov.The prosecutor was so overcome and moved that in ay presence heordered the arrest of the "Invalid", declaring that there was no placeon free soil in the Polish People's Republic for such contemptiblepeople.In the course of the Investigation, the Yavplovs revealed the resi-dence of the murderer Levkovski from the village of Samihostitch.When I arrived at Zgazshaletz and turned to the secret police tosecure Levkovski's arrest, the con&andant, who happened to be a Jev,was on furlough. When he was informed by telephone of my mission,he canceled his furlough, and he returned to personally expedite andassist me in ay task.In such a manner, one murderer implicated the next, and, in a shorttime, they arrested Kria, Damyon Haralko, Babka and others.Understandably, each arrest was a story in Itself, filled with drama-tic Bioments, enormous efforts, with searching and traveling, and evenwith personal danger.It is interesting to note that the Polish security police warnedwe to be careful because ay life was in danger. They told me not togo out alone at night, not to open ay door until I was certain who wason the other aide, not to go amongst strangers, etc.I paid no attention to their warnings as I energetically carriedout ay holy work.The Polish security police appropriately valued ay achievements, and,in gratitude, they sent me a letter of appreciation which gave mea certain moral satisfaction for ay untiring holy work. Understandably,ay greatest satisfaction cane from the arrest of the murderers.Proa unofficial sources I learned that Maralko's daughter Ella waslater arrested. She had worked %d.th the Germane as an interpretor.Also arrested were his two sons-’in-lav Vaitavitch and Vlalavaiski,who were officers in the pre-war Poliih army, and his son Misha withhis Jewish wife fron England. Miaha had taken a high position in thePolish security sd.oistry.* * *129was taken In Tel-Aviv, and then the docuoents were returned to saw.In August 1954, I revisited the Polish e^assy. I feel it necessaryto relate to ay countrymen their answers to ay questions.I was told: "All of the arrested criminals are confined. Howmany murderers were arrested, where they are confined end tihether theyhave stood trial yet - we cannot give you answers to these questionsyet".As compensation for these evasive answers, I received the followingpromise: "Patience, dear sir - a day will come when you will knoweverything".Unfortunately, at the time of this writing, that promise has notyet been fulfilled.*Translators note: I am asking an effort to trace the results ofthe trials. Tbusfar I am ansoccessful, but ay efforts aredentinaing.If any reader of this translation has any knowledge as to theeuteoae of these trials, I would greatly appreciate theircontacting ae.H.B.