DAVIDAND SYLVIA STEINER YIZKOR BOOK COLLECTIONSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARYNO. 14220Pinsk Memorial BookStudies in Pinsk JewryTHE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY - NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSTHE STEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARY PROVIDESON-DEMAND REPRINTS OF MODERN YIDDISH LITERATURE©2003 THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY ANDTHE NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERMAJOR FUNDING FOR THEYIZKOR BOOK PROJECT WAS PROVIDED BY:Harry and Lillian Freedman FundDavid and Barbara B. Hirschhorn FoundationDavid and Barbara MarguliesThe Nash Family FoundationHarris RosenDavid and Sylvia SteinerRuth TaubmanOriginal publication dataAUTHOR Rabinowitsch, Wolf Zeev, 1900-title Studies in Pinsk Jewry / by Wolf Zeev Rabinowitsch.IMPRINT Haifa : [s.n.], 1983.DESCRIPT [4], 163 p. : ill.; 28 cm.SUBJECT Jews — Belarus — Pinsk.Pinsk (Belarus) — Ethnic relations.Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945) — Belarus — Pinsk.THIS BOOK MEETS A.N.S.I. STANDARDS FORPAPER PERMANENCE AND LIBRARY BINDING.PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.STUDIES IN PINSK JEWRYWOLF ZEEV RABINOWITSCHHAIFA 1983The New YorkPublic LibrarySTUDIES IN PINSK JEWRYBYWOLF ZEEV RABINOWITSCHHAIFA 1983STUDIES IN PINSK JEWRYCONTENTSPageHISTORY OF THE PINSK COMMUNITY 1-16THE "ROTHSCHILDS" OF PINSK AND KARLIN 17 - 72HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN 73 -163The sources for these three Monographs are chapters written by the authorIn the two books of the historical volume"Pinsk"Published by the Association of the Jews of Pinsk in IsraelHaifa 1973, 1977HISTORICAL COURSE OF THE PINSK COMMUNITYFOUNDATIONS AND MOTIVESThe long history of the eternal people is markedby countless milestones. In every period, in everycountry and city where Jews have lived, the tenetsof Judaism have been cherished and fostered by thegroup historically known as the ''Community” (kehtUlah), or with greater emphasis, the "Holy Community”(kehillah kedoshah).The first perequisites for any knowledge of such aJewish community are a study of its whole history —its origin, development, rise and decline or tragicdestruction — and a scholarly assessment of thishistory, on the basis of documentary evidence andeye-witness reports which reflect the community'sspiritual character and cultural values in social, eco-nomic and political terms.Such a study provides us with valuable informa-tion not only about the community in question butalso about the great majority of the other communi-ties in the same "Land” (eretsj or "State” (medinah)(cf. the Committee of the Four "Lands”, the Com-munal Register of the "State” of Lithuania). Henceevery scholarly investigation of a community andthe consequent determination of that community’sinfluence means the establishment of a further land-mark in our knowledge of Jewish history, accordingto the community’s size and relative importance. Astudy of this kind may also provide guidance andsource-material for students of Jewish history as awhole.♦Such is the awareness that has induced me tochoose this way of commemorating the two com-munities of Pinsk and Karlin. I have sought toerect a lasting historical memorial to them, not by astatic description of their leading personalities, but ra-ther by a vivid, dynamic portrayal of their active andvital communal life. I have tried to present not onlythe details of their day-to-day existence, with itsbrighter and darker sides, but also the faith in eternallife that was the central theme and mainstay of thesetwo communities throughout their history, as of allJewish communities: not only the earthly Pinsk-Karlin, but also its heavenly counterpart.*The large-scale migrations eastward of Jews in thefourteenth and fifteenth centuries from western Eu-rope brought them to Lithuania. Some of the Jews ofBrest-Litovsk continued eastwards until they reachedPinsk, where they obtained permission from theauthorities to build a synagogue and dedicate groundfor a cemetry (1506), thus laying the foundations fora new Jewish community — that of Pinsk. The partof the city that they chose for their residence and theway in which they settled in it were characteristic:they established themselves en bloc in a "Judengasse”hard by the prince’s castle (to ensure his protection),and not far from the riverside market (to facilitatetheir economic activity). Thus did the Pinsk ghettocome into being.The growth of the city’s Jewish population wasgradual, both in absolute terms and relatively to thetotal number of inhabitants. At the time of its estab-lishment (1506), the Jewish community in Pinsknumbered about 75 souls — men, women, and chil-dren. Sixty years later (1566), their numbers hadrisen to about 300, or 8% of the total population.At the time of the 1648 Khmelnitzki massacres theynumbered approximately 1,000, or 25% of the popu-lation, and in the year of Pinsk’s annexation to Rus-sia (1793) about 5,100. From then onwards theirnumbers increased rapidly to 19,754 in 1878 (or 86%of the total population) and 21,965 in 1897 (or 74.2%of the total). On the eve of the First World Warthere were 28,063 Jews in Pinsk, constituting 72.4%2W. Z. RABINOWITSCHof the city’s population. This remained the demogra-phic structure of Pinsk until the tragic end of thePinsk and Karlin communities. These statistics showthat, starting with a small Jewish minority, Pinskbecame first a mixed city, and eventually a city witha Jewish majority numbering as much as seventy fivepercent, or even more, of the total population. Pinskwas the second Russian city, after Berdichev, withsuch a high percentage of Jews, a situation which hada decisive influence on the mentality of the PinskJew. Since the majority of the non-Jewish populationlived in the outskirts, the Jewish character of the citywas particularly felt in such matters as the celebra-tion of Sabbaths and Festivals, and the like. Indeed,the sight of the Christians coming out of their chur-ches on their holy days, dressed in their best clothesand walking through the streets of the city, was offen-sive to the Pinsk Jews, who regarded this as somethingalien to, and detracting from, the specially Jewishcharacter of the city.*The numerical growth of the Jews in Pinsk resultedin their spreading out in all directions from thequarter where they had originally settled, viz. the^^Judengasse” which ran from the cemetry in ZavalnaStreet to the great synagogue and the market. Theyturned first eastwards, to the city’s main thorough-fare, Spaski Street, (‘‘die greisse Gass”) and to theroads running parallel to it, and then westwards toLohishin Street and the area between it and BriskStreet. Later on they occupied the whole length ofBrisk Street and the lanes running off it; and inthe 18th and 19th centuries they pushed out north-wards beyond Zavalna Street, and southwards tothe bank of the river Pina. The way in which theyspread out was typical. Maintaining their cohesion,they penetrated in large numbers into the Christianstreets adjoining the area in which they were alreadyliving. In these “new” streets the Jews first of alllived side by side with the Christians, till in thecourse of time, with the natural increase of the Jewishpopulation these streets too came to be inhabitatedmainly by Jews. The Christians moved out to thesuburbs, while the Jews continued to live where theywere in a solid, homogeneous bloc. This process tookplace in all parts of the city, both those subject tothe municipal authorities and those under the controlof the Pravo-Slavic, Catholic priesthood or of thefeudal barons (peritsim). According to the situation.the Jews presented their petitions to either the muni-cipal authorities or to one of the churches, takingfull advantage of the rights granted them. Theirstruggle against the restrictions imposed on them byall these authorities was a successful, though hard,one. In addition to this expansion from the centre (the“Judengasse”) to the periphery, there was also aprocess of Jewish settlement in the opposite direction,from the periphery to the centre. At the end of the17th century a Jewish community was established inKarlin, to the east of Pinsk. The Jews of Pinsk there-upon began to settle in Karlin, partly at the requestof the local inhabitants. The number of Jews in Karlinincreased steadily and Karlin itself grew in size untilit eventually reached the boundaries of Pinsk. Karlinnow became a suburb of Pinsk with both places beinginhabited mainly by Jews. Thus was Pinsk “takenover” by the Jews. The independence originally en-joyed by Karlin gave its Jewish inhabitants such adeep-rooted desire for autonomy that in the 18thcentury two separate Jewish communities arose in theone city of Pinsk — the Pinsk community and theKarlin community, which together accounted for mostof the city’s population.♦Having “taken over” their own city, the Jews ofPinsk went on to play an important historical part inthe setting up of Jewish communities in the smalltowns in the district of Polesia (such as Kletsk), andeven outside its boundaries (in Volhynia). One of themain economic activities of Pinsk Jewry was the leas-ing of estates, villages, forests, and lakes, together withtheir movable effects (including serfs) and immovableproperty (such as inns, mills, foundries), the latteroften including transport facilities and road tolls. Suchleases necessitated the administration of the propertyby trustworthy officials, sub-lesses, and the like. Asthese latter were nearly all either members of thechief lessee’s family or fellow-townsmen of his whotook up residence in the places leased, a process beganwhereby the Jews of Pinsk gradually “colonized” thesmall towns. Even after great changes had taken placein the social structure of the Jewish population inPinsk and its surroundings, Pinsk still remained thecultural, economic and political metropolis of thewhole of Polesia and the seat of the district govern-ment offices. Here the Jews established industrialenterprises for processing the raw-material of thedistrict (saw-mills for the wood from the PolesianTHE STORY OF A COMMUNITY3forests, the factories of Lourie and Halpern, and thelike) and turned the city into a marketing centre forthe agricultural produce of the whole region. But,above all, Pinsk became a centre of Torah (religiousstudy) and haskalah (secular Jewish learning). Totake only one example out of many : it was to Pinskthat Ozer Weizmann, from the nearby small town ofMotele, sent his son Chaim and his other childrento continue their studies, and then moved there him-self for the sake of his own business activities and hischildren’s education. Many other Jewish fathers in theregion did the same. So great was the influence exer-cised by Pinsk over the whole surrounding districtthat the new doctrine of hasidism, which had comefrom Karlin, the suburb of Pinsk, evoked a readierresponse in the 18 th and 19 th centuries amongst theJewish population of the small towns and villagesthan in Pinsk itself. The Jewish community in Pinskand its surroundings continued to grow and spread,despite the hardships (legal disabilities, expulsions,burning-down of property, wars) to which it wasconstantly subjected. A decisive factor in this naturalincrease was the autonomy that the community en-joyed in its internal affairs. This autonomy was al-ready recognized in principle in 1506, when the autho-rities granted the request made by the first minyanof Jews in Pinsk for permission to build a synagogueand to dedicate a plot of land for a cemetery, both inthe ^‘J^^dengasse”.In the first twenty-five years of the Pinsk com-munity’s existence the foundation was laid for coope-ration with the other Lithuanian Jewish communities,and a joint organization was set up in which thePinsk community was prominently represented. In1555 we find a Jew from Pinsk making representationsto the secular authorities on behalf of all the Jewsof Lithuania. And of the three ‘^chief communities”represented on the supreme body of Lithuanian Jewry— the “Council of the State of Lithuania” — whichwas set up in 1623, Pinsk was the third, after Brestand Grodno. The Pinsk community suffered severelyin the Khmelnitzki massacres of 1648, but quicklyrecovered. At first, Pinsk was a “chief community”for 26 smaller Jewish settlements, but this numbersteadily decreased. To protect its rights as a “chiefcommunity in the State of Lithuania” Pinsk had towage a struggle with the Communal Council ofVolhynia, and with all the other “leading commu-nities of Lithuania”, especially with the neighbouringsmall communities which had been founded fromPinsk, and now wished to shake off its authority. Theseverest threat to Pinsk’s leadership came from Karlin,where the Jewish population established its own in-dependent community. Nevertheless, despite these con-flicts, which often led to open quarrels between thecommunities, Pinsk succeeded in preserving its posi-tion and influence, down to the abolition of the“Council of the State” (1764). During all this periodit represented the Jewish population to the secularauthorities, administered the collection of taxesthroughout the district, dealt with the release of Jew-ish captives, maintained its own independent law-court (for both civil and religious matters), its ownRav^ school teachers, hazan and shamash^ and provid-ed money for the support of its yeshivah students andfor the establishment of religious and charitable or-ganizations, etc. All these activities were an essentialpart of the “chief community’s” autonomy. The na-tional significance of this communal organization isillustrated by the prohibition promulgated by theheads of the community, as a sign of solidarity withPolish and Ukrainian Jewry in their times of trouble,on the wearing of finery, the playing of musical instru-ments, and the eating of unnecessarily large meals.Even when, in 1844, the secular authorities legallyabolished the institution of the kehillah, that of Kar-lin — and possibly also that of Pinsk — still con-tinued to function, as is attested by the letters of thePinsk Av Beth-Dln (President of the Religious Court)and the Karlin Av Beth-Din to the Rebbe of Kobrin,stamped with “the seal of the Karlin kehillaK^ anddated 1857. After the abolition of the kehilloth, theleaders of all the various Jewish communities becamelegally the functionaries of the secular power andwere used by it for its own purposes (the collectionof taxes, the payment of duties, etc.). But P'insk andKarlin, like the other Lithuanian kehilloth, retainedtheir social, juridical, and cultural autonomy. Theaffairs of the kehilloth were administered by the pre-sident and members of the religious courts, in co-operation with leading public figures and the offi-cially appointed Rabbi. A very important factor inthe preservation and extension of this autonomy inPinsk were the local rich “philanthropists”, whoestablished and maintained educational and charitableinstitutions out of their own pockets, and were in-fluential with the secular authorities. In contrast tothe assimilating tendencies of many of the Jewishdignitaries and wealthy merchants in the Polish com-munities, the leading Jews in Pinsk and Karlin were4W. Z. RABINOWITSCHdisting^uished by their loyalty to Judaism and theJewish people, and their devoted service fully earnedthem the title of “the Rothschilds of Pinsk andKarlin” (the Levin, Lourie, Halpern, and Eliasbergfamilies). The factories and commercial enterprisesestablished by them employed only Jewish labour .Inthis way, despite the lack of official authorization, theJews of Pinsk and Karlin were able to preserve theirautonomy in internal Jewish matters. In the twentiethcentury, the management of communal affairs passedto the political parties, each of which fostered its ownbrand of Jewish nationalism. In the last period ofPoland^s independent existence between the two WorldWars, an attempt was made to resuscitate the kehillahas a legally recognized institution. However, for mainlyinternal reasons, this attempt had only limited prac-tical results.♦In the martyrology of our people, P'insk has itsown page of glory. The members of the Jewish com-munity not only suffered from the restrictions im-posed on their civil rights by various rulers, but theywere also time and again the victims of expulsion andmassacres, especially during political upheavals andwars. On account of its geographical position, —wedged first between Pravo-Slavic Russia, CatholicPoland and Lithuania, and in its last years betweenBolshevik Russia and nationalist Poland — the cityfrequently changed hands in times of war, with theJews of Pinsk, who were neither Russians nor Poles,serving as a scapegoat for both sides. In this situation,the Jews of P'insk from time to time tried to escapetheir fate by abandoning their property and fleeingfrom the town before its conquest by one of the war-ring armies, only to be pursued and caught. Thosethat stayed in the town — mostly the poorer classes— were expelled or even put to death by the con-queror, often with the active assistance of the localGentile population. This long, tragic sequence of per-secutions reached its climax of horror in the secondhalf of the 17th century (the Khmelnitsky massacres,the Muscovites, the Cossacks, Kurhan’s maraudingbands, the Poles) and again in the confusion after theFirst World War (1918—1920; the Bolsheviks, thearmed bands of Bulak-Balakhovich, the Poles, the1919 pogrom).As the district capital of Polesia, Pinsk was theplace where the Jews who had been expelled by decreeof the secular power from the surrounding villagessought refuge. Together with the other Lithuaniankehilloth, Pinsk extended aid to the Jews expelled bythe Russian general, Nikolai Nikolaievitch, at thebeginning of the First World War. The condition ofthe Pinsk community at that time is well indicatedby the three “orphans’ homes” established by theJews of Pinsk during and after the First World War— two of them for the kehUlah^s own orphans, and thethird specially for those of the whole district. In addi-tion to the specifically anti-Jewish persecution, theJews of Pinsk also suffered from the numerous disas-ters of war which time and again afflicted the wholepopulation, such as the burning down of the city bythe Poles (1648) and by the Muscovites and Cossacks(1655, 1660), its destruction by the Swedes (1706),the expulsion of most of the population by the Ger-mans in the First World War, the burning down ofthe factories by the Russians before the Germans’entry into the city (1915), and the rest. Nor waspeacetime free of its scourges: the houses of Pinskbeing built, until modern times, mostly of wood, largeparts of the city were frequently devastated by disas-trous fires, such as the great conflagration of 1799(in which the Burial Society register — pinkas — wasdestroyed, and also apparently the communal register),and those in 1901 and 1921.One cannot help being amazed at the vitality dis-played by the Pinsk community in surviving andovercoming all these devastating shocks, and againand again rebuilding a flourishing spiritual and eco-nomic life for itself out of the ruins of a previousedifice. In the days of the “Council of the State”,Pinsk preserved its autonomy as a “chief community”,despite the Khmelnitski massacres. Similarly, theenergy with which the Jews of the town devotedthemselves to the study of the Law, to Jewish educa-tion, and to the betterment of their economic con-dition remained undiminished in all the hardshipsand disasters of the First World War, in the yearsof bloodshed and revolution that followed, and inthe period of harshly anti-Semitic Polish rule (1921-1939). The determined spirit of Pinsk Jewry and itspower to remain unaffacted by outside economic andpolitical factors — such as the partitions of Polandand the other political upheavals in the region — isattested by the growth of a special branch of hasidism— Karlin hasidism — in its midst in the second halfof the 18th century, just at the time of these violentevents. The constant growth and development of thePinsk community, despite all these blows and set-THE STORY OF A COMMUNITY5backs, bears witness to the powerful spiritual vitalitywith which its members were endowed and which wastheir mainstay in time of trouble.★The economic condition of the Pinsk communitytook its own distinctive forms and followed its owndistinctive development.Whereas the community enjoyed cultural and na-tional independence from the day of its establishment,and its autonomous control of its internal affairs raisedit to the status of a ‘^chief community” with thecreation of the ^^Council of the State” (1623), itdid not become economically independent of the Gen-tile population till the 19th century, after Pinsk hadpassed under Russian rule. The economic develop-ment of the Pinsk Community falls into two chrono-logical halves: the Lithuanian-Polish period, markedby the small size of the city’s Jewish population andby the wars fought all around the city by hostilepowers; and the period of stable Russian rule andthe great increase in the Jewish population, fromc. 5,100 at the end of the Polish period (1793) to22,000 in 1886, or 83% of the city’s total inhabitants.In the first period, the Jews of Pinsk, as a minority— and at first a small one — were not able to con-stitute an independent economic unit. Thanks to theircommercial and organizational talents some Jews, asindividuals or small groups, succeeded in findingplaces for themselves in the economic and social struc-ture of the town and its surroundings. As describedabove, their chief economic occupation was leasing inall its various forms: leasing of estates, including thepeasants, serfs, inns, highways, road-and bridge-tolls, and the like. Many Jews dealt in loans, mainlyto Gentiles; and the borrowers, for example the‘^boyars” (the wealthy upper classes), used to mort-gage their lands as surety for the repayment of theloan to the Jewish moneylenders. There were alsoJewish dealers in furs, salt, and forest-products, suchas potash, etc. These goods were sent to the Ukraineor Poland. Then, in the market, there were Jewishshop-owners who helped to develop the town’s com-mercial centre, close to the ^‘Judengasse”. If Jewsacquired land, it was only as an investment, sincethey took no part in agriculture. Nor were theremany Jewish artisans.As time passed, the economic structure of PinskJewry underwent various changes. As a result of thefrequent wars and the consequent political instability,the large leases disappeared completely, while tax-and duty-leasing and money-lending to Gentilessteadily declined. On the other hand, there was anincrease in Jewish business dealings — whether importand export trade in, e.g., timber, potash, crops, hard-ware, and food commodities, or purchases and salesin the shops opened by Jews in the market-place. TheJews of Pinsk now participated in the fairs insideand outside P'insk, going as far afield as Breslau inGermany. They gained themselves a prominent placeamong the city’s wholesalers, gradually pushing outthe Gentile merchants. This process whereby the Jewsgave up leasing and turned more and more to develop-ing the city’s commerce gathered momentum. TheJews began to sell drinks, to buy the produce of thelocal farmers, and to set up a new commercial centrenext to the synagogue. A Jewish retail trade nowdeveloped, which also began to force the local Gen-tiles out of business. Some Jews also started to workas artisans. Thus, parallel to the ‘^taking over” of thecity by the Jewish population as a result of its nume-rical growth and spread, the Jews already at thisearly period succeeded in gaining control of the city’scommerce. As the Gentiles were dislodged from theireconomic positions, they moved to the outskirts andtook to manual trades. The Jewish domination of allkinds of business aroused the envy and hatred of theGentiles, and gave rise to a hostile attitude on thepart of the churches, the secular authorities, and thearistocracy. However, this Jewish domination of thecommercial life of Pinsk had no sound economicfoundation, since in order to carry on their businessesthe Jews had to take loans from the Gentiles, forexample from the aristocracy. Now the boot was onthe other foot: the former lenders were now the bor-rowers, and the former borrowers became the lenders.At that time, the latter part of the 18th century andthe end of the Polish period, there was a general col-lapse of moral restraints and an outbreak of licenceand violent robbery which caused great suffering tothe Jews of Pinsk and greatly harmed their economicposition. In addition to these blows from outside,they were also afflicted by a great decline in thecommunity’s prestige, in consequence of its inabilityto pay off large debts incurred to various monasticorders and government officers. It was in such un-stable and difficult circumstances that the foundationwas laid of Pinsk Jewry’s economic independence,though the full flowering of that independence had6W. Z. RABINOWITSCHto wait until the city had passed from Polish to Rus-sian rule.The development of Pinsk’s economy was favouredby the change for the better in the city’s geographicalposition after the abolition of the Russo-Polish border(1795), and by the improvement in its transportfacilities at the end of the 18th and in the course ofthe 19th century, following on the cutting of theOginsky and Royal Canals, and the laying of therailway lines, westwards to Zhabinka-Brest-Litovsk(1844) and eastwards to Luninets (1887). It wasthe Jews of Pinsk that set the city’s economy — firstits commerce, and then its industry — on a firmbasis by making the most of three factors: the ex-ploitation of the region’s natural resources (especiallythe forests of Polesia) and of the city’s position asan inland port and transport centre (for Poland, theBaltic, the Ukraine, and Polesia); the commercialinitiative and organizational talent displayed by theJews of Pinsk in setting up large-scale enterprisesrun by the technological methods of Western Europe;and the skill and strength of the Pinsk Jewish worker.In the period preceding the annexation of the city toRussia, the Jews of Pinsk had already (as describedabove) taken control of the city’s wholesale and retailtrade. Now they set up large business concerns whichdeveloped the city into an inland harbour capable ofhandling goods coming from distant places: crops,wood, textile products, salt, tobacco, sugar, iron, etc.Pinsk thus became an important transit station onthe great commercial arteries running along the in-land network of rivers, and a link with the outsideworld was established. The commercial life of Pinskin those days was concentrated on the banks of theriver, so that it was correctly dubbed “the JewishHansa”. Of the great merchants of that time, men-tion should be made of R. Shaul Karliner (Levin),one of the most influential Jews of Pinsk, Karlin andthe whole region. His great wealth and influence areevident from his will, which is a document of historicalvalue. He apparently made his money from timberand government contracts. His commercial activitieswere continued by his four sons, also among the richestJews of Pinsk. But they were outshone by their sisterHayyah, the ancestress of the Lourie family, who byher talents became one of the wealthiest Jews inPinsk, if not the wealthiest of them all. In furtheringher business interests — apparently the buying andselling of corn and timber — she exploited Pinsk’scentral position to extend her commercial power south-wards and westwards. Her great contribution to thedevelopment of Pinsk as an inland port was recognizedby the Russian government when the Tsar Alexander IIawarded Hayyah Lourie and her descendants the titleof “Honorary Citizen of the Russian Empire”. Natu-rally, the chief beneficiaries from her commercial enter-prises were Pinsk Jews, such great merchants asHayyah’s own sons — Moshe and David Lourie, andGad-Asher Levin — and the tallow-magnate, Mor-dekhai Lifschitz. To develop the city’s harbour, someJews acquired steam-boats, which they operated be-tween Pinsk and the towns of the Ukraine in placeof the oar-propelled rafts. Meir Levin led the way bypurchasing one such steamboat (before 1862) froma Gentile and renaming it “Liov”. In 1868, 8 of the12 private steamboats carrying goods on this water-way were Jewish-owned. That was the time — thesixties of the last century — when these Jewish mag-nates began setting up factories for the processing ofthe raw materials which they brought in steamboatsfrom the surrounding district and further south. Itwas a period when the economy of the Jews of Pinskwas based partly on commerce and partly on in-dustry. As with the actual settlement in the city, soin the commercial and industrial operation of thesteamboats, the Gentiles preceded the Jews. In thecourse of time, most of the above enterprises passedinto Jewish hands, like the factory for making candlesand soap from tallow which was built by Gentilesin 1850 and came under Jewish control in 1872. How-ever, whereas the settlement and spread of the Jewsin the city mostly followed on their purchase of pro-perty from the local Gentiles, many Jews (e.g. MosheLourie) developed the operation of the steamboats,and industrial activities in general, on their own ini-tiative, ordering ships and machinery from abroad.The laying of the railway lines through Pinsk in theeighties of the 19th century decreased its importanceas a transport centre and had a damaging effect onits commerce. As a result, industry began to take theplace of commerce, developing as the Jewish popula-tion increased. Pinsk now became a mainly industrialcity, with various branches of commerce playing asecondary role. The feature common to the industryand the commerce was that both were almost entirelyin Jewish hands. So much so, that the anti-SemiticRussian economist, J. Jansson, in his study of theeconomy of Pinsk (1869), was obliged to call it “thisJewish city”.The folowing is a list of the factories built by theTHE STORY OF A COMMUNITY7Jews of Pinsk during the 19th century and up to theFirst World War : (1) Two factories for the manu-facture of candles and soap. These were originallyput up by Gentiles, but when the first owners provedincapable of running them properly and lost theirmoney, they were bought out by Jews (Eliyahu Elias-berg, the son-in-law of Hay yah Lourie’s son Moshe,Shemuel Rabinovitz, the son-in-law of Gad-Asher Le-vin, and Scheinfinkel) who proceeded to operate oneof them, which became a household word throughoutRussia. At first, most of the workers employed in thisfactory were Gentiles but in the course of time theirplace was taken by Jewish workers, 120 in number.The factory was destroyed by fire in 1900 and neverrebuilt. (2) In 1865 a flour-mill was built (by MosheLourie), and in 1872 it was operated by a steam-powered engine imported from Germany. (3) At aboutthe same time, a second steam-engine was importedto power an oil-press (also owned by Moshe Lourie).(4) In 1879-80, the same Moshe Lourie built a largefactory for wooden nails for shoes, the first of itskind in Russia. This factory, which was also poweredby steam-engines imported from abroad, employed200 workers, and its products were sold all overRussia. (5) This was followed by the erection of afactory for the production of wooden containers forcart-wheel grease, with a special bark-stripping ma-chine imported from Germany by the owner (MosheLourie’s son, Lippa). (6) In 1898—99 a large factorywas erected for the production of plywood boards forbuilding and furniture. In order to be able to makefull use for this purpose of the alder growing inPolesia, the owner of the factory (Lippa Lourie) in-troduced two improvements in the technical processof manufacturing the boards: he put into operationa hydraulic press to squeeze out the oil with whichthe sheets of plywood were stuck together; and hewas the first to make use of wet glue in place of dryglue. The new industry which thus came into beingin Pinsk provided a livelihood for thousands of Jews.The products of this factory found a market not onlyin Russia, but also in Austria and England. In theHaifa “Technion’’ there is preserved a castiron platefrom one of the presses which were used for thefirst time in this factory. (7) In about 1890, a largesaw-mill was built, also operated by steam-power(owned by the brothers L. and A. Lourie). (8) Aspecial factory for the production of parquet flooring.All these factories for the processing of timber toge-ther employed 800 people, the great majority ofthem Jews. (9) In 1892, a Jew from Courland openeda match-factory. After its destruction by fire in 1897,it was rebuilt by Yosef Halpern and employed 400—500 workers, 80-90% of them, and even more, Jews.The matches produced by this factory, one of thelargest of its kind in Russia, were sold as far awayas Southern Russia, the Caucasus, the towns on theshore of the Caspian Sea, etc. This was the next lar-gest factory in Pinsk after those of the Lourie family,and provided a livelihood for a considerable part ofthe Jewish population. (10) Of the two cork-factoriesin Pinsk, one was owned by Gentiles, and the other,larger one, by Jews. 11) The well-known Zionist,Grigory Lourie, a contemporary of HerzPs and oneof the delegates to the First Zionist Congress, builta factory for making chalk, and also a small chemicalworks in which the first President of Israel, ChaimWeizmann, worked in his student days. Grigory Lou-rie was the first, and in his day the only, employerin Pinsk, who introduced an eight-hour working dayin his industrial enterprises. (12) Also in Jewish owner-ship were plants for tobacco, beer, bricks, leather,envelopes, glassware, sweets, ‘‘halva”, straw, and manysaw-mills, etc.There were two Gentile-owned ship-repair yards onthe banks of the river Pina. Close to the railwaystation there was a large government railway coach-repairing works employing 1,500 Gentiles, whose homeswere on the outskirts of the city and whose dailyneeds were a source of Jewish livelihood (tailoring,shoe-repairing and the like). A government-ownedbrandy distillery was built by the government nearthe railway station. This is evidence of the processwhereby the Gentile minority segregated itself fromthe Jewish majority in the city, first topographically,with the Gentile population being pushed out to theperiphery and the city being “taken over” by the Jews,and then economically and socially. On a rough esti-mate, the number of Jewish workers — men andwomen — in Pinsk at the end of the 19th centurywas at least 2,500 — 3,000, many of them heads offamilies. The creation of many new places of workbrought about a significant change in the social struc-ture of Pinsk Jewry. An industrial and clerical pro-letariat now came into being, with 50% of the city’sJewish population making its living by manual labour.The number of Jewish artisans, which was about 95in 1865, greatly increased in the eighties of the cen-tury, when the government set up the large railway-coach repair works. There was also a significant rise8W. Z. RABINOWITSCHin the number of building-workers, furniture-makers,tailors, shoe-repairers, fur-makers, etc. Some of theenterprises included in the above list of factories werepresumably no more than modest family workshopsin which the members of the family earned a hard-won livelihood, either by themselves or with the as-sistance of one or two workers. There may also havebeen some small concerns which have not been includedin our list. It should also be mentioned that Jews werethe first bankers in Pinsk.Since the Jews of Pinsk came to have virtually noeconomic relations with the Gentile population, theywere obliged to provide all the labour force requiredfor the satisfaction of their needs out of their ownmidst; carters, porters, fishermen, artisans of all kinds,factory workers, clerks, and managers. Many tradeswere completely taken over by Jews (builders, pain-ters, plasterers, carpenters, glaziers, tinsmiths, watch-makers, goldsmiths, and many others). Only in theacademic professions (doctors, engineers, lawyers, mid-wives, pharmaceutists) were there as many Gentilesas Jews. With justice did “Karliner” (the pen-name ofLippa-Leopold Lourie) entitle his article about Pinsk,which was published in Dr. HerzPs “Die Welt” (1898,No. 11, p. 3 ff.), “Eine juedische Arbeiterstadt”. Im-portant details about the economic condition of Pinsk,especially at the end of the 19th century, are to befound in the article “On Pinsk, Karlin, and theirInhabitants” (in Hebrew) by the first historian ofthe Pinsk community, Shaul Mendl Halevi Rabino-witsch, which was published in the literary journalTalpiyoth (Berdichev 1895, Mador Kehilloth YaakoVypp. 7-17). The harbour town of Pinsk now becamethe city of Jewish labour.*But economic success and economic independenceare far from being the whole story of the Pinsk Jewishcommunity in the 19th century. The spiritual cha-racter of the community in this period was mouldedby the traditional values of Judaism, and in con-sequence the Jewish population's whole way of lifeand the whole atmosphere of its existence were givena characteristically Jewish stamp. On the eves ofSabbaths and Festivals the workers in the factorieswould lay down their tools an hour before the timefor lighting the ceremonial candles. Two long blastson the siren from the Lourie factory would heraldin the Sabbath — the first announcing the time forclosing the shops, and the second, about half an hourlater, the time for lighting the candles. Not only theJews of Pinsk, but also those of the neighbouringsmaller communities beyond the lakes and rivers,took these siren-blasts as their sign for bringing inthe Sabbath. The factories of Pinsk were closed onSabbaths and Festivals, and some of them stoppedwork on Tisha b^Av too. In the large factories (likethat of the Lourie’s, and the Halpern match factory)provision was made for a synagogue in which, espe-cially on the “Pentitential Days”, the manager andthe ordinary workers prayed together. The workerswho came to the first shift before sunrise would downtools to pray, a special break being allowed them forthis purpose. An Ark and Scroll of the Law wereplaced in the hall set aside as a synagogue. At Pass-over, the workers in the plywood factory would begiven wooden boards to cover their tables and therebymake them ritually clean for the Festival of Un-leavened Bread. In normal years, the same workersalso received mat sot h free of charge. In the synagoguethat stood in the industrial zone in the west of thecity, the overwhelming majority of the congregationconsisted of workers from the factories. Here it wasthat many of them, after their day’s toil at the work-bench, spent their leisure together on Sabbaths andFestivals, and also their free evenings during the week.Near to this synagogue was the home of a dayyan,Rav Hindin, to whose halakhic authority the workersappealed in matters of religious observance and forthe settlement of any money disputes between them.Various artisans’ and workers’ organizations set upspecial synagogues (minyanim) for their own mem-bers, and there were thus synagogues of, e.g., thetailors, the butchers, the porters, the fur-makers, thefish-merchants, the hat-makers, etc.From the end of the 19th century until the FirstWorld War, and also between the two World Wars,there was intense socialist activity in the factories,carried on by the Haskalah movement and the variouspolitical parties, as described in detail in the volume“Toisent Johr Pinsk” (ed. B. Hoffman, New York1941). During the years of the “reaction” in Russia,many of the workers were forced to leave Pinsk andemigrate to the U.S.A. The factory managers andclerks were among the leaders of the Hovevei Zionand Zionist movements in Pinsk, e.g., Meir Liebermanand Dr. Hazanovich from the candle factory, AharonRubinstein, Shaul Rabinowitsch, Mordekhai Eisenberg,Aharon Stillerman, Yaakov Eliasberg from the Louriefactory, Moshe Y. Rom, Avraham Kreinyuk, AharonTHE STORY OF A COMMUNITY9Rubin from the match factory, and others, all ofwhom played an important and honourable part in theZionist effort during and after HerzPs time.*The pK)sition of Rav in Pinsk and Karlin was oneof the most important rabbinical offices in Lithuaniaand Poland. Amongst the great Rabbanim and talmu-dical scholars of these communities, who until the endof the 19th century were their spiritual leaders, wefind representatives of all the different trends in Ju-daism. There were darshanim (homiletic exegetes),such as R. Yehudah'-Leib Pukhovitser (b. Pinskc. 1630, d. after 1700); the exegete and preacher,popularly known as ‘The moralist from P'insk”, whowrote the works Keneh Hokhmah, Derekh Hokhmah,Divrei Hakhamim, Kevod Hakhamim, and whosebooks are today studied in the Hebrew University;R. Eliezer, the son of R. Meir Halevi, a Pinsk Ravin the second half of the 18th century, the authorof Siah ha-Sadeh and Reiah ha-Sadeh, allegorical andmoralistic commentaries on the Pentateuch; R. Elie-zer, the son of R. Reuven Oahana, who lived in Karlinin the first half of the 18th century and who wroteSiah Sefunim, an allegorical commentary on the FiveScrolls which was translated into Yiddish, and alsoTaamei Torah, Among the posekim (halakhic autho-rities), who wrote new interpretations in matters ofhalakhah and responsa to religious questions, were thefollowing: R. Yaakov, the son of R. Shimon, wholived in the first half of the 18th century and wasthe author of Kehillath Yaakov (interpretations tothe Talmud and Responsa); Dov-Baer, the son of R.Nathan-Note, who lived in Pinsk also in the firsthalf of the 18th century and was the author of NiteiShaashuintj a halakhic commentary on various tal-mudic tractates; R. Raphael Hamburger, who wrotethe book Torath Yekuthiel while serving as the PinskAv Beth-Din from 1763 to 1772; R. Shelomo Katzof Pinsk, author of Halakhah Pesukah (published in1787); R. Yaakov, the son of R. Aharon (Barukhin),the Av Beth-Din of Karlin (d. there in 1844), theauthor of Mishkenoth Yaakov and Kehillath Yaakov;his brother and successor in Karlin, R. Yitshak, theson of R. Aharon (Minkovski), d. in Karlin 1851,and author of Keren Or ah, a volume of new halakhicrulings on various talmudic tractates which wentthrough many editions (the last in Jerusalem, 1959)and is especially well known among yeshivah students;R. David Friedmann, the Av Beth-Din of Karlin from1868 to 1915, author of Piskei Halakhoth and SheelothDavid, works based on the sayings of the first hala-khic scholars; R. Aharon Valkin, the Av Beth-Dinof Pinsk-Karlin from after the end of the First WorldWar until 1942, wrote Beth Aharon, Zekan Aharon,Metsah Aharon (allegorical homilies), and HoshenAharon, and published his own commentary to theSejer Yereim by R. Eliezer, the son of R. Shemuelof Metz, one of the authors of the tosajoth (all R.Aharon Valkin’s books were originally printed inPinsk). R. Elazar-Moshe Halevi Hurwitz, the PinskAv Beth-Din from 1859-1890, left in manuscript, athis death, “marginal comments” to the Talmud whichwere included in the Vilna edition of that work andwere also published, together with comments on theTalmud, Midrash and other Jewish source-texts, underthe title Ohel Moshe.Three Pinsk Rabbanim applied themselves to par-shanuth (exegetical commentary). The first, R. Aharonof Kretingen, Av Beth-Din of Pinsk (d. there in theearly forties of the 19th cent.), wrote Tosefoth Aharon,a volume of exegetical commentary on cruxes in thetosajoth, with comparisons of the Babylonian andJerusalem versions in the Talmud and allegorical in-terpretations in the spirit of the Kabbalah. The othertwo wrote commentaries on the additions to the Tal-mud. R. Shemuel-Avigdor Tosefaah, the Karlin AvBeth-Din from 1855 or 1856 till his death in 1866,compiled a commentary to the Tosejta, for which hewas known, among rabbinical scholars, as Tanna To-sejaah. His commentary on the talmudic “orders”Nashim, Zeraim, Moed, and Kodashim was includedin the Vilna edition of the Talmud, and in the Vilnaedition of Hilekhoth R. Aljas. R. Tsevi-Hirsch Ha-cohen Valk, the Pinsk Av Beth-Din from 1895 tillhis death in 1906, wrote a commentary to Sijrei en-titled Kether Kehunah, R. Yitshak, the son of R.Aharon, in his above mentioned book Keren Or ah,also offers exegetical comments on various talmudictractates, from the tone of which it is clear that hetook account of contemporary social conditions.R. Barukh Epstein (b. 1860, d. Pinsk 1942) wasa talmudic encyclopedist and chronicler. In his well-known work, Torah Temimah, he assigns to everyverse in the Written Law appropriate rabbinical com-ments from the Oral Law. To substantiate the con-nection between the two sources, the author addedhis own explanatory remarks, written in the logicaland analytical style characteristic of a LithuanianJew from the Volozhin yeshivah. R. Barukh Epstein’s10W. Z. RABINOWITSCHsecond great work, Mekor Barukh^ a volume of variedautobiographical reminiscences in four parts (2039pages), is a particularly rich mine of historical infor-mation about Lithuanian Jewry during the last threegenerations before the Second World War. His otherbooks, some of them written in the spirit of TorahTemimah, are: Tosejeth Berakhah (printed in Pinsk),Gishmei Berakhah^ Barukh she-Amar (3 vols., on theprayers, the Passover haggadah, and Pirkei Avoth,printed in Pinsk shortly before the Communist occu-pation of the city in 1939), Mekor Barukh (a com-mentary on the Jerusalem Talmud), Nahal Dimah(a eulogy of his deceased father-in-law, R. Elazar-Moshe Hurwitz, the Pinsk Av Beth-Din), Safah la-Neemanim, Mehkerei Sajah (printed in Pinsk), andsupplements to the work of his fellow-townsman, A.B. Goldin, Othiyoth Mahkimoth,Of biographical and bibliographical interest is thevolume Oholei Shem by R. Shemuel-Noah Gottlieb(printed in Pinsk) which contains many importantdetails about the lives of the Rabbanim who were theauthor’s contemporaries (1912).A very important episode in the history of our twocommunities — the rise of the hasidic movement —is commemorated by two books of homiletic exegesisin the hasidic spirit: Kedushath Levi by R. Levi-Yitshak of Berdichev, the Pinsk Av Beth-Din from1875 or 1876 to 1885; and Beth Aharon by all theTsaddikim of the Karlin hasidic dynasty.In Pinsk and Karlin, as in other Jewish commu-nities, every generation had its own scholars andsages. The most gifted of them moulded the spiritualcharacter of the two communities, preserved and fos-tered their cultural values, and often brought aboutfar-reaching changes in their spiritual lives.Culturaly, the period from the establishment of thePinsk and Karlin communities to the early sixties ofthe 18th century was marked by the same unvariedpattern: the Av Beth-Din and the Rav, the melam-med and the yeshivah^ the Shulhan Arukh, the Talmudand its commentaries, and in some measure the kab-balistic lore all these determined the character ofthe lives lived by the Jews of Pinsk and Karlin, asof the Jews in all the other communities of EasternEurope throughout this long period.In the early sixties of the 18th century, there cameinto being in Karlin a hasidic centre (R. Aharon theGreat and his disciples) which became famous in thehistory not only of the hasidic movement but alsoof the whole Jewish people; so much so, that “Kar-liner” was for a whole century a synonym for “hasid”.The rise of Karlin hasidism was one of the reasonsfor the bans promulgated against hasidism in Lithua-nia, and split both the Pinsk and Karlin communitiesinto the two bitterly opposed factions of the hasidicminority and the mithnagged majority. So strong wasthe feeling generated by the bans and the communalschism that the Tsaddik R. Levi-Yitshak was forcedto give up his rabbinical office in Pinsk and moveto Berdichev (1785), the Tsaddik R. Shelomo of Kar-lin had to leave Karlin and move to Ludmir in Vol-hynia (before 1784), the Pinsk Av Beth-Din, R. Avig-dor, was forcibly deposed from his rabbinical officeby the Karlin hasidim (1793), the Tsaddik R. Asherthe First, on his return from Volhynia to his birth-place was too afraid of the mithnaggedim to dare takeup residence in Karlin and settled in the nearby smalltown of Stolin, and the Tsaddik R. Aharon the Secondwas obliged, on the insistence of an influential mith-nagged family in Pinsk (the Lourie family), to trans-fer his “court” from Karlin back to Stolin (before1864), one hundred years after the setting up of thefirst hasidic minyan in Karlin. These events testifyto the bitterness of the factional spirit prevailing inPinsk and Karlin at this time, though it grew gra-dually weaker with the passage of the years. Besidesthe Karlin hasidim, there were also, from the begin-ning of the 19th century, in these two communitiestollowers of the Rebbes of Libeshei and David-Ho-rodok (both close to Pinsk) and of Bereznah inVolhynia (where, however, there were altogether onlya few hasidim). All in all, the hasidim in Pinsk andKarlin had six prayer-houses (shulkhen) out ofthe forty two synagogues in the city, including theGreat Synagogue. After the tension between the twoopposing factions had died down, the mithnaggedimand hasidim lived peacefully side by side, each groupaccording to the tenets of its own doctrine.An important place in the lives of both mithnagge-dim and hasidim alike was occupied by the movementfor the “resettlement of the Land of Israel”. As aresult, two parallel kolelim (groups of settlers) wereestablished by them in Palestine — the “Pinsk kdeV*,founded by the mithnaggedim, and the “Karlin koleV*,founded by the Karlin hasidim. Many of the leadersof the kolelim in Palestine were Jews from Pinsk,while the Karlin kolel acquired lands and prayer-houses in Tiberias, Safed, and Jerusalem.THE STORY OF A COMMUNITY11In about the middle of the 19th century the firstsigns of the haskalah movement began to appear inI"insk and Karlin. A group of maskilim was establishedlike the similar groups which came into being atthis time in Vilna. These maskilim stirred up thestagnant waters of Jewish thought and Jewish com-munal life by their historical researches and belle-tristic writings. But whereas the Vilna maskilim con-fined their activities to their own city, many of thePinsk maskilim spread their doctrines throughout EastEuropean Jewry. Almost all the Pinsk maskilim werepupils of the talmudic yeshivothj whose secular know-ledge was self-taught and intuitive. One of the firstof them was Moshe-Aharon Shatskes who, in hiswell-known book Ha-Mafteah, sought to give an un-orthodox, logical, allegorical and critical interpreta-tion of the rabbinical legends. The work caused agreat furore, with the orthodox condemning it to theflames (as in the town of Grodno), and the youngergeneration making Shatskes their intellectual hero. HisYiddish book, ‘‘Der Yiddisher far Pesach”, containeda satirical criticism of what he thought to be theoverdone precautions taken to ensure a ritually purePassover. Another of the Pinsk maskilim of the time,Avraham-Dov Dovzevich, also dealt with the inter-pretation of the talmudic legends in his book Ha-Met sarej. The same author takes up the cudgels indefence of the well-known scholar of the haskalahgeneration, A. Z. Zweifel, against the criticisms ofShatskes. A third member of this group of Pinsk mas-kilim was the Pinsk-born writer and journalist, TseviHacohen Shereshevski, who as a boy had been close tothe Pinsk Av Beth-Din R. Elazar-Moshe Hurwitz andhad gained his knowledge of the Law from privateconversations with him. Shereshevski wrote a satiricalpoem. Baser Avoth^ on the education of the youngergeneration, and was a member of the editorial boardof the journals Ha-Melits and Ha-Emeth. Two othermembers of the Pinsk group were Nahum-Meir Shai-kevich (Shomer) and Avraham-Hayyim Rosenberg,the sons-in-law of Michal Berchinski, himself a maskiland a member of the city council. On coming to livein Pinsk, Shaikevich joined the maskilim of the cityand was one of the first writers of fiction in Hebrewand Yiddish. His stories and plays — numberingaltogether nearly three hundred — were meant pri-marily for the plain man, and were historically adirect outcome of the haskalah movement. Avraham-Hayyim Rosenberg was educated by his father, R.Uzziel Yaffe, a Pinsk dayyan (religious judge). Hisvaried career was typical of many young men of thehaskalah generation. After studying in the rabbinicalseminary in Zhitomir, he became an officially ap-pointed Rabbi in his hometown of Pinsk (1872-1881),where he founded a Jewish boys’ school in which thelanguage of instruction was Russian, but the syllabusmade ample provision for Hebrew studies in the spiritof traditional Judaism. He wrote a text-book of Jew-ish history in Russian, contributed articles to Ha-Melits, Ha-Carmel, Voshod and Rasvet, subsequentlyjoined the Hibbath Tsion movement, and after emi-grating to the U.S.A. wrote there for the Hebrewand Yiddish press. His magnum opus was the Otsarha-Shemoth (5 vols.), an attempt at a biblical ency-clopedia.All these were the leading representatives of thespirit of the haskalah, which penetrated to Pinsk andbegan to influence the younger generation of the timeThe later Hibbath Tsion movement played a largepart in the history of Pinsk. Recalling his youth inPinsk of those days, Chaim Weizmann writes: ‘‘Pinskbecame one of the centres of Hibbath Tsion. RabbiDavid Friedman [the Karlin Av Beth-Din] was amember of the praesidium at the Katovitz conference[of Hovevei Tsion, 1884], and was therefore namedthe leader of the movement in Pinsk”. The Pinsk AvBeth-Din R. Elazar-Moshe Hurwitz also wrote appro-vingly of the movement. The well-known preacher ofthe day, Tsevi-Hirsch Maslianski, was the drivingspirit of the movement in Pinsk, where the committeewas headed by some of the most respected communalleaders: Tsevi Hiller, M. M. Strick, Yitshak-AsherNaidich, S. Friedman, Aharon Rubinstein, and others.The number of members reached 250, and even asmany as 400, only to fall to about 70 in the periodsof crisis through which the movement passed. Manywere the P'insk Jews whom the movement inspiredto immigrate to Palestine: Yaakov Shertok (the fatherof Moshe Sharett), who immigrated a short time be-fore the Bilu (1881), Rav Zerah Epstein (1883),Yosef Vinograd (1883), Yitshak Vinograd (1886),Yaakov-Tsevi Zisselman (1886), Nimtsovitz (1886),Efraim Graver, and others. Between 1882 and 1891about two hundred souls emigrated from Pinsk toPalestine, where the Hovevei Tsion association andvarious of its individual members bought land. Aspecial association (Amdath ha-Elej) was founded toraise funds, and emissaries were sent to Palestine topurchase land. When the “Odessa Committee” wasformed, Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg was its representa-12W. 2. RABINOWITSCHlive in Pinsk; and when the Benei Moshe order wasestablished, a branch of it bearing the name LishkathZerubbavel was organized in Pinsk, headed by thewell-known Zionist Yehudah-Leib Berger. The twoyoung Hovevei Tsion and maskilim, Shaul Rabino-witsch and Yeshayahu Grossberg were the correspon-dents of Ha-Melits in Pinsk and published reports onall the activities of the Hibbath Tsion movement intheir city.The Pinsk members of Hibbath Tsion were thefirst to preach the revival of Hebrew as a spokenlanguage and to press for the modernization of theheder (religious school). In 1890^ only one year afterthe establishment of the Sajah Berurah society (forthe revival of spoken Hebrew), first in Jerusalemand then in Odessa, some of the young Jews of Pinskset up a society with the same name and purpose intheir city (S. M. Rabinowitsch, Y. H. Grossberg,M. Frankel, Y. Y. Volovelski, Y. L. Vint^, A. Ru-binstein, A. Blumenkrantz, Y. Gottlieb, Y. Shulman,P. Bregman, E. D. Lifschitz, S. N. Gittelman^ andothers, including disciples of the well-known Pinsktalmudist and maskil, R. Tsevi Zilberman, ^Hhe me-lammed from Slutsk”). From the regulations of thissociety, and from the correspondence between itsmembers and those of the Odessa society, we cangain some idea of the great difficulties encounteredby them in their efforts to realize their aim. In 1895members of Sajah Berurah were prominent among thefounders of the ‘‘modern heder’\ one of the first of itskind in any Jewish community. Amongst those thattook an active part in this enterprise were Y. L. Bergerand Chaim Weizmann, and the teachers S. Dubovski,S. N. Gittelman, A. A. Feinstein, and others. TheSajah Berurah society and the “modern heder^^ inPinsk played an important part in the revival ofHebrew as a spoken language and in the reform ofJewish education. Many of the society’s members werecontributors to the Hebrew press, writers of literaryworks, or authors of learned articles on the historyof Pinsk. E. D. Lifschitz was the author of the poem^‘Numah Per ah Beni Mahamadi” which became a po-pular lullaby.From all that has been written above, it is clearthat Herzl’s political Zionism found a very readyresponse among the Jews of Pinsk. Chaim Weizmann’swords about this period in his autobiography mayserve as personal evidence: “It was here in Pinsk thatI grew from boyhood into early manhood, here thatI had my social and intellectual contacts, and herethat I was inducted into the Zionist movement. Pinsk,then, set the double pattern of my life; it gave memy first bent towards science and it provided mewith my first experiences in Zionism”. The propa-gators of the Zionist idea in Pinsk in those days strad-dled two Jewish worlds, the old and the new. Pro-ducts of the talmudic education, with a wide know-ledge of the classical texts of Judaism, they wereat the same time well versed in the modern “JuedischeWissenschaft” and in secular learning. This combina-tion actually started in the days of Hibbath Tsion,but without the degree of national consciousness sub-sequently added to it by the Zionist movement. In-teresting evidence of the social and cultural condi-tion of Pinsk Zionism in those days can be foundin the “P'insker Stot-Luah”, an annual published(1903-04) by the Agudath Tsion and devoted to con-temporary problems, the Zionist movement, and localhistory. The Pinsk Zionist Organization was repre-sented at the various Zionist Congresses, its threedelegates to the First Congress being Berger, andGrigory and Shaul Lourie. The constitutive assemblyof the Colonial Bank in Cologne (1898) was attendedby Grigory Lourie and Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg.Grigory Lourie was one of the Bank’s first directors,and Pinsk was the centre of the sales-propagandafor the Bank’s shares in Russia. Amongst the activemembers of the P'insk Zionist Organization mentionshould also be made of M. Lieberman, Dr. L. Haza-novitz, M. Y. Rom, S. M. Rabinowitsch, Y. Bregman(who attended the Helsingfors Convention), the Weiz-mann family, Y. A. Minkovitz, P. Mandelbaum, Mor-dekhai Eisenberg, Y. Volovelski (Kami), A. A. Fein-stein, and others. Shimshon Rosenbaum, a native ofPinsk, used to travel from Minsk, where he lived,to his home-town to carry on Zionist propagandathere. In the course of time, other Zionist groups wereformed in Pinsk — the Mizrahi (headed by RavGlicksberg, P. Eisenberg, and others), Poalei Tsion,whose members subsequently joined the S. S. (So-cialist-Territorialist) Party, and the Ha-Tehiyah asso-ciation (founded and led by Zelig Tir). Since theZionist movement was banned in Russia, many ofits members were under police surveillance and weref()rbidden to leave Pinsk. The more active amongthem were actually in danger of being deported toSiberia, a fate from which they were saved by theintervention of Dr. Tchlenow with the Russian au-thorities.Side by side with the Zionist movement, which drewTHE STORY OF A COMMUNITY13its strength mainly from the Jewish middle-class,there also came into being in Pinsk two anti-Zionistsocialist parties — the ‘‘Bund” and the S.S. — whosemembers were mainly workers. The aim of theseparties was, in their own words, “to add our sparkto the flame of the revolution in Russia ... and toliquidate the capitalist world”. To this end, theywaged a revolutionary economic and political struggle,under the slogans of a shorter working day, higherwages, and better social benefits. They strove, inwriting and by word of mouth, to educate the workersto a complete change of mental attitude — to con-vince them that they could dictate conditions to theemployers. They were opposed to the traditional Jew-ish way of life and attacked the patriarchal rule ofthe gevirim (the rich members of the Community),who were at this time moving out of Pinsk. Whilethe Zionist struggle in Pinsk was carried on surrep-titiously, behind closed doors (the sale of shekelsand of Colonial Bank shares) and through schooleducation and propaganda sheets, the socialists foughttheir battle openly in the streets of the city, in thewoods, and in the factories. They even formed theirown pistol-carrying armed bands and did not recoilfrom acts of violence, such as throwing acid in police-men’s faces or even murdering some of them, androbbing government institutions to finance their acti-vities (the purchase of weapons, and the like). SincePinsk had a large proletariat, its leaders (most ofwhom came from outside) were able to conduct alarge-scale and bitter revolutionary struggle. Thehistory of these socialist parties, especially of the“Bund”, is a long series of public meetings, strikes,demonstrations, clashes with the police and, as al-ready stated, murders (like that of the policemanBundarzig). The authorities were obliged to bringCossacks to Pinsk to crush these terrorist activities.The socialists’ struggle now took on all the fervourof a holy war. They fought with selfless heroism,risking, and often sacrificing, their lives. Hershel Sternwas murdered by a policeman, who was himself sub-sequently murdered by members of the “Bund”. Do-linko was killed when a stick of dynamite explodedin his hand; and Moshe Kolodny was blown to piecesby a bomb that he was preparing for use, and hisremains were buried by his comrades to the accom-paniment of revolutionary songs and pistol-volleys.At the funeral of another Bundist, who had died anatural death, the dead man’s comrades, standinground the open grave, shouted: “Long live politicalfreedom ! Down with the monarchy !”. These aresome of the many examples of the courage displayedby the Pinsk socialists in those days. Many of themwere condemned to long terms of imprisonment withforced labour, were deported to distant parts of Rus-sia, or were placed under police surveillance, werebeaten, and the like. Outstanding among the leadersof this struggle were Shlomke Zeleznikov, Moshe Adler,the shop-assistant Notke, Volodka (who was shot inthe leg), and others. By their heroism, the youngPinsk workers of those days wrote a glorious pagein the history of Jewish socialism, even though theywere ultimately defeated in their struggle. At theheight of the oppressive anti-Jewish measures andpersecutions (1905), many of them emigrated tothe U.S.A. These emigrants still remained loyal totheir comrades in Pinsk, providing them with finan-cial support year after year, especially during thehard times through which P'insk passed after theFirst World War.The ideological differences between the various so-cialist movements often led to quarrels between them,and even to acts of violence. Thus, for example, whenthe Jews of Pinsk were threatened with a pogrom,no fewer than three defence organizations sprang upin the city : that of the Benei Tsion, that of the“Bund”, and that of the S. S. Party. The hostile re-lations between these rival parties are a sorry chapterin the history of the socialist movement in Pinsk.*In the First World War, the Jews of Pinsk sharedthe bitter fate of all the Jewish communities in placesconquered by the Germans. Pinsk was particularlyunfortunate because of its proximity to the battle-front, and suffered both from war-damage and fromfood-shortage. Nevertheless, even in these hard con-ditions, the Jews of Pinsk continued to maintain theircommunal institutions and to provide for the educa-tion of their youth.In the violent years of political anarchy (1918-1920), when the Jews of Pinsk were at the mercy oftheir enemies to the east and west (the Polish pogromof 1919, the excesses committed by the Balakhovichgangs), an outstanding example of utterly selfless anddevoted public-service was set by one of the last sur-vivors of the Hibbath Tsion period, a man who hadgained many adherents for Zionism and the nationalrevival in his city — Avraham-Asher Feinstein.Throughout this desperate period, he did not spare14W. Z. RABINOWITSCHhimself in his efforts to protect the lives, honour andproperty of his fellow-Jews, and his record of thetime and of his endeavours is preserved in his histo-rical volume, Megillath Puranuyoth (Tel Aviv 1929).Pinsk’s period of being under Polish rule (1920-1939) was marked by political oppression and byeconomic discrimination and struggle, side by sidewith flourishing cultural growth and activity. Thevarious movements that had arisen amongst the Jewsof Pinsk at the end of the previous century (Zionismin its various forms, the modern heder^ the “Bund’^and the other socialist parties, the Yiddish school, thetrade unions) now consolidated their ideologies andlaid down the lines of the policies to be followed bythem. In external matters, they waged a united strug-gle against the anti-Semitic Polish regime and in de-fence of their own political and economic rights.But internally they were torn apart by bitter con-flicts, particularly on cultural and educational issues.These conflicts sometimes assumed extreme forms, asin the ^^Bund’s” opposition to the election of a com-munal RaVy the language dispute (Hebrew versusYiddish), and the like. The schools established bythese movements were a faithful reflection of the spi-ritual condition of Pinsk Jewry at this time. Theorthodox Jews, as the conservative element, ensuredthe maintenance of the two Talmud Torah institutions— the one in Pinsk, with 350 pupils, and the otherin its own building in Karlin. Unlike their counter-parts in Poland, these Talmud Torah schools includedsecular subjects in their syllabus, and amongst themembers of their staffs were teachers who had re-ceived a general education and formal pedagogic train-ing. The main patrons of these schools were theRabbanim Ravinski and Rosenzweig, the Rebbe ofKarlin R. Elimelekh Perlov, and the older membersof the community Dov Levin, Alter Kolodny, AharonShub, Shemuel Tchernihov, Yeshayahu Gevirtsman,David Bonyuk, Moshe Bregman, and others. Alsoestablished in Pinsk at this time was the Beth Yosefyeshivah, which was transferred there from Russia.In its religious teaching and rules of conduct thisyeshivah belonged to the Musar movement whichhad been till then unknown in Pinsk. It was underthe direction of the Rabbis Shemuel Weintraub, YosefClick from Kazan, Yitshak Wolfshen from Shershov,and Yitshak (Itchele) Berlin from Karlin. It hadthree hundred pupils, who studied in very difficultconditions. Another educational institution establishedin Pinsk at this same time was a branch of theTifereth Bahurim movement for religious eveningclasses. The presence of the Rebbe R. Elimelekh, theson of the Yenuka of Stolin, in Karlin, and of theRebbe R. Yitshak-Aharon of Libeshei in Pinsk,brought about a hasidic revival in the city, albeitlimited to their own narrow circle.The Zionist movement developed a network of edu-cational institutions for the propagation of Zionism andJewish national consciousness. The Midrashah Tarbuthprimary school in Pinsk, and later in Karlin, was acontinuation of the ^^modern hedeP^ and prepared itspupils for the Tarbuth high school. The girls’ schoolfounded at the beginning of the present century bythe General Zionists, and called first the Leah Fei-geles Shule and subsequently Tel Hat, was latertaken over by members of the Tseirei Tsion move-ment. It educated its pupils in the spirit of the ZionistLabour Parties as did the “Y. H. Brenner” primaryschool. The technical school was already under Zionistdirection in the days before the First World War andits principal, Yaakov Ehrlich, emigrated with hisfamily to Palestine before the War. After the War,the school was reopened under the joint direction ofthe General Zionists, Tseirei Tsion, and leading in-dustrialists and businessmen. The pride of the PinskJewish educational system was an institution whichgained itself a fine reputation throughout Poland —the Tarbuth high school founded by its energetic anddevoted first principal, Avraham Mazor, whose workwas faithfully carried on and developed by his suc-cessor David Alper (neither of them was a native ofPinsk). The school’s teachers gave their hundreds ofpupils a general education which equipped them tocontinue their studies at university level and imbuedthem with the spirit of Zionism and Jewish national-ism. A large number of these pupils realized theirparents’ ambition and put their teachers’ instructioninto practice by emigrating to Palestine and playingtheir part in the rebuilding of the Jewish homeland.The governing bodies of these Zionist educationalinstitutions were composed of middle-class membersof the Zionist organization, such as A. A. Feinstein,S. N. Gittelman, M. Basevich, Y. Bregman, A. H.Neiman, Y. Shkolnik, A. Papish, M. Y. and Z. Se-galevitz, M. Eisenberg, A. Stillerman, F. Ginsburg,A. Bodankin, Y. Pekatz, Y. Eliasberg, Dr. E. Breg-man (in his capacity as Deputy Mayor), A. Weiner(Yisraeli), H. Pinski, B. Katzman, J. Briski, En-THE STORY OF A COMMUNITY15gineer Reich, P. Borushok, and many others. Thewomen of Pinsk were spurred on to form their ownorganization by the difficult social conditions in thetown after the First World War and the Balakhovichpogroms, and also by the fund-raising activities forthe upbuilding of Palestine and the practical realiza-tion of Zionist aims after the Balfour Declaration.They founded a WIZO branch in the town, whichwas very successful in the fields of social work andeducation, as well as in fund-raising. The WIZO officewas headed by the following ladies: R. Rabinowitsch,A. Burstein, S. Kahan, H. Budkovski, M. Rubin, R.Stillerman and others.The workers’ parties, which were opposed to reli-gious education and were fervent advocates of theuse of Yiddish and of socialist indoctrination (espe-cially the ‘^Bund”), set up their own educational in-stitutions, in which the language of instruction wasYiddish: an orphans’ home, and a primary schoolbearing the name of M. Gleiberman which was out-standing amongst Pinsk schools for its teaching stan-dards and cultural attainments. It had more than 250pupils, mostly workers’ children, and was supported bythe ZYSHO (Zentrale Yiddische Schulorganizatsye).There was also a club for adults called ^^ArbeiterWinkel” and a youth organization called “Zukunft”.The left wing of Poalei Tsion opened two primaryschools, and also evening classes. These various insti-tutions were directed by a joint board of intellectualsand workers: Leizer Levin, A. Y. Shlakman, Tern-chin, Motel Fishko, H. K. Busel (of the left-wing ofPoalei Tsion), and others.Many Jewish parents sent their sons and daughtersto study at the ‘^Chechik high school” where, thoughit was Jewish owned and under Jewish direction, thelanguage of instruction was Polish and the pupilsreceived a government matriculation certificate. Thesyllabus, however, included Jewish history. Althoughthere were assimilationist Jews from Galicia and Po-land on the teaching staff, the Jewish atmospherein the pupils’ homes and elsewhere outside the school(the Jewish political movements) preserved the pupils’national consciousness. Just as the ‘‘modern hedeP*proved itself stronger than the Pinsk “Realschule”in the time of Russian rule, so in the Polish periodthe idea of the Jewish national revival was powerfulenough to prevent assimilationist tendencies fromhaving any adverse effect on the Jewish consciousnessof the younger generation.*We are now nearing the end of the history of thePinsk Jewish Community. Our intension this time hasbeen to evaluate, in the light of all the extant ma-terial, the various elements and factors of which thehistory of the Pinsk community, my birth place, wascomposed, and to reflect the various aspects of thishistory.In the Jewish social spectrum of the Pinsk andKarlin communities in the last phase of their existencewe thus find, at one extreme, the Zionist Haluts move-ment which established in Palestine “the settlement inmemory of the Pinsk martyrs”, and at the otherextreme, a group of assimilationist Jews who cameto Pinsk from the outside — teachers, lawyers, doc-tors, and government officials, who were remote fromJudaism and who aspired to become part of the Po-lish people. This period came to an end when Pinskwas occupied by the Russian communists, who pulan end to all Jewish activity in the city (1939-1941)They were followed by the Nazis, who exterminatedthe Jews of Pinsk, destroyed the Jewish cemetriesand smashed to pieces the memorials of centuries oiJewish life.♦A community’s most lasting memorial is its historyMonument in memory of Pinsk's Nazi victims, erected by the Soviets (1966)with plaque according to their wording: "In memory of 30 thousand Sovietcitizens tortured and shot by the Fascist German Occupiers in 1942—1943 inthis area"IHE “ROTHSCHILDS” OF PINSK AND KARLINA HISTORICAL EVALUATIONbyDr. Wolf Zeev Rabinowitsch“Rothschild” is not just a family name, but aconcept designating historically creative spiritualvalues. The special power of the “Rothschilds” didnot lie simply in their wealth, since there werenumerous other wealthy Jews. What distinguishedthe “Rothschilds” was their possession of threeessentially Jewish qualities — respect for theTorah, provision of employment for theirbrethren, and gemiluth hasadim (charitableaid to both individuals and the whole community).Such “Rothschilds” came to the fore in varioustowns in Lithuania and White Russia (e.g., in Shklov,Grodno, Biknov and other places) but these werefor the most part sporadic individual cases. InPinsk and Karlin, by contrast, there arose wholefamilies of philanthropists who constituted a specialsocial phenomenon unparalleled in any of the otherJewish communities. These families were distingu-ished, first of all by their lineage, wealth, andunity. They were closely related to each othereither by blood or by their practice of inter-marriage, the latter resulting from their conscious-ness of family unity and their desire to preservetheir “purity of descent”, since their sense ofbelonging to the Jewish aristocracy made themzealous guardians of their family tradition.However, although many of them kept themselvesaloof and formed a seeminslv closed, exclusive“clique”, this characteristic did not impair theirresponsiveness to either individual or communalneeds. They displayed a reverence for Jewish valuesand a special warmth of affection for their fellow-Jews. They built economic enterprises in Pinsk andKarlin, developed industry and commerce, andestablished public and private banks, while at thesame time endeavouring to follow the injunctionthat “man does not live by bread alone”. In additionto their constructive economic activity, they werealso remarkable for their generous philanthropicwork in providing for religious needs, in the fieldof education, in the setting up of various institutionsof social welfare, and in support of charitablesocieties. In Pinsk z d Karlin they built synagogues,religious schools, hospitals for the poor, old agehomes, and the like. They also provided for theproper upkeep of the institutions which they hadfounded, making lavish financial contributions forthis purpose. Furthermore, they rendered assis-tance to their fellow-Jews in times of urgent need,such as the aftermath of fires, expulsions, andvarious other disasters. They also made use of thecivic standing accorded them by their wealth tointercede with the secular authorities on behalf ofboth the Jewish community as a whole and itsindividual members, whenever necessary. Startingfrom the end of the 18th century, throughout the19th century, and continuing into the 20th centurydown to the extermination of Pinsk Jewry by theNazis — in all, for a period of five generations —they left a deep imprint on the history of theircommunities. In retrospect, it can be seen that thesefamilies constituted the aristocracy of LithuanianJewry during all this long time. Every one of theirmembers was the bearer of various Jewish andgeneral cultural values, like most of the Jewishintelligentsia in the 19th and 20th centuries, thougheven within the same family there were considerabledifferences of attitude, in a positive or negativesense, to these same values. Thanks to theireducation, their social position, and their activeparticipation in both communal and general affairs,every member of these families is representativeto a greater or lesser degree — of some well knowntype in the Jewish public of their time. This is trueeven of those among the latter-day descendants ofthese families who followed the path of assimi-— 18 —lation to the point of no return. Every single oneof them set his own example and left his owndistinctive legacy behind him. Thus the legacy left bythe founder of the Pinsk “family”, Shaul Karliner,was very different from that left by some of thelast of the Louries. The history of these familiesthus reflects, in microcosm, the various factors andtendencies which were at work shaping the largerhistory of the Jewish community of their town andof Jewish society as a whole — some of themwere highly conservative, others adopted the ideasof the H a s k a 1 a h and Zionism, and still otherscreated the conditions for the development of thesocialist movements, though usually withoutthemselves participating in their activities. In viewof all this, it is impossible to write the history ofthe Pinsk and Karlin Jewish communities withouta proper description and evaluation of the activitiesof these Jewish individuals who deserve to be called“the Rothschilds of Pinsk and Karlin”.The following are the families of Pinsk“Rothschilds”, in chronological order: ShaulKarliner (Levin) and his sons, Hayyah Lourie andher descendants, and the Eliasbergs and Halpernswho married the sons and daughters of the Levinand Lourie families.The Levin FamilyThe founder of this “dynasty” was ShaulKarliner (1775? —1834), the son of R.Mo she. His long and interesting will shows himto have been a pious, god-fearing Jew, withcabbalistic leanings, and a rich man. At his deathhe left “land, movable property, goods, cash, anddebts”. During his life he built two bateimid rash [synagogues], one in Pinsk and theother in Karlin. In his will, he gives instructionsthat, after his death, provision should be madefrom his fortune for his poor relatives, “thescholar being given preference over the ignorantman, for the defraying of wedding expenses, for theredemption of Jewish captives, for the repair of mybeth midrash... and for the poor of theHoly Land ... ”. He also allocated sums of moneyto various institutions, such as the Pinsk BikkurHolim [Society for Visiting the Sick] andTalmud Torah, the Karlin Bikkur Holimand Hevrah Kaddishah [burial society],and the charity fund. He was evidently one of thecommunal leaders, if not actually the head of thecommunity. Thus, he writes in his will: “I did myduty in my lifetime by my fellow-townsmen...All my life I served them honestly and conscient-iously”. He was also influential in the neighbour-ing small towns — Liubeshov (Libeshei), Stolin,Pohost near Libchin, Pohost beyond the river, andHorodnoye — and bequeathed sums for the supportof their Jewish communities. “In all the smalltowns... let them proclaim in their synagogues...that they forgive me if I gave them any advice and(God forbid!) it was not good, even though I didnot act for my own personal benefit, neither againstany individual nor against the community... Thedistribution of my bequests to charity shall continuedown the generations and the injunctions of thiswill shall be performed for a thousand generations...And the sums to charity shall be paid in full tillthe rebuilding of the Temple”.Printed on the title pages of the book “EfesDamim” [“No Blood”], written against theblood-libel in Russia by the haskalah authorY.B. Levinsohn (Warsaw 1884), there is a letterfrom the well-known rabbi, R. Aryeh-Leib Katze-nellenbogen of Brisk (Brest-Litovsk) in Lithuania,to Shaul Karliner (1833) requesting him to assistthe writer “with payment and money for printing...seeing that Your Honour shows concern for theabove-mentioned scholar, especially when theoccasion calls. Therefore, let Your Honour act...and also be so good as to rouse others to bestirthemselves and send him money, so that he maydevote himself wholly to this task”. The wording ofthis letter testifies to Shaul Karliner’s standing inLithuanian Jewry. According to a Russian source,he was the owner of the Telekhan estate, close toPinsk, and rendered Russia loyal service in the waragainst Napoleon, for which a popular traditionrelates that he was honoured by the Tsar Alexander1. He was popularly depicted as a powerful person-ality, “the communal leader of the generation”, andbecame the subject of various legends One of hisdescendants, Anton Lourie made a detailed study1. Yosef Zekharia... Stern, Zekher Yehosefp. 208, Warsaw 1860. S. Ginsburg, Meg ill ahRabbath Inyan, Yeda Am, Vol. VIII, No. 26,pp. 36—39, Tel Aviv 1963.— 19 —of his will and his personality 2. The terms of hiswill indicate that he was strongly opposed tohasidism, which in his time was spreading inKarlin and its surroundings.Shaul Karliner’s sons were also remarkable fortheir good works.His eldest son Zalman Levin, is said tohave been a timber merchant and philanthropist,“the great and glorious gevir [rich man]”3.Shaul Karliner’s second son, Moshe-YitshakLevin (1802—1872), was a rich timber-merchant,who also apparently traded in corn and fats andwas employed as a government contractor. Togetherwith his sister, Hayyah Lourie, he built the paupers’hospital in KarlinHe also had a beth midrash— built by his father — in Karlin, which bore hisname till modern times. Between Purim andPesach, the street next to this beth midrashwas thronged with the poor of the town who, asreported by an eye-witness (Mordekhai Kerman),were invited by Moshe-Yitshak Levin to come thereto receive maoth hittim [money forma tsah ] . The shamash of the bethm i d r a s h would draw up the lists of the poorand present them to Moshe-Yitshak for signature.The first to be thus authorized to receive this freematsah straight from the mill were the poor ofthe immediate neighbourhood, and after them camethe other paupers of the town. Many were senttheir share secretly by special messenger, to savethem embarrassment. Besides the maoth hittim,Moshe-Yitshak used also to distribute potatoes andother Pesach commodities to the poor. On thedays preceding the Festival, chits for the four cupsof wine [^o be drunk at the Seder] were handedout in his beth midrash. The crowd of appli-cants was so great that the regular students of thebeth midrash had to suspend their studiesduring these days. One of these students was the2. A. Lourie, Di Tsavoe fun a PinskerBaal ha-Bayith fun Onheib NeintsentenYorhundert, YIVO Bleter, Vol XIII, Nos. 5/6,pp. 390—427, 1938.3. Hamelits, 1868, No. 5, p. 36 (where thereference is to Zalman the eldest son of Shaul Karliner,and not to Zalman the son of Moshe-Yitshak Levin, sincethe writer of the article goes on to mention Moshe-Yitshak, the second son of Shaul Karliner).4. H a m e 1 i t s , i b i d , and 1880, No. 4, pp. 277—278.young Moshe Aharon Shatskes, the later famousmaski 1 and author of “Ha-Mafteah” (Warsaw1866, 1869). Another maskil, R. YehezkeelSlutsker, who was “well versed in the deepermeaning of the t o r a h and an acute and discern-ing interpreter of the profound sayings of the sages,took up residence in the beth midrash of R.Moshe Yitshak Levin” ^ Moshe Yitshak used to bakematsah shemurah in his own home, underhis own and his sons’ supervision. On the eve ofYom Kippur he used to visit the cemetery withhis sons, and on leaving he would hold out hishand to the shamash to receive his gift of apiece of honey-cake, just like all the other visitors,including even the poorest among them, to showthe equality of all mortals on the Day of Judgment.Altogether, Moshe Yitshak Levin was a shiningexample of the life lived by a Pinsk philanthropist inthose days. After his death, Nahum-Meir Shaikevichwrote of him as follows: “A bitter cry is raised inPinsk and a great disaster has come upon Karlinwith the death of R. Moshe-Yitshak Levin, whopassed away on the 6th Elul, 1872. Thousands ofpeople are lamenting and mourning the passing oftheir town’s glory and the loss of its crown. Deathhas robbed Karlin of its greatest philanthropist, thefamed giver of charity, helper of the poor andfather of the wretched, R. Moshe-Yitshak Levin,who was renowned throughout Russia for his manybenevolences, and who all his life worked for thegood of those that sought his help... For he wastheir father, their helper, and their protector...always ready to aid them with his generosity. It isno exaggeration to say that he was one of thenoblest men... of our generation. Thousands offamilies were supported by him. From all overRussia crowds of wretched people came flockingto him... Every morning, when he entered hishouse of prayer, he would put on his tallithand set his hat on the table, and all that werewretched and bitter in spirit would place theirpetitions and requests, written on pieces of paper,in the hat. After this wonderfully generous manhad finished his prayers, he would put on his hat,taking great care that not one of the pieces ofpaper should fall out, and hurry home. There he5. A. D. Dobzevich, Lo Dubbim ve-lo Yaar,p. 41, Berdichev 1890.— 20 —would not touch any food until he had read all theletters and performed the requests of all thosethat sought his help... God granted him four finesons... He was esteemed by Jews and Christiansalike... He greatly revered students of the t o r a h,and also esteemed the scholars of the h a ska-l a h... Thousands of people... had their distressrelieved by the help of this generous man. Many saythat the sums which he donated to charity in thecourse of his life amounted (according to theaccount found written down in his private records)to one million and forty roubles... On the dayof R. Moshe-Yitshak’s ascent to heaven all theshops were closed and all the people, young andold, assembled... to accompany him to his eternalhome... About twenty thousand people filled thestreets surrounding his house... And when theycame to the synagogue, which his noble father, R.Shaul Levin of blessed memory, had built, theyplaced his bier on the ground... and all of themstood in silence to hear the words of the m a g g i dof the Pinsk congregation, who was about toeulogize the deceased”A different form of philanthropic activity waschosen by Wolf Levin, Shaul Karliner’s thirdson. He too traded in timber, and perhaps also incorn and fats, and was a government contractor. Asearly as the beginning of the second half of the19th century, he had the idea of encouraging themembers of his community to take up a life ofproductive physical labour, by founding anagricultural settlement for them just outside Pinsk.In furtherance of his project, he applied to thecentral Russian government in Petersburg for per-mission to purchase an area of land in the vicinityof his native town. In his written request, heexplained his idea in detail, and undertook tobear alone all the heavy outlay involved insettling the Jews on the land. When his requestwas granted, he purchased some land about sevenkilometres to the north of the town, close to thevillage of Ivanik, put up houses and fitted themout, and bought cattle and flocks and agriculturalequipment, all at his own expense. Not only werethe settlers provided in advance with all theirrequirements, but they were also exempted frompayment of government taxes and their sons were6. Hamel its, 1872, No. 2, p. 79.not liable to military service. Fifteen familiesresponded to Wolf Levin’s call.However, it soon became clear that these firstsettlers — most of whom were from the nearbysmall town of Lohishin — had only respondedto the call in order to get exemption frommilitary service and payment of taxes, and not atall out of any real interest in the founder’s idea.They lived in Ivanik, but continued to run theirbusinesses in Pinsk; and when factories weresubsequently established in Pinsk, their sons anddaughters went to work in them, renting the fieldsto Gentiles from the nearby village. Nevertheless,the produce of the little agricultural work done bysome of the settlers on their farms provided themwith a source of livelihood in summer, and in theirold age. Much later, during the economic crisis thatPinsk went through at the end of the First WorldWar, the inhabitants of Ivanik kept themselvesalive by turning to agriculture. They receivedassistance from the “Alliance” and “Ort” organi-zations, and some of the settlers remained faithfulto the noble idea conceived and devotedlyforwarded by Wolf Levin of Karlin, though hehimself was completely forgotten by them in theend. Tradition records that Wolf Levin alsodefrayed the whole cost of building the b e t hm i d r a s h known as the “ P i n s k e r K1 o i z ”,which was the center of talmudical studies in Pinsk.Here the Av [president] of the Pinsk Beth-Din[religious court], the gaon R. Elazar-MosheHurwitz, used to pray, together with a memberof his court, the dayyan [religious judge] R.Yaacov-Meir Hurwitz, and also the great talmudicscholar, R. Barukh Epstein, and others. At theend of his life. Wolf Levin lost all his fortunein a business law-suit with another estate-owner.He died, it would seem, in 1870'.A k h s a h, Saul Karliner’s third daughter,was married to R. Yaakov-Meir Padva®. He firstlived in Pinsk, and subsquently became the AvBeth-Din of Brisk. He wrote the following7. T o y s e n t Y o r P i n s k , pp. 242 ff, New York1941. M. Kerman, Meine Zikhreines, 100 YorPinsk, p. 5 (stencil) [Haifa 1953]. S. Ginsburg,Historische Werk, Vol. I, pp. 225—227, New York1937.8. Louri6, Di T s a v o e , p. 423. Y. T. Eisenstat andS. Y. Viener, Daath Kedoshim, p. 212, Petersburg1897/8.— 21 —^orks: “Mekor Mayyim Hayyim, Ktho-neth Passim”, “Sheeloth u-Teshuvoth”[Responsa]. His son, Aharon-Moshe Padva, livedin Karlin and wrote “B e u r H a r a m” [“Comment-ary of R. Aharon-Moshe”] a commentary on themidrash “Shoher Tov” (Warsaw, 1865). Inconnection with this work, Aharon-Moshe used tocorrespond from Pinsk with the well-knownmidrashic scholar, Shelomo BuberShaul Karliner’s fifth daughter, Dinah, alsobuilt a synagogue in Karlin (in Siver Street)which continued to bear her name (“DinehlesShulchen”) right to the end. She died in 1865^^.Meir Levin, Moshe-Yitshak Levin’s eldestson, followed the example set by his father andgrandfather in their way of life and concern for thewelfare of their community. He was one of the firstPinsk merchants to buy a steamship and set it toplying between Pinsk and the Ukraine (before 1862).A man of wide Jewish and secular learning, heconcerned himself with the upkeep of the KarlinTalmud Torah, and saw to the establishmentin Pinsk of heders for the study of the talmud.He brought in melammedim [childrens’teachers] from various Lithuanian towns, taking careto ensure that they should be conscientious andproperly qualified for their task. He also befriendedthem in variousways. They usedtoprayin hissynagogue inKarlin, which borehisname(“MeichesShulchen”,orMeirLevins Shulchen”), andeatthethirdSabbath meal at his table. In his house too theywould eat the last meal before a fast; and they satdown to his table for the P u r i m feast. Meir Levinalso had close connections with the Russian govern-ment authorities, on account of his commercialunder:akings and his social standing in the town.Thus, for example, whenever the provincial governorvisited Pinsk, he would call on Meir Levin to discuss(he affairs of the town with him.Among the responsa of the Karlin A v B e t h -Din, the gaon R. David Friedmanwe find onesent by the author “to my very dear friend, the9. The Shvadron Collection, Padva AharonM o s h e, The National and University Library,Jerusalem.10. Lourid, Di Tsavoe, p. 423.11. Friedman, David, Sheeloth David, YoreDeah, sect 17, p. 69, Petrikov 1913perfect and glorious gevir [rich man] our teacherR. Meir Halevi Levin, from here in Karlin-Pinsk... This responsum, which deals withMaimonides’ remarks on the laws governing templecontributions, is very long and detailed, and itscontents indicate that Meir Levin’s original questionwas, characteristically, that of a real talmudicscholar. Indeed, Meir Levin’s son-in-law, AharonLourie, a man of wide Jewish and general education,refers to his father-in-law, in a letter to J.L. Gordondated 19 lyyar, 1863, as follows: “The greatrabbi, R. Meir Levin... a well-educated andintelligent man, who can vie with the greatest in theland in knowledge of the tor ah and also desiresthe light of civilization [i.e. general culture]”.Meir Levin moved to Kiev, apparently in 1875,since in 1876 his place as director of the KarlinTalmud Torah was taken by one of hisrelatives, Mikhal the son of Yosef Ettinger. In 1879,when the Russian government called on the Jewsto elect a committee for the clarification of variousreligious and social Jewish questions, Meir Levinwas one of the three members chosen. The chroniclerYaacov Lifschitz, writes of him: “The one talmu-dic scholar on the committee, the famous ravand gaon R. Meir Levin of Kiev, was elected inMinsk...”. And in 1882, Meir Levin was chosenas a member of the committee which was sent toPetersburg to intervene with the Russian Govern-ment on behalf of the Jews. The same chroniclerwrites of him: “The Kiev community sent toPetersburg its leading dignitary, the rich rav andgaon of noble descent, R. Meir Levin of blessedmemory, who was on very friendly terms with BaronGinsburg and highly respected by all the otherPetersburg aristocrats... It was thought particularlyfortunate that R. Meir Levin was there [inPetersburg], because he was the representative ofthe millionaire R. Yisrael Brodsky of blessedmemory from Kiev, the head of the Brodskyfamily” 12.Of Moshe-Yitshak Levin’s son, Zalman, it isrelated by the Pinsk Jewish writer, Nahum-MeirShaikevich, that, after his father’s death, he prayedto him to “intercede with Him That Dwells On12. Hatsefirah, 1876, No. 15, pp. 114—115, Y.Lifshits, Zikhron Yaakov, Pt. 2, p. 206, Kovno-Slobodka 1927 and Pt. 3, pp. 100—105, 1968 (no place ofpublication).22 —High to strengthen our heart to follow in your pathsand to do your deeds”The Levin family began at this time to moveout of Pinsk, and its influence there came to an endbefore the last quarter of the 19th century.Hayyah Lourie and Her SonsThe heirs to the Levin “dynasty” in Pinsk, bothgenealogically and in terms of social status and wayof life, were the Lourie family, with Hayyah(1791 —1873), the daughter of Shaul Karliner, attheir head. After being twice widowed — by thedeath (in 1816) of her first husband, Gad-AsherRokeah, the son of the Pinsk Av Beth DinR. Yehoshua, who was the grandson of the g a o nR. Elazar Rokeah of Amsterdam, and then again(in 1835) by the death of her second husband,Aharon Lourie, the son of R, Iser Lourie ofMohilev — Hayyah herself took over the direetionof the family business in corn, timber, fat, and salt.Taking advantage of Pinsk’s central geographicalposition, she developed her trading connections tothe south and west, between the fertile region ofthe Ukraine and the Baltic countries and Poland.As a sign of the Russian government’s recognitionof the great importance of her contribution to thedevelopment of Pinsk as a port-town and commu-nications centre, the Tsar Alexander II madeHayyah Lourie and her descendants “honorarycitizens of the Russian empire. The first andforemost beneficiaries of her enterprises were,naturally, the Jews of Pinsk. One of her greatestservices to her fellow-Jews was rendered during thefamine which came upon the predominantly Jewishpopulated province of Kovno during the droughtyears 1866—1867. The starving populace werecompelled to abandon their homes and possessionsand make their way to the southern provinces.Large numbers of migrants streamed into Pinsk,seeking to continue their way southwards bysteamship. Hayyah Lourie came to the aid of thewretched refugees by setting up a large camp forthem in Pinsk where she fed and clothed them,provided for all their needs, and saw to it thatthey were transported southwards to their desti-nation in steamboats belonging to her sons, Mosheand David Lourie, and her nephew, Meir Levin.She also supplied them with money and with food13. Hamelits, 1872, No. 11, p. 80.for the journey. For two whole years she directedthis rescue operation, and thereby saved thousandsfrom hunger and even from death by starvation. Ifsuch was her concern for the poor of other towns,her devotion to the poor of her own town canreadily be imagined. In about 1865 she built fourcharitable institutions in Karlin: the TalmudTorah, the hospital (together with her brother,Moshe-Yitshak Levin), a synagogue (which wasnamed after her “Hayyehles Shulchen”),and an old-age home (together with her relative,Feigel Levin). Representations of these four build-ings were engraved on her tombstone. Hayyahinherited her father’s hatred of hasidism. Near toher home in Karlin stood the “court” of the hasidictsaddik, R. Aharon the Second of Karlin andits noisiness, especially on the Festivals, disturbedher quiet. This led to an open quarrel between herand the hasidim, which resulted in the rebbebeing forced by police-order to leave Karlin andtransfer his court” to the nearby small town ofStolin (before 1864). This happening shows howgreat the influence of the Lourie family was inPinsk and Karlin in those days. Hayyah Lourie diedin 1873. An eye-witness (Mordekhai Kerman)recounts that the books recording the acts ofcharity performed by her and the institutionserected by her were placed on her coffin, whichwas then carried to its last resting-place, stoppingat the synagogue that she had built^^. She hadalso been a generous supporter of the PinskTalmud Torah, the building of which, accord-ing to a newspaper report from the year of itsfoundation, was made possible by her generosity^®.Hayyah Lourie was connected by marriage withthe family of the well-known r a v, R. A k i v aEiger through the union of Heshe Rokeah(b. 1814), her eldest son by her first husband,with the daughter of R. Eiger’s son, R. Shelomo.One of Heshe Rokeah’s most intimate friends washis wife’s brother, R. Yisrael Eiger, who was therav of Antopol, a small town close to Pinsk, andwho subsequently resided in Pinsk where there14. S.M. Rabinowitsch, A1 Pinsk, Karlin ve-Yosheveihen, Talpiyoth, Pt. KehillothYaakov, p. 16. Berdichev 1895.15. W. Z. Rabinowitsch, Lithuanian Hasidism, London1970.16. Hamfrlits, 1862, No. 2, pp. 21—23; idem, 1868,No. 5, pp. 35—36.Hayyah Louri6(Pinsk 1867)Heshe Rokeah (1814 — ?)Hayyah Louri6‘s eldest sonThe house of Gad-Asher Levin and Yosef Halpern, as an Orphan’s Home (1921) Georg Halpern (1878—1962)Bernhard (Beni) HalpernYaakov Eliasberg (1881 —1961)— 25 —was a synagogue (in Peretz Street) named afterhim (“R. Yisrael Eigers Shulchen”).Heshe Rokeah’s father-in-law, R. Shelomo Eiger,writes of him as follows: “Praise be to God, myfirst son-in-law, Heshel Rokeah who lives in Pinsk,is also a delightful man, keen-minded and well-versed in the t o r a h, pious and God-fearing, aHebrew writer, owner of a property amounting tofrom ten to thirteen roubles. His mother is a veryrich woman, with a known (not estimated) fortuneof 150 thousand roubles, and he is of distinguishedlineage, a grandson of the gaon, R. Elazar theAv Beth-Din of Amsterdam... author of thebook ‘Maaseh Rokeah’. He was also lovedand respected by my revered father and teacher, R.Akiva Eiger, who often proudly referred to him asin truth a great talmudic scholar. He is now about24 years of age ” Heshe Rokeah was the leadingsupporter of the Karlin Talmud TorahHisappearance in the photograph reproduced hereshows him to have been a strictly orthodox Jew;and the contrast with the photographs of his uncles,Moshe-Yitshak and Wolf Levin, and his brother,Moshe Lourie, is no doubt indicative of the diffe-rences of outlook found in the Pinsk Jewishcommunity of those times on educational andcultural questions.A place of special importance is reserved forHayyah Lourie’s second son, Gad-AsherLevin-Rokeah (or G o d y e, as he waspopularly called). Like his uncle. Wolf Levin, Godyegave a great deal of thought to ways and meansof training the Jewish youth of his town forproductive work. But, whereas his uncle sought toachieve this aim by agricultural labour, Gad-AsherLevin took as his slogan the Jewish saying: “Aman should always teach his son a craft”. Boththese philanthropists aimed at realizing in the Pinskof their time, and by their own private means,the programme that was later carried out on anational scale by the “Alliance” and “Ort”organizations. Gad-Asher Levin had a traditionalJewish education including, besides the talmudand the commentaries on it, such works asMaimonides’ “Guide to the Perplexed” and “Yad17. Iggeroth Soferim... m i - M i sh p a h a t hEiger-Sofer... sect. 54, p. 70, Vienna 1933.18. Hamaggid, 1880, No. 35, pp. 300—301, where,like his brother Gad-Asher, he is given the family nameLevin, and not Rokah or Rokeah.ha-Hazakah” and Yehudah Halevi’s “Cuzari”.He began his business career as a partner in thefamily timber and steamboat concerns. Then, forpersonal reasons originating in his outlook andcharacter (which he is thought to have inheritedin part, together with some of his wealth, fromhis grandfather, Shaul Karliner), he parted companywith his relatives and set up his own business, runby new methods. He owned the steamboats “Pina”and “Nieman” which plied between Pinsk, Krem-enchug and other towns (1868). His “credo” in lifewas based on two main principles. First, he stressedboth in theory and in practice the enlightenedethical values of Judaism and, though a practisingJew, avoided any purely formal religious obser-vance. His criticism of the prevailing forms ofJewish belief and of the character of the believingJew involved him in numerous clashes, particularlywith the members of his own family. Shunningpublic honour and hating sycophants, he heldfirmly to his own individual views. Indeed, it wastruly said of him that if he had not been awealthy man and generous giver of donations, therabbis would have decreed his excommunicationor ordered him to be flogged, so “unorthodox”was he. The second of his principles was summedup in the saying: “He that lives by the labour ofhis hands is greater than the God-fearing man”. Herefused to support people who were capable ofworking for their living, on the grounds that “manis required to provide for himself”. The help hegave to others was therefore of a constructivenature, rather than purely philanthropic. Thus, inthe sixties of the last century, he made it known tothe members of his community that whoeverwished to teach his son a craft could apply to himand he would defray the expense of the boy’straining. Since to be a “craftsman” was in thosedays considered by Jews a despised occupation, thisgenerous offer was not taken up even by thepoor. Thereupon Gad-Asher proceeded to carryout his plan by collecting together a number oforphan children, especially from the “Linishches”quarter of the town where the poor lived, andevery year placing thirty to thirty five of them asapprentices with tailors, cobblers, carpenters,watchmakers, and the like. He drew up a contractwith these craftsmen, specifying the period oftraining, terms of maintenance, and conditions ofwork, and paid out of his own pocket for every— 16 —young apprentice, stipulating only that he shouldlearn the particular trade for three years, till hebecame thoroughly proficient in it, and during allthis period be provided with food and lodging byhis master^®. He himself personally made sure thatthe boys were given a real apprenticeship, and didnot simply become servants in their masters’ homes.He also made provision for their Jewish educationand for m e 1 a m m e d i m to teach them t o r a h.These lessons were given in “ D in e h 1 e sShulchen”, the synagogue named after his auntand mother in-law, Dinah. Every Sabbath Gad-AsherLevin would come to this synagogue and examine“his” boys on what they had learnt from their teacher.At the same time, he would ask each one of themabout what had happened in his little world duringthe previous week. He would also find out if theapprentices were observing the mitsvothproperly. He saw to it that they were properlyclothed, providing them at his own expense withuniform outfits for week days and Sabbaths, andfor summer and winter. We have an eye-witnessaccount of how, every Sabbath, “his” boys usedto walk together, all dressed in the same clothes,through the town on their way to the synagogue.These boys were popularly known as “Godye’sTroop” (“Godyes Polk”). It need hardly beadded how devotedly he cared for these boys whenthey were ill. Indeed, he bore alone the burden offunctions that would normally be carried out by awhole organization. At the end of the period ofapprenticeship, he gave each youth a sum of moneyto help set him up on his own in his trade or tocover the expense of further training. In this way,he set up two hundred and fourteen of the youngJewish men of his town as qualified artisans, sendingforty of them to Russia for further training. Someof his trainees moved to other towns, but themajority remained in Pinsk. It is said that in SouthAfrica there was for several decades an associationof Jewish immigrants called “Godye’s Troop”,whose members were former trainees of Gad-AsherLevin. His concern for vocational training andJewish education was equalled by his support forgeneral education. He used himself to defray thetuition fees for needy youngsters at the Pinsk“Realschule” [High School for Sciences], andthat at a time when the Jews of Pinsk were19. Hamel its, 1880, No. 14, pp. 277—278.opposed to educating their children in schools ofany kind, let alone a gentile school. Gad-Asher’sfinancial support of these pupils is thus eloquenttestimony to his views on education. At the sametime, he also supported the Talmud Torahinstitutions and their pupils. He likewise providedassistance for adults, though in the form of produc-tive aid rather than by gifts of charity. Thus, hewould buy a horse for a poor carter, and wouldhelp poor shopkeepers by loans for the purchaseof stock. There was a special arrangement in Pinskwhereby in winter the grocers used to give thecarters food on credit, to be repaid in the summerwhen the carters’ business was good, and Gad-Asher used to guarantee these debts In memoryof his wife, who was killed in Germany in a railwayaccident, he donated fifteen thousand roubles forthe annual purchase, during the intermediate daysof Sukkoth, of winter clothes for the old andinfirm. Being estranged from the other members ofhis family, he carried out all his public work alone,performing his philanthropic acts with the minimumof publicity. Before his death, he distributed sumsof money to charitable institutions and to his poorrelations. In his will he bequeathed one of hishouses for needy old people. For many years, hisdescendants used to mark the day of his death bydistributing to the poor and sick clothes boughtwith money from his legacy. His personality andopinions are reflected in his will. He died on 22ndKislev, 1877^^. The Jews of Pinsk did not forgetGodye. On the 25th anniversary of his death, anarticle in his memory was published in the journal,“Pinsker Stot-Luach” (Vilna 1903/4). Andon the fiftieth anniversary, the leading members ofthe community gathered together in his house,which had been used as a home for orphans duringand after the First World War, for a memorialservice to commemorate the man and his work. Theolder people present, who still remembered Gad-Asher, recalled his views and his efforts to improvethe social, economic, and cultural situation in hisdays, and spoke about the changes that hadoccurred in the town since his death — how an20. Hatsefirah, 1877, No. 47, p. 373.21. Z. Rabinowitsch, R. Gad-Asher Levin m i -Pinsk, Heavar, Vol. XIV, pp. 185—190, Tel Aviv1967. Gad-Asher Levin, Pinsker Slot Luahpp. 41—49, Vilna 1903/427 —industrial proletariat had come into existence andPinsk had become a workers’ town.The Halpern FamilyAmong the men responsible for the creation ofopportunities of work for the Jews of Pinsk wereGad-Asher Levin’s two sons-in law (he had no sonsof his own). The first of these was YosefHalpern (the husband of his daughter,Beil eh). In 1897, Yosef Halpern bought andextended the match-factory, which became a sourceof livelihood for hundreds of Pinsk families. 400—500 workers were employed in it, 80—90% of themJews. This was the second largest factory, after theLourie works, in Pinsk, and one of the largest in allRussia. Its products were sold as far afield assouthern Russia, the Caucasus, and the towns alongthe shores of the Caspian Sea. Here too, as in theLourie works, a Jewish atmosphere prevailed. Theworkers included both orthodox Jews and alsomembers of the “Bund” who, at the time of the1905 revolution, emigrated to America and wereamong the founders and active members of thewell-known “Pinsker Brentsch 210 Arbe-ter Ring” organization in New York; whilemany of the clerks in the factory belonged to theZionist movement. In his public benefactions, YosefHalpern showed particular concern for social insti-tutions. He was lifelong president of the Pinskhospital, where the town’s poor received treatmentfree, and always used his social standing andpersonal influence to raise funds for its upkeep.In 1880, when the hospital was in the throes of agrave financial crisis, he saved it by prevailing onhis fellow-Jews to make contributions to it as thank-offerings for being called up to the Reading of theLaw in synagogue. Together with members of theLourie family, Yosef Halpern headed the S o m e k hNofelim [Supporter of the Falling] charitablesociety in Karlin, for the provision of aid to peoplewho had lost their money and needed financialsupport to enable them to keep their businessesgoing. And he was also one of the directors of theKarlin Old-Age Home established by HayyahLourie.Gad-Asher Levin’s second son-in-law wasShemuel Rabinovich, one of the ownersof the Karlin candle-factory, which employed 120workers, almost all of them Jews.When Yosef Halpern died in Vienna in about1919, his son, Beni (Bernard), took over themanagement of the match-factory, which hecompletely rebuilt after it had been burnt down(in 1923). 15% of the town’s Jewish populationworked in this factory. However, under pressurefrom the anti-semitic Polish government, BeniHalpern was in 1925 obliged to sell the factory toa Swedish trust and agree, in fact, to its national-ization. This expropriation brought to an end oneof the largest industrial concerns of its kind, foundedand operated by Jews, in Russia. It is related that,when the new Gentile owners of the plant demandedof Beni Halpern, who was still the manager, thathe should gradually lay off the Jewish workers, hereplied that, in that case, he himself should be thefirst to be dismissed — a step forbidden under theterms of the sale of the factory.Apart from the regular contributions that hemade to various institutions in Pinsk, in particularto the “Oze” and “Orphans Home”, Beni Halpernalso showed practical concern for his fellow-Jews intimes of special need. After the First World War,when many refugees arrived in Pinsk, while manyPinsk Jews themselves returned to their homeswithout any means of livelihood, he was chairmanof the committee set up by the “Jewish Represen-tatives in the Polish Sejm” to help these unfortunatepeople. In 1924 he was one of the founders of theJewish commercial and industrial bank in Pinsk, andserved as chairman of its board of directors. Theformer residence of Yosef Halpern, which he hadinherited from Gad-Asher Levin, was made over byBeni Halpern to the Orphans’ Home set up by theJews of Pinsk after the First World War and thepogrom perpetrated by Bulak Balakhovich’s troops.Like his father before him, Beni Halpern did notjoin the Zionist Organization. He spent his lastyears in Warsaw, where he was killed, togetherwith his wife (Sonia, the daughter of YeshayahuBerlin of Riga), in the ghetto. He had no children.Yosef Halpern’s second son Georg (or Gad),who was born a few months after the death of hisgrandfather, Gad-Asher Levin, and named afterhim, joined the Zionist movement and for manyyears headed its economic bodies. He was one ofthe directors of the Keren Hayesod (togetherwith his fellow-townsman, Yitshak-Asher Naidich),was elected at the twelfth Zionist Organization, andwas a member of the first board of governors of— 28 —the Keren Hayesod and a member of theexecutive committee of the World Zionist Organi-zation. In Jerusalem he founded the large insurancecompany “ M i g d a 1”. At the fifth Congress hewas a member of the “Democratic Faction” ofWeizmann and Motzkin, and from then onwardsremained one of Weizmann’s loyal supporters andone of his advisers on economic matters affecting theZionist Organization. Weizmann’s letters to andabout Georg Halpern show, in particular, thatHalpern was one of Weizmann’s loyal supportersin the activities of the Democratic Faction, in theproject of establishing the Hebrew University, andin the opposition to the Uganda plan for Jewishsettlement. The two of them, together with GrigoryLourie, Shaul Lourie and the Eliasberg family —see below — used to meet in Pinsk, both out ofpersonal friendship and also to discuss theproblems of the Zionist movement at that time.When the match-factory in Pinsk was about tobe sold to Gentiles, he stipulated that the Jewishworkers should continue to be employed there, andthat the new owners should not be allowed tocompete with the “Nur” match-factory that GershonWeizmann had set up in Acre in 1924. GeorgHalpern wrote his doctoral thesis on “The JewishWorkers of London”. Although he emigrated fromPinsk in his youth to Western Europe, he retaineda strong emotional attachment to his birthplace,and right to the end of his life, whenever he meta Pinsk Jew, he would say to him: “Please don’tcall me Georg. Call me Godye” (as his grandfatherhad been called in Pinsk). He died in 1962 inJerusalem where his daughter, the journalistLea Ben-Dor, lives.22. The Letters and Papers of Chaim Weizmann,Volume 11, III, Indexed Letters, London 1970, 1972.Professor Gershom Scholem of Jerusalem has informed methat one of Yosef Halpern’s daughters was the secondwife of Karl Buber, the father of Martin Buber, andanother daughter was married to one of the Nathansonfamily in Lemberg. To complete the biographical details,it should be added that Yosef Halpern also had adaughter, who lived in Germany and married a non-Jew.Thus Yosef Halpern’s sons and daughters, the great-grandchildren of Shaul Karliner and grandchildren of Gad-Asher Levin of Pinsk, are representative of the threedifferent “solutions” to the Jewish problem adopted bythe Jews of those time.The Lourie FamilyThe Lourie “dynasty” was continued in Pinsk byMoshe Lourie (1824—1906), Hayyah’s eldestson by her second husband, Aharon Lourie (“OrelePinsker”). Following the example set by his motherwith regard both to the economic development ofthe town and the support of charitable institutions, hebecame one of the most important figures in thewhole history of Pinsk, the man who developed thetown’s commerce and later created a modern.Westernized industry in it. As one of the operatorsof the steamboats plying between Pinsk andsouthern Russia, he helped (like his mother beforehim) to turn Pinsk into an inland port and atransport junction between the south and west(through his firm “The Brothers [Moshe andDavid] Lourie & Co.”). When, in the 80s of the19th century, the construction of a railway runningthrough Pinsk reduced the town’s importance as aport and seriously affected its commerce, MosheLourie set up a whole variety of industrial plantsin the town. In 1865 he built a flour-mill, whichwas in 1872 powered by a steam-engine importedfrom Germany, and also a fat-factory, likewisesteam-powered. In 1879—80 he founded a largeplant for wooden nails, the first of its kind inRussia; and in 1881 a factory to manufacturewooden boxes for the greasing of waggon-wheels.Then, together with two of his children, heconstructed a large saw-mill (in 1890) and a factory(in 1898—99) for the production of large plywood-boards for building and furniture. The establishmentof all these enterprises created a Jewish industrialproletariat and made Pinsk into a workers’ town.With the co-operation of his senior officials, MosheLourie saw to it that there was a traditional Jewishatmosphere in his factories, in keeping with thePinsk Jewish way of life. When taking on newclerks, he gave preference to Talmud Torahstudents; and he showed his Jewish-consciousnessand national pride by naming one of his steamboats“Montefiore”. There were in those days very fewfactories within the Jewish “Pale” that could boast♦of a Jewish atmosphere and an observance of Jewishcustoms such as were to be found in Moshe Lourie’senterprises and in the match-factory belonging to hisrelative, Yosef Halpern (see above). It has rightlybeen said that these concerns were Jewish in thefull sense of the word, and not just Jewish-owned.On the eve of the Sabbath or of a Festival, theMoshc Louri6(1824—1906)A medallion commemoratingthe diamond wedding anniversaryof Moshe and Miriam-Leah Louri6(Pinsk 1900)Moshe Louri*^ and his family (Pinsk 1900)Workers of the Lourie factory (1934)Leopold and Alexander Lourie, as children(c. 1870)— 31workers downed tools one hour before the time forthe lighting of the candles. Two long siren-blastsfrom the Lourie factory proclaimed the incomingof the Sabbath — the first as a sign for theclosing of the shops, and the second for the lightingof the Sabbath candles. Not only the Jews of Pinskbut also those of the smaller communities roundabout, on the far side of the lakes and rivers,brought in the Sabbath according to these blastsof the factory siren. On Sabbaths and Festivalsthe Lourie factory complex was closed and empty.In it, there was a synagogue in which, especiallyon the Yamim Noraim [Penitential Days],the manager and the ordinary workers prayedtogether. There was also a m i n y a n on theYamim Noraim in Halpern’s match-factory.The workers in the Lourie factory, who started theirfirst shift before dawn, used to make a specialwork-break for morning prayers in the synagogue,where they had installed an Ark with a sefert o r a h. Those that worked on Saturday night wouldcome to the factory still dressed in their Sabbathclothes, and (so a reliable witness reports), wouldchange into their working clothes only after one oftheir number had said the havdalah prayermarking the end of the Sabbath. At the approachof P e s a c h, the workers in the plywood-factoryused to receive a gift of boards to cover theirtables with, so as to make them kosher for theFestival. They were also, in normal years, givenfree matsoth. In the part of the town wherethe Lourie and Halpern factories stood there wasa synagogue, known as the “Monastier-chiener Shulchen”, in which almost all thecongregants were workers from those factoriesmany of whom spent their free time together thereon Sabbaths and Festivals, and also on week-dayevenings. Close by this synagogue lived a d a y y a n(Rav Hindin) who served as the workers’ religiousauthority and guide, and to whom they used toappeal for decisions on questions of halakhah[religious law], or for settlement of their moneydisputes, and also for instruction in the to rah,or a lesson on a page of the talmud or achapter of “Ein Yaacov” [a collection oftalmudic stories].In the philanthropic field, Moshe Lourie devotedhis efforts to the maintenance of the institutionsestablished by his mother: the Talmud Torah,the hospital, and the Karlin Old-Age Home. Themanagement of these institutions was controlledby members of the Lourie family who, out ofrespect for their founder, continued the familytradition of support for them right to the end.They also provided for the upkeep of “HayyelesSchulchen”, in which the numerous membersof the family used to pray. Together with Hayyah’sother children, Moshe Lourie founded the KarlinGemiluth Hasadim society (1872) andplaced at its disposal one of the apartments in hismother’s former house, in which the society setup a trade school intended primarily for the poorof the town (1885, 1888). On his golden wedding(1890), Moshe Lourie donated a thousand roublesto the institutions established by his mother; andon his diamond wedding (1900) he gave ten thous-and roubles for the building of a new TalmudTorah in Karlin, to replace the old one erectedby his mother. In 1903 he shared in the cost ofextensive renovations to the Pinsk hospital; andhe also provided financial aid for the SomekhN o f e 1 i m society which had been founded byhis wife, Miriam-Leah, together with their relative,Feigel Levin, (in about 1875) and which wasmanaged by the women of the Lourie family.During the food shortage in Pinsk in 1887, MosheLourie and his brother David distributed sixtypud [1 pud = 16.38 kg.] of grain from their millweekly to the poor of the town; and in 1891 Mosheundertook to grind five thousand p u d of rye flourfor the same poor free of charge. After the greatfire that broke out in Pinsk in 1901, he donated800 roubles for relief work. On the other hand,after the Kishinev pogrom in 1903, he did notrespond generously to an appeal for aid for thevictims, perhaps because such a contribution wasnot in keeping with the rule that he apparentlyfollowed of giving preference to the needy of hisown town. When the Association of Pinsk JewishBoatmen was founded in 1890, Moshe Louriecontributed his share of the cost. A contemporarywriter reports (1880): “After them [sc. after HayyahLourie, Moshe Yitshak and Gad-Asher Levin] ...their sons continue... to perform innumerableacts of charity and are even more generous intheir provision for the Talmud Torah andthe Bikkur Holim [hospital], so that all thepeople of Karlin look to them for support”. Aneye-witness (Mordekhai Kerman) describes how theLouries of his day, and in particular Moshe,— 32 —employed an agent to distribute their charities tothe needy in the beth midrash during them i n h a h prayer, in a discreet way unnoticed byany but the recipient. Moshe Lourie was not amember of Hovevei Tsion, nor indeed of theZionist Organization, and did not contribute tothem as he did to charity. Herzl’s ideas did not•evoke any emotional response in him and hisindifference greatly angered the supporters of thestrong Zionist movement that arose in the town.However, he was not positively opposed to thismovement; indeed, in 1899 a thoroughly Zionist-style Hanukkah party was held in his home,with the participation of the town’s leading andmost active Zionists (Shimshon Rosenbaum andothers). This was no doubt due to the influence ofMoshe Lourie’s son-in-law, Moshe-Hayyim Eliac-berg (one of the oldest Pinsk members of Hove-vei Tsion and the town’s delegate to the Secondand Sixth Zionist Congresses), and also of his twograndsons, Grigory the son of Aharon Lourie andShaul the son of Idel Lourie (both of them Pinskdelegates to the First Congress). Despite hisindifference to Zionism, Moshe Lourie was amember of the “Society for the Spread ofhaskalah”^^.Times changed. Following the growing unrestamong the workers caused by the various socialistmovements at the end of the 19th century, theLouries began to leave Pinsk, as the Levins had (fordifferent reasons) done before them. Typical of thechanged atiitude to the Lourie family is thefollowing fact, reported by Hayyah Weizmann-Lichtenstein : “W. Lourie and his wife (Beileh) livedfor decades in the same house and the samestreet. She used to go out on to the balcony andwatch what was going on in the street and makecomments. Year after year she sat there taking thepassers-by to task for faults in their appearanceand dress, and being listened to with the respectdue to such a ‘lady’. Came the year 1905, and shewas still sitting there on her balcony and makingher critical observations. As a young man and womanpassed by Mrs. Louri6 told the girl off for not having23. S. M. Rabinowitsch, op. cit., pp. 10, 16, 17.Pinsker Stot Luah, ibid, p. 77. Hamelits,1891, No. 291, p. 3. Hatsef irah, 1900, No. 76, p. 322.Toysent Yor Pinsk, pp. 73—74, 222, 231. Reportsof the Hevrath Mefitsei Haskalah, f romthe years 1865, 1869, 1872, 1873.her hair combed and for talking in a loud voicein the street. Looking her straight in the eye, thegirl answered her back: ‘That’s no business ofyours, Beilkeh! Mind your own business, if youdon’t want to get hurt. Pale and frightened, Mrs.Lourie went into the house and said to her husband.‘Our days are over. There is no more room for usin Pinsk’. And indeed, only a short time later theyleft Pinsk and settled in Wiesbaden, where theylived the rest of their lives” 2^.Moshe Lourie also left Pinsk, the town of hisancestors, towards the end of his life and wentto Wiesbaden, where he died in 1906, and his wifedied in 1911.Moshe Lourie’s industrial concern was inheritedby his two sons, Leopold (Lippa) andAlexander Lourie, who had already enlargedand improved it while their father was still alive,adding a saw-mill and a plywood plant. On hisdeath, they took over not only the running of theconcern but also its “Jewishness” : the clerks andworkers, the atmosphere and customs, remainedJewish as in their father’s day. Right to the veryend there was, in the main office, a list of thecharitable institutions to which contibutions weresent every year, in accordance with the familytradition. Heading the list, of course, were thoseinstitutions which had been established or particu-larly supported by the founders of the family.The spirit prevailing in the Lourie factory waswell symbolized by the person of the gatekeeper, aman known as “Shmuelke der Shomer” who workedfor both Moshe Lourie and his sons, and who wasone of the most popular characters in the works.For several decades he stood on guard at theentrance to this large concern, deciding who shouldbe allowed in and out. A Jew of the old school,with a flowing beard and a typical peaked hasidiccap, a follower of the t s a d d i k of nearbyLibeshei, he used to read the biblical Portion ofthe Week, together with the tar gum andRashi’s commentary and hasidic exegesis, whileactually on duty, without once making a mistakein the performance of his responsible task. And hewas representative of many other conscientious andreliable Jewish workers in the plant.24. H. Weizmann-Lichtenstein, Be-Tsel Kora*t h e n u , pp. 79—80, Tel Aviv 1953.— 33 —In 1889 Leopold Lourie moved to Vienna, aftermarrying Fanny Landau of Brody, a descen-dant of the gaon R. Yehezkeel Landau (authorof “Noda bi-Yehudah”) of Brody andPrague. Even after leaving Pinsk, Leopold continuedto visit the town, since he was still responsible forthe technical supervision of the factory, and heremained true to the Jewish upbringing that he hadreceived there. “He judged the happenings of theworld” — wrote his son, Paul, in the small volumededicated to his father’s memory — “as a Jew. andbequeathed his Jewish outlook to his sons. He waswell versed in the Torah and used to study it inhis leisure hours... He inherited a tradition ofcharitable works from his forefathers”. Althoughnot an active Zionist, Leopold Lourie made theacquaintance of Dr. Herzl and had several meetingswith him. As a result of this, Herzl in 1898published in his weekly, “Die Welt”, an article byLeopold Lourie (under the pseudonym “Karliner”)on Pinsk, entitled “Eine jiidische Arbeiterstadt”,containing extremely important details on theeconomic situation of the town at that time. In1904, when the stream of refugees from theRussian pogroms reached Vienna, Leopold Lourieheaded the Rescue Committee set up on theirbehalf. Through his efforts, many of these refugeesfound work in Vienna, while many others wereenabled to continue on their way, mostly to America.Leopold Lourie occupies a special place in thefamily annals. A gifted mechanic, he designed anddeveloped new machines and adapted old ones tonew purposes, making improvements in theirstructure and functioning. The machines developedby him in Pinsk were an economic boon to hisfellow-townsmen, and made a name for themselvesin Russian, and even in West European, industry.After finishing his studies at the technical institutein Karlsruhe, Germany (in 1881), he went to Franceand took a further degree in mechanical engineering.Here he saw for the first time a special veneerpeeling machine which had just begun to be usedfor the manufacture of fine plywood-boards. Onhis journey home, he stopped in Germany to buya machine of this kind, brought it to Pinsk, andput it into operation in his father’s factory for theproduction of axle-boxes for the greasing of carriage-and cart-wheels. Since the horse-carriage was atthat time a very common vehicle in Russia, theseboxes were widely sold and the factory became animportant source of livelihood for the Jews of Pinsk.In 1894 Leopold had the idea of making strong,but light, parts for these grease-boxes by gluing acriss-cross of plywood strips on to them with ahydraulic press which was used in his father’s oil-factory. He fitted this press with plates of heatablecast-iron, between which the plywood boards weresqueezed flat. Then, in 1898, he embarked on theproduction of large plywood-boards for buildingand furniture by the same method. Thanks to thisinvention of Leopold Lourie’s, a new industry cameinto being in Pinsk and spread rapidly all overRussia, wherever there were alder-trees to supplythe kind of wood from which plywood could bemade by this new method. Since the alder grewin Polesia, around Pinsk, in the Rokitno marshes,and in other parts of the Jewish “Pale”, thisindustry provided a living for thousands of Jews,and particularly for the Jews of Leopold Louri^’**own town. A cast-iron plate from one of the fii^tpresses constructed by him is still preserved in theHaifa Technion. In addition to this invention, healso developed a technique of using wet glue, inplace of the then customary dry glue, for thesticking together of boards of alder-wood. This newdiscovery led to the creation of a special branch inthe plywood industry which was of great benefit tothe Jews of Pinsk and its environs. Thus, thanks tothese two technical improvements of LeopoldLourie’s, one of the local natural resources of Pinskbecame a source of livelihood for the Jews in thetown. The factories of the “L[eopold] andAUexander] Lourie” company employed as manyas 800 workers, nearly all of them Jewish. LeopoldLourie died in London in 1938, at the age of 79.After his death (his brother Alexander had diedbefore him in 1924), the factory was managed byhis eldest son Paul (or Shemuel, now living inCanada), until it was nationalized by the Bolsh-eviks after their occupation of Pinsk in 1939. Paulcontinued the family tradition of making yearlycontributions to charitable institutions in the towaas did his youngest brother, Arthur (now inIreland). Leopold Louri^’s second son, Anton(now in the United States) published the will ofHayyah Louri^’s father, the “great” Shaul Karliner,in “ Y i V o B1 e 11 e r ”, together with a carefulanalysis of its historical veracity. This study containssome very important information about Pinsk atthe beginning of the 19th century. Anton also wrote— 34a monograph, “Die Familie Louri6”.giving genealogical details of this family from the14th century onwards, down to the last threegenerations of its connection with, and work in,Pinsk. The three sons of Leopold Lourie were thelast of the “Rothschilds” of Pinsk and Karlin.Dr. Alexander Lourie (1861—1924),the youngest of Moshe Lourie’s eight sons anddaughters, was a very well-known figure in Pinskand the last representative of the “Lourie” traditionthere. Most of the members of the family —including Moshe Lourie’s brothers, Shemuel andDavid, and their children — had left Pinsk bythe beginning of the 20th century, but AlexanderLourie maintained his connection with the towntill his death in 1924. After his brother Leopoldmoved to Vienna (1889), Alexander still went onliving for some time in Pinsk; and even after hehimself had made his home in Vienna, he frequentlyvisited Pinsk in connection with the family’sindustrial affairs. As a child he received both aJewish and a general education; and when he grewup he continued his studies in Germany, obtaininga doctorate in philosophy at the university ofHeidelberg. On his return to Pinsk, he and hisbrother set up the firm of “The Brothers L. andAl. Lourie”. He used to give his workers variousgratuities in time of need, but he could also beharsh and unyielding with them. When, in March1905, a strike broke out in his factory, he called inthe police and the Cossacks to load the goods onto the railway waggons; and during this wholeperiod of industrial unrest there was considerabletension between him and his workers, who weremembers of the “Bund”. He was, as already stated,a student of the humanities, and his education hada lasting effect on him. Although very busy withthe affairs of his factory, he made time for study,and for several years took lessons in talmud andJewish philosophy in Vienna from the well-knownscholar and rabbi. Dr. Aharon Kaminka. In Pinskhe continued the philanthropic tradition of hisforebears. He gave generously, both in his ownname and on behalf of his Company, to charitableinstitutions, especially those established by hisfather’s mother, Hayyah Lourie. After the great firein Pinsk in 1901 he headed the Rescue Committee,together with his brother Aharon. In 1903 hecontributed a thousand roubles to the renovation ofthe Pinsk hospital. In 1905 he served as “advisor”in the Pinsk municipality, but gave up this positionwhen the “Association for the Attainment of FullEquality for the Jewish People in Russia” directedsuch Jewish “advisors” to resign, because they hadnot been elected by the Jewish community but hadbeen appointed by the Russian authorities.Alexander Lourie proved his loyalty to the Jews ofPinsk during the First World War, when the townwas conquered in 1915 by the Germans. Althoughhe could have returned to his family in Vienna, hetold his friends that he would not abandon hisfellow-townsmen in that hard time of bloodshed andhunger. He thought, and rightly so, that with hissocial standing, education and knowledge ofGerman, he would be able to ensure that therights of the Jews of his town were respected bythe German conqueror. And indeed, the Germansappointed him chairman of the “Citizens Com-mittee”, i.e. mayor of the town, in which positionhe worked indefatigably to protect the interests ofthe people of Pinsk. During the food shortage thatwas felt all over Germany, and particularly in theconquered parts of Russia, he even succeeded insomewhere getting hold of a waggonful of grain forP e s a c h and was thus able to provide every Jewwith a pound of matsah for the Festival.However, it soon became clear to him that theGermans were using the “Citizens’ Committee” asa convenient tool to enable them to carry out theirplans for exploiting the local population and itsproperty for their own advantage. When hecourageously opposed their demands — includingan order to hand over the girls of the town as campprostitutes — he was arrested and marched throughthe streets of Pinsk, under a guard of Germansoldiers, to serve a short prison sentence. Onanother occasion, he was taken by the Germans asa hostage, together with four other of the town’sleading citizens. Although the local population sawthat the ineffectiveness of the “Citizens’ Committee”was not due to any lack of effort on its part, theynevertheless started a whispering campaign againstit and its chairman. Disheartened by this state ofaffairs, Alexander Lourie resigned from his positionand left the town in the summer of 1916, returningto his family in Vienna.Unlike his brother Leopold, Alexander Louriewas opposed to the Zionist movement, a fact thatsaddened and angered the Zionists of Pinsk,- 35 —including Chaim Weizmann in the Lourie factoryat the beginning of the present century, as in theHalpern match-factory, there was a clear ideologicalstratification on Jewish matters: the workers wereeither religiously observant Jews or members ofthe “Bund” socialist party; the clerks and officialswere Zionists of one kind or another; and AlexanderLourie himself represented the philanthropicattitude^®. He died in 1924, after having successfullyrebuilt his factory after the First World War. Hisdaughter, Paula Strauss, who was born ofhis marriage with Natalia Wahl of Konigsberg,is now living in Canada.Moshe Louri6’s oldest son, Aharon, was oneof the leading public figures in Pinsk in the secondhalf of the 19th and the beginning of the 20thcentury. He founded social institutions, waschairman of schools and hospitals and used hisgood connections with the Russian authorities tohelp his fellow-townsmen. By nature strong-willedand authoritarian, he was nevertheless a devotedservant of the Jewish community. Although helived in the aristocratic manner of the gevir, hemixed freely with his fellow-Jews, and was easilyapproachable and ready to listen to any request.Hence he was affectionately known by the ordinarypeople as “Ore Lourie”. He was born in 1842 andgiven a traditional education by private teachers.He married B e i 1 e h, the daughter of the above-mentioned Meir Levin, his father’s cousin (see hisown letter to Y.L. Gordon, reproduced in fullbelow). In 1860—1868 he was the Pinsk corres-pondent of the Russian Jewish paper “Tsion”and the Vilna Jewish journal “Hacarmel”.In 1851, the poet Y.L. Gordon happened to cometo Pinsk and Aharon Lourie had for 2-3 monthsthe good fortune of being his pupil. A friendshipsprang up between them which was to last therest of their lives, as is shown by Gordon’s lettersto Aharon Lourie from 1862 to 1888^7. Some25. Ch. Weizmann, Trial and Error, p. 40, Jerusalem1963.26. S. M. Rabinowitsch, op. c i t., p, 10. Moment,Volumes I, II, III, Indexed Letters, London 1968, 1970,1972. See also ibid, Vol. I, letters 13, 40, 304, 316 andVol. Ill, letter 215.1911, No. 299, p. 4. Warsaw. Haint, 1911, No. 301, p. 3,Warsaw. Toysent Yor Pinsk, pp. 116, 179, 184, 187.27. Published in Iggeroth Yehudah-LeibGordon, 1894.excerpts from these letters will indicate the affectionand respect felt for Aharon Louri6 by a poet ofthe haskalah period. On the 20th Teveth,1862, Gordon writes to him: “...I hasten to letyou know that I am the man you are seeking. Istayed twelve years ago in your town and was afrequent visitor in the house of your respectedparents. You were taught by me for two or threemonths. I still remember you as a small, delicatechild... I at that time predicted to your respectedfather that you would grow up to be well educatedand intelligent, as indeed you have. I see fromyour short, well and tastefully written letter... thatyour heart and soul are filled with wisdom andknowledge. I am also very, very glad to see thatyou still remember me... for you too are dear tome... and I feel a strong affection for you...Tell me about all that has happened to you since Ileft all of you... Is all well with your generous-hearted father, the dear and respected R. Moshe,and with your wise and capable mother ?... Isyour grandmother, Hayyah Lourie, still living ?How is your widely-learned uncle, R. YosefEttinger [the husband of Gite Ettinger, a step-sisterof Moshe Lourie] ? And what about your twotowns, Pinsk and Karlin — have they advancedtowards the light of the haskalah or have theyfallen back?... Also tell me, please, if the A.Lourie that writes in the Jewish journals is noneother than yourself... I can hardly wait for yourreply... If you have a photograph of yourself...please send it to me... Ever your affectionatefriend, Yalag”. And from another letter, writtenin a similar vein on the 10th Nisan 1863: “...Inthe year 1850, when I was nineteen, my father, ofblessed memory, sent me to Pinsk to claim a sumof money owed him by a man who was a teacherin the school there. In connection with this claim, Iwas obliged to remain in that town [Pinsk] forseveral weeks and I bethought myself to earn mykeep by private teaching... Thus I came to knowyou, you and your respected father and mother,and that wonderful woman, your grandmother, andall the other upright and dear members of yourfamily and inhabitants of your town, some of whomI still remember and yearn to see”. In yet anotherletter, dated the 10th Adar, 1864, Gordon writesto Lourie: “... When I read your letter a secondtime today, I found it full of sound remarks, writtenwith wisdom and intelligence, and testifying to your— 36 —wide knowledge and balanced thought. The situationin your towns [Pinsk and Karlin] with regard tothe ha ska 1 ah movement is the same as that inmost of the towns in our country where our brethrenreside: the great mass of the people is still walkingin darkness,... but... the sun’s rays can be seenreaching out to these rejecters of the light... Yourstyle is good and elegant, and you have a readywriter’s pen... In your letter... there were foreignwords... as I have also found in your articles in‘Carmel’. Train yourself to speak Hebrew, sothat you should have no need of non-Hebrewwords”.On the 15th lyyar, 1868, Gordon writes to tellLourie about his satirical story describing thet s a d d i k R. Aharon the Second and the hasidicmilieu that he created around himself, the quarrelbetween the Karlin hasidim and the Lourie familywho lived close to the rebbe’s “court”, and theexpulsion of R. Aharon from Karlin. “... I wantyou to know that, among the many stories that Ihave ready in manuscript, there is one called‘Aharith Simhah Tugah’ [‘Joy Ends inSorrow’] ... about the life of the hasidic sect. Thisstory is a tribute... to that great Jewish lady, yourgrandmother, and to your respected father. Ofcourse, I have been careful to change their namescompletely, but all who know them will recognizethem in my characters, for they are a seed blessedby God Since I know you, my friends, to bea man of understanding, full of the spirit ofdivine wisdom, I beg you to let me know youropinion of my new poems... You alone do Iknow of all ... the leading citizens of your townsPinsk and Karlin .... Please be so good asto hand the book to Mr. Shatskes, the authorof ‘Ha-Mafteah’ [a key to the rabbinicalwritings, one of the pioneering works of thehaskalah literature, written by a native ofKarlin]... ”. On the publication of a new bookby Gordon, the author sent a copy of it toLourie with the following letter (1868): “... Forabout two weeks I have been busy distributingcopies of my new book... but till now I havenot sent one to your town... Apart from yourselfI have no one on whom I can rely in your town”.In another letter written on the day after YomKippur, 1868, Gordon gives some details aboutthe business affairs of Aharon Lourie’s father anduncle: “... Tell me, my very dear friend, whatkind of business is carried on by your firm ‘TheBrothers [Moshe and David] Lourie & Co.’.I have heard that you have a steamboat. Wheredoes it sail to ? And what goods does it carry ?What is your line of business ? Do you dealin timber and grain, as your family has donefor generations ? Or are you building railwaylines?”. When his book “Olam ke-Minhago”[“Everything As Usual”] appeared, Gordon wroteto Lourie (on the first of the intermediate days ofPesach, 1873): “I am sending you all, you andyour father and grandmother, one... copy of thesecond story from my book ‘Olam ke-Minhago’, which has just been published. Iknow that your grandmother understands Hebrewfairly well, and therefore I could not refrain fromsending her a special copy of the book, as a tokenof my gratitude for the kindness that she showedme many years ago. When you read my book, youwill easily recognize the real identity of the heroesand villains hinted at by my descriptions. But youmust keep this to yourselves and behave as if youdid not know, so that I should not be accused ofwickedness... Also tell me how the reading ofthe story affects the members of your house-hold...”. On the 22nd Av, 1874, Gordon writesto Lourie about the sale of certain books andabout the Hebrew newspaper “Hatsefirah”:“... You will have seen from the papers that thecommittee is prepared to publish the Five Books ofMoses in a new Russian translation for our Jewishyouth and that it is trying to get people to covenantto buy this book... For it has been firmly decidednot to publish the tor ah until we have collecteda thousand paid-up covenants in your town, forwhich purpose you will find enclosed... a printedform for recording the names of the people whosign a covenant  I have also sent one of theseforms to the rabbi of your holy congregation, R.Rosenberg [the rabbi appointed by the Russianauthorities] ... Furthermore, R. Hayyim SeligSlonimski has begun republishing ‘Hatsefirah’and has made me its general agent throughoutRussia. Please be so good, therefore, as to recommendto me a trustworthy man in your town whom can Ican employ as my agent, on a business basis...Always your sincere friend, Yalag”. On August13th 1876, Gordon wrote to Lourie from Marienbad:“... I was very happy to meet your dear motheragain after twenty-five years... I send you my37 —greetings from far away... We shall see each otheragain in Petersburg... Don’t forget me on yourarrival there... Your brother A[lexander] told melast night that you had enquired after me in yourletter to your mother... I think I told you at thetime that my daughter has become engaged toa young lawyer... I therefore request you toprovide this future son-in-law of mine with law-suits, either your own or others’, for he is a quickand able lawyer...”. On Nov. 1st 1876, Gordonwrote to Lourie about an article which he hadreceived from him : “... Your letter... with theenclosed article... did not reach me until today, andthat is why I have not answered it... Now 1 havealso received your second letter with... 12roubles... If only we had a million members likeyou!... Next week you will receive a small tributefrom me — the poem that I have written... Give mybest regards to your respected mother, whom Iwas delighted to meet again after more than twentyyears. Your friend, Yalag”.In 1888, Aharon Louri6 published a notice in“ H a m e 1 i t s ” and “ V o s h o d ” announcing thathe required a teacher for the trade school which hehad opened in Pinsk, and requesting applicants tosend details of their education and qualifications toGordon’s address in Petersburg. This shows how closethe relations between the two men were. On the12th Av, 1888, Gordon wrote to Lourie about thecandidates who were applying for the position:“Following on the notice that you placed in‘Voshod’ and ‘Hamelits’, I am receivinga large number of applications, some in personand some by letter from remote places, fromcarpenters and iron-smiths who want to work inyour school... You have not yet told me theterms... what the teacher’s salary will be... So...let me have all the details... so that I should knowwhat replies to give to the applicants’ questions...Always your affectionate and sincere friend, Yalag”.Aharon Lourie’s feeling for Y.L. Gordon isillustrated in the following two letters 2®, whichalso contain details of the condition of Pinsk Jewryat the time and of Louri6’s views on educationaland cultural questions: ‘T9th lyyar 1863First of all, I will finish what I started to writein my last letter.28. Made available to me by Dr. M. Nadav of theUniversity Library, Jerusalem.At the end of the week I returned home andfound Perl [the Pinsk teacher, Marcus Perl] onceagain doing the work that I love, without anyproper equipment for this task. I realized that Iwas woefully ignorant (for apart from the HolyTongue, at which I had worked without anyteacher, I had no clear knowledge of any otherlanguage, still less of any of the other necessarysubjects))... I said to my father: Please be sogood as to find me someone to teach me...But there was no second Perl in our town. Inthe government Hebrew School... there were atthat time two charlatans of teachers... completelyignorant melammedim. So my father decidedto take the unprecedented step of finding me aninstructor from among the teachers of the town’shigh school and was divinely guided to pick on theschool’s inspector, Ovtchinikov ^^ ... a man whoknew various languages and was versed in all thesciences, and who also had the advantage of havingperfected his instruction by long practice, for hehad been teaching for over twenty years. He hadalready taught many pupils by his new method,without any of the wearisome books of dry rulesand theorems... He knew how to impart to hispupils all the rigorous laws of every subject insuch a direct, easy, effective, and pleasant waythat they were never again forgotten. And inaddition to all these qualities, he was a man ofgreat integrity and culture, one who loved andrespected his fellow-creatures regardless of theirnationality. At that time, my father had manyshadkhanim [marriage-brokers] knocking athis door, for they could not bear to see a youthof sixteen still single. Before long, I heard myselfbeing called ‘ h a t h a n ’ [bridegroom] : myparents had betrothed me to a cultured young lady,Shulamith, the daughter of R. Meir Levin (of ourtown). This R. Meir is an educated and wise man,who can vie with the greatest scholars in theland in knowledge of the tor ah, and who atthe same time is a seeker of general enlightenment.My parents wisely delayed the day of my marriagefor two years, till I reached the age of 18. Duringthis period (and afterwards too), I continued mystudies with my teacher, the upright and goodinspector. Apart from teaching me language and29. See paper Tsion, 1863 (?), No. 34, PinskLetters. This article was not before my eyes.38literature, and some other necessary knowledge, heconstantly strove to widen my understanding andto show me what attitude a human being shouldadopt to the world around him, to everything thatis done under the sun.This is how the ten years passed, from thetime you left us to the happy day of my marriage(the 11th Elul, 1859). During all this period,most of my time was devoted to the talmud,and two or three hours a day to secular studies.Of all my teachers of talmud the only onethat had any real understanding of his task wasa certain old man named R. Moshe-Leib, whotaught me in my fifteenth and sixteenth years...My teachers never taught me the Bible at all,because they thought this study a waste of time,or because they considered that the words of theprophets were an encouragement to sinners. Alas!When will the Jewish people become trulywise ?I have now been four years in the house ofthe rav and gaon, my father-in-law, and Ihave still one more year — God willing — to livea life of peace and quiet in his house. God hasblessed me with two lovely boys. May it begranted me to educate them in the t o r a h, inJewish observance, and in worldly knowledge!By God’s grace, I am permanently resident inthe town where my dear parents live. I am nolonger their only child, for I have four brothers,besides the three sisters who had already passedaway when you were staying here. All is wellwith us, as with my grandmother, Hayyah (longmay she live!).It is now more than two years since I startedto engage in the business of bringing animal fatfrom the district of Yekaterinoslav by ship to Pinsk.The business has declined in this last year, onaccount of the railway between Petersburg andWarsaw, but there is good hope of its playing animportant part in Pinsk’s commerce... if theLithuanian line is built between Pinsk andBialystok, the junction for the Warsaw line whichconnects... also with foreign lands.Till now I have kept up my Jewish and secularstudies; and my reading of German, French, andparticularly Russian and Hebrew books has beenmy daily recreation. I also sometimes devote time...to writing articles in... Hebrew and Russian forjournals written in these languages. Usually I signthem with my own name, A. Lourie, but occasionallyI employ various pseudonyms. I am ‘Abram theHebrew’ who was attacked by many people forhis ‘philological remarks’ in ‘Hama ggid’, tillI answered them in ‘A Reply to My Critics’.1 shall postpone my reply to your questionabout the state of the ha ska 1 ah movement inPinsk in these days to another letter.1 received your last letter and was glad to seein it that you know how to devote a large partof these letters to your wise comments.You try to convince me that there is no pointin my hearing the story of your life. But 1 thinkdifferently, since 1 learn many things by readingbetween the lines, and above all this: that therewas a man whose teachers did not take properpains with him and whose education was left tounqualified melammedim with no knowledgeof pedagogy — and who nevertheless eventuallybecame a very wise and learned man, a shiningintellectual example to his brethren, greatlyadmired for his wisdom... This is a lesson to me,and one that I have learnt!Please send me ten copies of your book‘Mishlei Yehudah’ for me to distribute inmy town. You should know that two years agoI also bought ten copies of this book in Vilnaand distributed them among my acquaintances, sothat I cannot now promise you a good price for theten new copies. If you fix a low price, I shall domy best for you ...The best way to send the books is through R.Yitshak Mikhalovski in Vilna. If you write to himthat these books are for me, he will send themto me with one of the consignments of books thathe sends to my town.Also, please let me have some copies of‘Ahavath David’, if you agree to a price of30 kopek, for copies of the book are plentiful inour town.Your affectionate and respectful friend,A. LourieP.S. The R. Hayyim Lourie about whom you askin your letter is the son-in-law of R. HenekhEisenstadt of Minsk and is at present the ownerof a shop [?] in partnership with Eisenstadt’s son,the name of their firm being ‘Eisenstadt and Lourie’(in Minsk)”.— 39 —In the second letter to Gordon, Louri€ writesas follows:“Sunday, January 29th, PinskMy dear friend,I hasten to reply to your letter of the 20thwhich I received yesterday, to be sure of thisreaching you in Telsh.I see from your letter that you sent me asmall volume of ‘Meshalim’ [‘Fables’] whichI never received. Please send me another one onyour return.Please find enclosed 75 kopek, the price of 6copies of your book — 5 of ‘MishleiYehudah, and one of ‘Olam ke-Min-hago, Pt. r.When the second part of your ‘Olam’ appears,be sure to send it to me.You have presumably seen the book ‘Mil-hemeth Soferim’ (by Muller), which myfriends thought would be still-born... This workis characteristic of a certain set of Russian Jews,the y e s h i V a h students who, having lookedthrough some books in Hebrew on secular subjects,think that they have mastered the whole of secularwisdom and make a noisy display of their supposedknowledge, like a few coins rattling in an empty jarI was particularly amused by the author’s statementthat the truth of the a k e d a h [binding of Isaac]was proved by the words occurring in the s h e m o -neh esreh prayer for the New Year: ‘Thouwilt remember the binding of Isaac for his seed’.Irrefutable proof indeed’.Your affectionate and respectful friend,A. Lourie”In 1862 Aharon Lourie drew up a petition onbehalf of the Pinsk merchants to the Minsk provin-cial governor “concerning the railway from Pinskto Bialystok”. In his above-quoted letter of the19th lyyar 1863 to Y.L. Gordon, Louri6 remarksthat he wrote the petition in Russian, and thenhimself translated it into Hebrew for publication in“Hacarmel” (1863, Vol. 30, pp. 241—244).Ten of the twelve leading merchants of the townwho signed the petition were either members ofthe Levin and Lourie families or related to them bymarriage, a fact which testifies to the great impor-tance of these families in the commercial life ofPinsk. Here is the list of the signatories of thepetition:“Pinsk, November 8th, 1862Moshe [Yitshak] Levin, merchant of thesecond guildHayyah Lourie, merchant of the secondguildMeir, the son of R. Moshe [Yitshak] Levin,merchant of the second guildMoshe Lourie, merchant’s sonShelomo [son of Moshe Yitshak] Levin,merchant’s sonYosef Ettinger [husband of Gite n6e Louri6],merchantNehemyah Kolodny, merchantWolf Naidich, merchantShabbethai Simhovich, merchant’s son[Yitshak] Isaac, the son of R. MosheEliasberg [son-in-law of Wolf Levin, theson of Shaul Karliner], merchant’s sonAharon, the son of R. Moshe Louri6,merchant’s son”.Nehemyah Kolodny and Wolf Naidich weredistinguished citizens of the town, and also amongthe leaders of the Karlin hasidim^o.Aharon Louri6 established four public institu-tions in Pinsk. In 1880 he founded the Mutual CreditSociety and served as chairman of its controlcommittee until 1905. The president of the boardof governors of this fund was Aharon Louri6’sson, Grigory, and its auditor was for some timethe well-known talmudic scholar R. Barukh Epstein.In 1885 Aharon Lourie set up a trade school forboys, which he enlarged and improved in 1888. Hepresided over and saw to the proper upkeep ofthis institution, the primary aim of which was toteach Jewish youth ship-repairing. In 19(X), togetherwith the officially appointed rabbi Semezhovski, hefounded the Jewish Charitable Society. And in 1901,he established the Halvaah ve-Hisakhon[Loan and Saving] bank for the benefit of themiddle classes and the small merchant, taking careto ensure that it was run on sound economic30. Hatsefirah, 1877, No. 49, p. 388.— 40 —principles. He was also president of the governingbody of the Karlin hospital; and, together withGite Ettinger, his father’s step-sister, he ran theBeth Gemiluth Hasadim [Loan Society]set up with the assistance of the Lourie family andother benefactors in 1872. From 1884 onwards,Aharon Lourie was one of the principals of theKarlin Talmud Torah school that had beenbuilt by Hayyah Lourie. When, in 1902, newpremises were erected for this school, thanks to adonation from his father, Moshe Lourie, Aharonsupervised the actual building operations. Themembers of the Lourie-Halpern-Eliasberg familiesat all times gave active support to the twoTalmud Torah schools, the one in Karlin andthe other in Pinsk — financially, academically(syllabus, teaching methods, choice of teachers),and administratively (as principals). Those thatparticularly devoted themselves to this work were,besides Aharon Lourie, his brother Isidore, his sonLeopold, and his brother-in-law Moshe-HayyimEliasberg; Gite Ettinger (nee Lourie), her husbandYosef Ettinger and their son Mikhal; ShabbethaiSimhovich and Yonah Simhovich (apparentlyShabbethai’s son), the son-in-law of David LourieLike his father, Aharon Lourie was a member ofthe “Society for the Promotion of the EnlightenmentAmong the Jews in Russia”. The two of them werethe first members of the “Society” in Pinsk andAharon Lourie was later for many years the onlymember in the town^^. It was characteristic ofPinsk Jewry that only members of the Louriefamily joined the “Society”: Aharon Lourie’sbrother, Alexander; his son, Grigory; and hisbrother-in-law, Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg AharonLourie was instrumental in bringing about theappointment of Beilin as the official rabbi of Pinsk;and when the local priest paid a visit to Beilin,Lourie succeeded in purchasing from the church aplot of land for the extension of the Karlin Jewishcemetery. For 25 years Aharon Lourie served as aRussian-appointed “advisor” on the Pinsk municipalcouncil.31. Hamelits, 1863, No. 20, p. 312, Idem, 1887,No. 114, p. 1203. Hatsefirah, 1876, No. 15, p. 113.Hamaggid, 1880, No. 35, p. 300 and No. 47, p. 400.S. M. Rabinowitsch, o p . cit., pp. 11, 16.32. Reports of the Society for the years 1865—1873.33. Reports for the years 1888—1893.34. Reports for 1894, 1895.Despite his wide education and homelycharacter Aharon Lourie fought against changesin the cultural and political life of his communitysimilar to those that he himself introduced in theeconomic sphere. He was opposed to Zionism, tothe socialist movement, to the democratization ofpublic institutions, and to reforms in Jewish educa-tion, even though he himself sent two of his sonsto learn in the government “Realschule” in Pinsk.However, the realities of contemporary Jewish lifeproved too strong for the community’s mostpowerful personality in his struggle to resist thenew ideas of his time.In the election of representatives to the FirstDuma (Parliament) in Russia the list of candidatesheaded by Aharon Lourie was defeated by theZionist list. At a time when there was a threatof a pogrom in Pinsk, emissaries from the Jewishsocialist party came to Lourie and asked him fora contribution to the Jewish self-defence organization.After first refusing and even insulting them, heeventually agreed to contribute 500 roubles. It wasat this time that, so the report goes, he wasattacked and beaten on his way home from thesynagogue on the first day of Rosh Hashanah,and a primitive scare-bomb exploded in his house.Significant of the change in the times was AharonLourie’s having to relinquish the chairmanship ofthe Halvaah ve-Hisakhon bank, which hehad founded and developed, in favour of theZionist candidate for the position, Pinhas Mandel-baum; and Aharon Lourie’s successor as head ofthe Mutual Credit Society band, which he had alsofounded and over which he had presided for morethan twenty-five years, was the Zionist, MosheSoloveichik. A bitter conflict broke out betweenLourie and the Zionists in 1900, following on theorder issued by the provincial governor for theelection of a president of the Pinsk TalmudTorah school. The Zionists wanted to takeadvantage of the election to gain control of thisimportant institution, in order to educate theyounger generation in Zionism. Lourie, together withcertain orthodox Jews, strongly opposed theZionists, and in the struggle that followed his son,Grigory, defied his authority. The Zionists succeededin getting changes introduced into the syllabus of3S. A. Mukdonl, Meine Beg,egenishen,Buenos Aires 1949.41 —ihe school. Together with Yosef Halpern and agroup of orthodox Jews, Lourie sought to preventthe appointment of the r a v R. Tsevi Valk as thePinsk Av Beth-Din, in place of the deceasedR. Elazar-Moshe Hurwitz. Lourie wanted the ravR. David Friedman, the Karlin Av Beth-Dinand son-in-law of Shemaryahu Lourie of Mohilev,to become the Av Beth-Din of both communi-ties. But most of the Jews of Pinsk were opposedto this arrangement, and he was obliged to yieldto their wishes.Unlike his father, Aharon Lourie had nothingto do with industry. He was a contractor for thesupply of railway-sleepers in Central Asia, and ofiron and bricks for the construction of bridges andrailway-stations. He was also a partner in atimber concern and an agent of the “NorthernInsurance Company”. He died in the town ofBobruisk, in the province of Minsk, and was buriedin the Karlin Jewish cemetry (1910). On the wayfrom the railway-station to the cemetery, thefuneral procession stopped outside the institutionswith which he had been actively associated in hislifetime, while pupils of the Karlin TalmudTorah school and the choir of the Pinsk greatsynagogue recited passages from the Psalms,Representatives of the societies that he had foundedor directed accompanied him to his last resting-place^®.A particularly remarkable member of the Louriefamily was a man with all the virtues and faults ofthe unworldly idealist. This was Grigory(G a V r i e 1), the eldest son of Aharon Lourie, whosepublic activities — mainly in the Zionist cause —extended beyond the confines of his native townthroughout the “Pale” of Jewish settlement inRussia, and even further afield. In fact, thisGrigory deserves a monograph all to himself. Hislife and work in Pinsk belong to the early days ofHerzl’s Zionist movement. Born in Pinsk in 1861,he was sent as a youth by his father to Germany toattend the “Gymnasium” [high school] in Frankfurt-on-Main. After this, he went to Karlsruhe to studyat the Polytechnic Institute there. But before he hadcompleted his course of studies in Chemistry, hewent on to France and spent two years in Paris.On his return to Pinsk, he set up a large oil-processing mill (1888), built a small chemical factory36. Pinski Listok, 1910, No. 4, p. 2.in which the student Chaim Weizmann worked foia year (1895—6) as a chemist, and developeda chalk-manufacturing enterprise. His personalityis perhaps best revealed in his revolutionary — interms of contemporary social conditions and ideas —act of introducing an eight-hour working day in hisenterprises, a humane and progressive step thatwas completely unrealistic in terms of the economicviability of industrial concerns in those days. Thisexperiment is known to have been one of thefirs\ perhaps actually the very first, of its kind inall Europe. In accordance with this new workschedule, his oil-mill was the first industrial concernin which there were three shifts of workers in a24-hour day. Grigory Lourie founded a bank inPinsk, and, together with his brother Shemuel,opened banks in Homel and in the small townsof Klintsi, Pochep, and Zhlobin. Like all the otherLouries, he took an active interest in educationaland cultural institutions; only in place of theTalmud Torah established and maintained byearlier generations of his family, the recipients ofhis benefactions were now the “progressiveheder”, the first Jewish club, the library andreading-room. He was also chairman of the govern-ing board of the Mutual Credit Society, an insti-tution of great economic and social importancewhich had been founded by his father, AharonLourie, in 1880. It was this fund that played amajor part in putting an end to the extortionateterms for loans which were still customary at thattime in Pinsk: money was lent against the securityof valuables and at a high rate of interest, withrepayment of both interest and capital having tobe made weekly. Grigory Lourie was not contentwith caring for the cultural welfare of his fellow-townsmen, but also aspired to improve theireconomic condition. However, the actual directorof this Credit Society was presumably theexperienced man of commerce, Aharon Lourie, andnot his son Grigory, who was not a businessmanat all.Throughout the period of the HibbathT s i o n movement, Grigory Lourie was one of itsloyal supporters. His advice was sought, forexample, on the question of the “progressiveheder” which was opened in Pinsk in 1895; andHerzl’s biographer (A. Bein) mentions him as oneof the most important members of HoveveiTsion. When the Zionist movement came into— 42 —being, Grigory was one of its active leaders inPinsk. He was sent as one of the Pinsk delegatesto the First Congress, and on his return to Pinsk,he was responsible for the opening of a Zionistclub which became the centre of the Zionistactivity in the town. He was also one of the chiefspeakers at the Zionist meetings held in the well-known synagogue “Mokhes Shulchen”.And he was one of the two Pinsk delegates chosento take part in the Zionist consultation held inBialystok about three months after the FirstCongress, to discuss the implementation of theresolutions passed at the Congress and the wholeprogramme of Zionist work in Russia. He particularlydevoted himself to the establishment and develop-ment of the Colonial Bank (for Jewish settlement),without of course deriving any personal advantagefrom the whole scheme. The shares of the Bankbegan to be issued in Pinsk, as in other Russiantowns, even before the Second Congress, on theannouncement by the Bank’s temporary committeeof a preliminary subscription.On the eve of the Second Zionist Congress, theRussian Zionist delegates to that Congress, includingthose from Pinsk, met to discuss the setting up ofa “bank for Jewish settlement in Palestine”. SinceGrigory Lourie was one of the Pinsk delegates tothe Second Congress, as well as the First, he musthave been present at this meeting, especially inview of the subject discussed. After the meeting, hewent on to Cologne where a conference was heldon the problems of setting up the Colonial Bank. Wefind his signature among those of the participantsin this conference, at which it was decided to proposethe establishment of the Bank to the SecondCongress. Another signature was that of his uncle,Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg, who was a Pinsk delegateto the Second and Sixth CongressesAt the Second Congress, Grigory Lourie tookpart in the drawing up of the resolution calling forthe immediate establishment of the Bank. He wasalso one of the nine members of the Bank Committeeelected at this Congress. The year between theSecond and the Third Congress was a year ofintensive activity on Lourie’s part, both in Pinskitself, which became the centre for the distributionof the Bank’s shares throughout Russia, and London37. H. H. Bodenheimer, Be-Reshith ha-T e n u a h, Jerusalem 1965.and Vienna, where he took part in consultationsand meetings in connection with the Bank. Duringthis period, he was Herzl’s advisor on all mattersconcerning the Bank in Russia. On the eve of theThird Congress, Herzl pressed Lourie to accept thepost of the Bank’s chairman in London. Herzlstressed that “the appointment of Lourie will makea good impression in Russia”, and he furtherurged “the Russian leaders that they too shouldcall on him to make this sacrifice for the cause”.When, immediately after the Second Congress,the Zionist Executive Committee assigned GrigoryLourie the task of obtaining subscriptions for theshares of the Colonial Bank, Pinsk (as alreadyremarked) became the centre of the propagandadrive for the sale of these shares. So much so, thatthe leaders of the Zionist movement used to cometo Pinsk from Warsaw and Vilna in connectionwith the organization of the Bank’s activities; andenquiries about the Bank poured into Pinsk from thelarge and small towns within the “Pale”, and evenfrom outside it^^.Lourie established and maintained contact betweenPinsk and London, to such good effect that theJewish public associated the affairs of the Bankwith the small Russian town rather than the Englishmetropolis. Since the Bank’s work was illegal, theshares were not sent from London to Pinsk by post,but carried across the Russian border in a parcelby a special emissary. The addresses that reachedPinsk from Warsaw and London were written, ingreat secrecy, on batches of the Bank’s propectuses,which were then placed in sacks, and taken at nightto the post-office and handed for despatch to a clerkwho was well paid for his collaboration. All theseclandestine activities were directed by GrigoryLourie. At the same time, printed copies appearedof the “Programme for a National Bank”, translatedfrom German into Hebrew by Efraim-DovLifshits, a native of Pinsk and one of the town’sleading Zionists. There is no doubt that it wasGrigory Lourie that encouraged his fellow-townsmanand friend, who was a gifted publicist, to translatethe programme, so that it could be widely distributedfor propaganda purposes. To the same end, Louriealso wanted to publish the regulations of the ColonialBank in Russian, but was forbidden to do so by38. Y. Apel, Betokh Reshith ha-Tehiyah,pp. 485—486, Tel Aviv 1936.Hostages of the Pinsk population during the German occupation (1916)second from the right Dr. Alexander Louri6KOMUTET'b no yMPEmAEHIK)CepQ^cKazo f^ioAoniaAbHazc J^auKae'o .TiiiO'niib.yj<''7/ ✓G :>''*■^4 ^^/'-'A f' f -,i»'/t. "Vo.y / jp /c>C^.4^yi. t^' , —JK^.CC*4^ oA/lc- 4^CJ yi.444jyxicyty<i ^-l-z. y^C'y'eAA-^'y4»x^^oy , :;^ JCAiA/^^C' > A/4'4 4/1.4 ■£4^4, y-/^ c^/^‘O’AC4, r’f/.ttj y4*4.44.i^44 A. j C f’/t AA^'(^^tcAi^eT^Aa'ri. /^^ytfcA^: A)t/ ^A C/t^S^^^4^^4t^>^A4.A4 ^'4 '>4~/£4^4k'jAA4%C4' . ^ ^^/^CCJSZ^ ^/4pyl- '7H.4^ ^Aharon, the son of MosheLourie, and his familyu^ccA^uA/ ^ l/(/-£AraAcft. At '»/t: /AAxt£^//^ * fiA y £yAy\4.4 t'oAl. A/1*1 '/(i : "i l>HV;* ‘ rThs letterLouri6 toconcerningof GrigoryDr. Herzlthe settingup of the Colonial Bank(Pinsk 1899)45the government censor. Thereupon, his fellow-townsman Yehudah-Leib Berger, the great Zionistwho had been the other Pinsk delegate to the Firstand Second Congresses, travelled from Pinsk toVilna to try to find some way of getting the censor’sprohibition revoked, a mission in which he waseventually successful. This journey to obtainpermission for the publication of the Colonial Bankregulations was also undoubtedly undertaken atLourie’s instigationLourie’s work in setting up the Bank raised himto a leading position in the Zionist Organization. Thenews of Herzl’s meeting with the Kaiser Wilhelm IIin Constantinople (on Oct. 13th 1898) was sent tohim in Pinsk, and it was he that passed it on toother towns. Even after he had ceased to be anactive member of the World Zionist Organization,he was consulted by Chaim Weizmann — in 1902,1903 — from Geneva about the state of the Zionistmovement and asked to assist in the establishmentof a Hebrew University in Palestine.As a member of the Colonial Bank committeeelected at the time of the Second Congress, GrigoryLourie played a particularly active role in thesetting up of this important institution. DuringHanukkah 1898 he took part in the committee’smeetings in London, after the formal procedures forthe foundation of the Bank had been completed andthe regulations drawn up. He also appeared, togetherwith Wolf son and Jacobus Kan from the Hague, ata large rally of members of the B e n e i T s i o nassociation. Three weeks later, at a meeting of theinner executive committee held in Vienna (on Jan.1st 1899), he signed an undertaking, together withHerzl, Wolfson, Kan and others, to pay two hundredpounds to cover the cost of setting up the Bank.At the meetings of the full executive committee, whichwere held in Vienna on Jan. 26-28, 1899, Lourie,together with Wolfson and Heiman from London,submitted a report on the Bank’s regulations and onthe work that had been done in preparation for theregistration of the Bank and the sale of its shares.After this, Lourie made a journey to London toattend to the arrangements in connection with theBank. Herzl addressed him, in his letters, as “Highly39. A. A. Feinstein, Megillath Puranuyoth,p. 9, Tel Aviv 1929. N. M. Lifshits, Di TsionistisheBevegung in Pinsk, Pinsker Stot Luah,p. 67, Vilna 1903/4.respected Director”, and placed the pages ofthe Zionist press at his disposal. In the days precedingthe registration of the Colonial Bank in London,Herzl sent a constant stream of telegrams and lettersfrom Vienna to the office of the Bank, demandingthat prospectuses and other material about the Bankbe sent in particular to Grigory Louri6 in Pinsk. Inone of his letters to Wolfson (Mar. 11th 1899), Herzlwrote: “Attention must be paid to the enclosed letterfrom Lourie. Russia is what matters most. Don’tleave him [Lourie] without help in his difficult-ies... ”. While David Wolfson, aided by Kan, wasfurthering the interests of the Colonial Bank inWestern Europe, Grigory Lourie was encounteringnumerous difficulties in the same task in Russia.Nevertheless, Herzl was able to write (on May 27th1899): “According to information received... thenecessary minimum of [bought] shares (250,000) is atlast assured for the Colonial Bank. Of this totalLourie is responsible for 175,000”. Lists were nowpublished giving the names of the banks through-out Russia at which shares of the Colonial Bankcould be purchased. In Pinsk, the four bankschosen — no doubt by Grigory Louri6 — for thispurpose were the following: Grigory Lourie’s ownbank, the Mutual Credit Society bank (of whichGrigory was chairman), the bank of Idel and Sam.D. Lourie, (two of Grigory’s relatives) and thelocal branch of the Minsk Commercial Bank. Inthe first years of the Colonial Bank’s existence,2150 shares were sold in Pinsk. Subscriptions andpayments for shares were likewise received in thebanks of G. (Grigory) and S. (Shemuel, Grigory’sbrother) Lourie in Homel, Klintsi, Pochep, andZhlobin. Herzl was highly appreciative of Lourie’swork in those difficult days, as can be seen fromhis letter of May 16th 1899 to Jacobus Kan andhis telegram of June 8th 1899 to Wolfson.In the meantime, Lourie was encounteringincreasing difficulties in Russia: the FinanceMinister, Vitte, instructed the censor to forbid thedistribution of all material printed by the ColonialBank. When Herzl decided that it was necessary“to find... an industrious chairman for the Bank”(Sept. 17th 1898), his choice fell on Grigory Lourie.Lourie’s reply, as reported by Herzl to Wolfson,is characteristic of the man and of the way in whichhe worked for the realization of his ideals. Herzlwrites as follows (July 6th 1899): “...On Kan’sadvice... I yesterday sent Lourie a telegram.— 46offering him the position of chairman at an annualsalary of a thousand pounds. He replied that hewas reluctant to accept, for fear of doubts beingcast on his financial integrity”. And again, on thesame day, in a letter to Kan: “... From Lourie Ihave received the following telegram in reply tomy offer of the chairmanship at an annual salaryof 1000 pounds: ‘I am afraid that my acceptancemight disappoint many Zionists who covenanted tobuy Colonial Bank shares because of my devotedwork for which I received no remuneration; but 1shall consider the matter, nevertheless”.In a second letter to Kan, on July 12th 1899,Herzl writes: “I am doing all I can to bringLourie to London. The executive committee willofficially offer him the chairmanship. In addition,I shall also ask the Russian Zionist leaders to urgehim to make this sacrifice for the cause. In thisway we shall make completely sure of him. Yourproposal that Lourie should at first be appointed‘director’ (i.e. should have a vote on the board)seems a good one to me... Lourie’s appointmentwill make a good impression in Russia... ”. At theThird Congress Lourie was again elected as one ofthe directors of the Colonial Bank, but was not atthat time rich enough to join the other Russiandirectors in personally helping to finance Herzl’splans in Turkey. The seven directors of the Bankelected at this Congress set up a sub-committeeconsisting of two of their own members — Kanand Lourie. Herzl’s letters to Wolfson af^er theThird Congress (written on Sept. 18th 1899 andSept. 30th 1899) show that Herzl had notabandoned the idea of making Lourie chairmanof the Bank, with a view to improving its condition.Herzl writes : “Is Lourie in London ? ... Louriewill organize the Bank in London”, and he goeson to request Wolfson to see that Lourie is assignedthis task. The shares of the Colonial Bank wereissued (Mar. 23rd 1900) over Lourie’s signature.However, as a result of being jointly run by Kanfrom the Hague and by Lourie from Pinsk, in theabsence of a chairman with overriding powers inLondon, the Bank did not develop as it should havedone. This led to differences of opinion betweenHerzl, on the one hand, and Kan and Lourie,supported by Wolfson and Bodenheimer, on theother. Echoes of this disagreement can be foundin Herzl’s diary and letters, in the minutes of themeetings of the Zionist Executive Committee andof the Bank’s board of governors, in Zionistliterature, and in Lourie’s letters (now in the centralZionist archives in Jerusalem). On May 8th 1900Lourie sent a letter of resignation from Pinsk to theBank’s directors and board of governors. Despitethe severe blow dealt to his own pride, Lourie’sonly thought was for the interests of the Bank, andwith his characteristic modesty he wrote to those incharge of it as follows: “... My leaving theColonial Bank is a loss of no great importancewhich can easily be made good. But Mr. Kan’sexpert services to the Bank are irreplaceable, andit is therefore my duty to advise you to telephoneto Mr. Kan and insist on his withdrawing hisresignation. I leave the Colonial Bank with an easymind, since I know that, as long as Mr. Loewe isthe Bank’s secretary and Mr. Lewis its lawyer, theyare sufficient insurance against misuse of theBank’s funds... ”.Lourie’s recognition of Kan’s pre-eminence asan expert in banking matters shows that, even atthe moment of his resignation, his chief concernwas for the future of the Colonial Bank which hehad done so much to bring into being, Down to thetime of the Fourth Congress (August 1900) heremained loosely connected with it and was actuallyco-opted on to the Bank’s economic committee.However, after the Fourth Congress he ceased totake a leading, active part in the Bank’s affairs,though he was again elected to its committee at theFifth Zionist Congress, which he attended as adelegate from Pinsk. In contrast to his fellow-townsman and fellow-delegate, Moshe Y. Rom,Lourie opposed the setting up of the JewishNational Fund by the Congress on the basis ofnothing more than a bare outline of the Fund'sregulations, and demanded that the regulations ofthis financial institution should be carefully drawnup in full by experienced jurists and presented tothe Sixth Congress. This proposal, arising appar-ently from Lourie’s bitter experience during theestablishment of the Colonial Bank, was lengthilydebated by, among others, Herzl, Bodenheimer,Kokesh, Victor Jacobson, Shalit, and Louri6’s ownbrother Leopold. As a man to whom cultural workwas also of deep concern, Grigory Lourie wasamongst those that pressed for its inclusion in theZionist effort, and we find his name in the listof delegates who expressed their wish to addressthe Fifth Congress on this subject. When the47 —Democratic Faction walked out of the debating hallon this issue, Louri6, though not a member of theFaction, joined them Grigory Lx)urie’s namedoes not appear among those taking part in theZionist conference held in Vienna, between theFifth and Sixth Congresses, on Oct. 28-30th, 1902,nor yet among the directors of the Colonial Bankwho were elected at that conference.Striking testimony to the power of Lourie’spersonal influence within the Zionist movement isto be found in four letters written to him fromGeneva at the end of 1902 and the beginning of1903 by Chaim Weizmann, three of them in Germanand the fourth in Russian After reminding Lourieof their conversations in Pinsk, Weizmann informshim that groups have been formed to propagatethe idea of establishing “a Jewish school of higherlearning” (i.e. a university) and requests him “tohelp us in our work... since with your personalityand your connections you can do a great deal forus... The questionnaires will be sent to you foryou kindly to express your opinion of them... Afteryou have put in a good word for us to Mr. Kan, weshall write to him... In the third letter, Weizmannwrites about “the Jewish school of higher learning”and discusses the (as it seems to him) precariouscondition of the Zionist movement. He stresses thepower of Lourie’s influence — even at that date —both in connection with the establishment of theproposed Jewish university and in helping to clarifyand improve the general Zionist situation, and adds:“It is your duty to help us... I know that you havealways adopted a balanced attitude to the activitiesof our party and I therefore very much want to hearyour opinion..The contents of this letter wouldseem to suggest that, in his replies to Weizmann’sprevious letters, Lourie had expressed oppositionto the decision to support the establishment of auniversity on condition that it be set up only inPalestine. We do not know what action Lourie tookafter receiving Weizmann’s letters.The Weizmann letters in the Rehovoth archivestestify to the close personal relationship betweenWeizmann and Grigory Lourie. As already stated,there was a disagreement between them in aboutthe middle of 1903. Grigory’s house was a meeting-place for the Pinsk Jewish intelligentsia, and a year40. Yisrael Klausner, Opozitsiyah le-Herzl,p. 147, Jerusalem 1960.later, on April 4th 1904, we find Weizmann writing:“1 have just had a visit from Shaichik [ShaulLourie],... We shall meet today at Grigory’s. Allthe Pinsk ‘Europeans’ have been invited to hishouse”In 1902 Lourie attended the Zionist conferenceat Minsk and was elected (presumably on thestrength of his having formerly been one of theBank’s directors) to the committee charged withthe organization of “clubs for the sale of ColonialBank shares” in Russia. The conference acceptedhis proposal calling for the publication of detailedinformation about the Bank’s activities (includingits balance-sheets) in the Russian Jewish press,and also adopted various suggestions of his forthe improvement of the Bank’s management. Hehimself appeared before the conference to presentthe Control Committee’s report on the financial stateof the movement.On his way home from the Minsk conference(which ended on Nov. 10th 1902), Grigory Louriemet Major Evans-Gordon, a member of the BritishRoyal Commission on Alien Immigration, broughthim back with him to Pinsk, and took him on atour of the neighbouring small towns to show himthe conditions of Jewish life there. In Pinsk itself,he arranged for Evans-Gordon to meet the localZionists, and Gordon’s visit was remembered byGeorg Halpern in 1961. Chaim Weizmann also tookpart in this tour. Afterwards, Grigory Lourie wrotethe following letter (now in the central Zionistarchives in Jerusalem), to Nahum Sokolow with acopy to Dr. Herzl who, of course, had appearedbefore the above-mentioned British Commission.Lourie wrote (in German) as follows:“Pinsk, Sept. 3/16, 1902.My dear Mr. Sokolow,I think that, after having visited several Jewishcommunities in Russia, Major Gordon has nowformed roughly the following opinion: that theJews are industrious and intelligent artisans wholove their work, but are subjected to innumerableoppressions; that the statistics given by Mr. Joseph(Welt, No. 29, p. 3) are not correct; and that the41. The Letters and Papers of Chaim Weizmann,Volume I, II, III, Indexed Letters, London 1968, 1970, 1972.See also ibid, Vol. I, letters 13, 40, 304, 316 and Vol. Ill,letter 215.— 48 —word ‘persecution’ means, for its victims, brutalexpulsion from their homes, and the like.Legislation limiting the entry of aliens intoEngland may perhaps reduce the numbers of aliensentering the country (as in America) by 10% or15%. But, as against this, it will increase theimportance of the Jewish problem and add to theJews’ sufferings. Rumania, Russia, and the othercountries are likely to conclude that the Jewsare indeed a harmful entity... and it is unworthyof England, the champion of freedom, to bringabout anything of this kind.Please visit Major Gordon in the Bristol Hoteland be so good as to let me know your impressions.In my humble opinion, it is your lofty duty to tryto arouse his [Gordon’s] interest in Zionism. Ithink that he is sympathetically disposed to everygood cause.With sincere regards.Yours most respectfully,G. Lourie”To the copy of the above letter sent to Dr.Herzl, Lourie appended the following note:“My dear Dr. Herzl,On the other side of this sheet you will finda copy of my letter to Mr. Sokolow.With the greetings of Zion,Yours sincerely and respectfully,G. LouriePinsk, Sept. 3/16, 1902”.Herzl’s visit to the Russian minister, Pleve, inPetersburg in 1903, after the ban on the sale ofColonial Bank shares in Russia, was arranged withthe help, not of Lourie, but of Dr. NisanKatzenelson, one of the Bank’s directors; andLourie’s name was missing from the list of thesix Russian representatives of the Bank which Herzlhanded to Pleve on Dec. 12th 1903. Nor wasLourie present at the Sixth Congress, which washeld in August 1903. He did attend the SeventhCongress (in August 1905), once again as a Pinskdelegate, but his name does not appear in the listof speakers or as a member of any of thecommittees. After that, he attended only theEleventh Congress (in 1913), where once again heis not mentioned among the speakers.From the time of the Minsk conference ofRussian Zionists (in 1902), Lourie’s Zionist andother public activity was mainly confined to hisnative town of Pinsk. In 1904 he founded a librarywhich was instrumental in the spread of generaleducation, especially among the town’s Jewishyouth. At the time of the anti-Tsarist ferment inthe Pinsk “Realschule”, Lourie joined the ranks ofthe fighters for civil rights. He was also arepresentative of the ICA (Jewish ColonizationAssociation) information bureau set up to answerquestions about the possibilities of Jewish emigra-tion from Russia. When Druyanov visited Pinsk(in 1911) and held a meeting in the house of OzerWeizmann (Chaim Weizmann’s father) to encouragethe sale of the Colonial Bank shares, Lourie wasone of those present. He also helped the PinskWomen’s Charitable Association in its activities,being the only male member of the organization.And he of course did all this work without askingfor, or receiving, any remuneration.It has already been remarked that GrigoryLourie was idealistic to the point of unworldliness,completely neglecting his own private affairs in hisselfless work for the good of the Jewish community.The money-grabbing clerks employed in hisfactories took advantage of his not keeping awatchful eye on them to cheat him out of hiswealth and reduce him to abject poverty. In thisdesperate plight, he abandoned all his remainingproperty to his creditors, left the town in whichhis family had lived for generations, and went tolive in Petersburg (before the outbreak of theFirst World War). Although his lack of businessability may also have been partly responsible forthese developments, there is no doubt that hisidealism was an important factor in his materialfailure. In Pe.ersburg, Lourie made a bare living,during the First World War, from various oddbusiness jobs. The members of the Zionist Centre(which was for a time located in Petrograd) treatedhim with respect, as did Ussishkin, rememberingLourie’s youthful services to the Zionist cause andhis co-operation with Herzl, Wolfson, and Kan inthe early days of the movement. But Lourie himselfno longer took any active part in Zionist work,visiting the Centre only on rare occasions and theoffices of the Zionist paper “PetrograderTogblat” not at all. Hayyah Weizmann-Lichtenstein, who took part in the Zionist conferencein Petrograd in May 1917 and was personally— 49 —acquainted with Grigory Lourie, her fellow-townsman and neighbour, refers to many of heracquaintances (including the veteran Pinsk Zionist,Meir Lieberman) who attended the conference, butmakes no mention of Lourie’s name GrigoryLouri^ died of a heart attack in Petrograd, at theend of 1917.His wife R i v k a h — “Reveka Savelyevna” asshe used to be called in Pinsk — was the daughterof Shepsel (Shabbethai?) Simhovichof Kiev and of F e i g e (?), the daughter of MeirLevin orginally from Pinsk, who later settled inKiev. This Meir Levin was (as noted above) theeldest son of Moshe-Yitshak Levin, the brother ofHayyah Lourie and second son of Shaul Karliner.Since Grigory Lourie’s mother, Beileh, was also (asstated by Aharon Lourie in his above-quoted letterof lyyar 19th 1863 to Y.L. Gordon) a daughterof Meir Levin, Rivkah was Grigory’s cousin. Thiswas in accord with the Lourie practice of marryingwithin the Lourie-Levin family. Of ShabbethaiSimhovich we know that, in the eighties of the lastcentury, he was head of the Pinsk TalmudTorah'^^; and we also find his name among thePinsk merchants who signed a petition to theMinsk provincial governor, on Nov. 8th 1862^^. Hetoo moved from Pinsk to Kiev, like his father-in-law, Meir Levin. Yonah Simhovich, whowas most probably Shabbethai’s son, marriedOdel, the daughter of David Lourie,and remained a resident of Pinsk, where (asdescribed in detail below) he continued his father’stradition and was associated with the membersof the Lourie family in their concern for theeducation of the rising generations^.42. H. Weizmann-Lichtenstein, op. c i t., p. 226.Grigory Louri^’s letters to Sokolow and to Herzl are inthe Central Zionist Archives, Jerusalem, DokumentZ 1/337.43. Ham el its, 1863, No. 20, p. 312.44. Hacarmel, 1863, No. 30, pp. 241—244.45. In the genealogical trees made available to me byHawah and Benjamin Hareli, two of the descendants ofthe Louri6-Eliasberg families, we find the name of“Rivkah Simhovich, the wife of Shemuel, the son ofMoshe-Hayyim Eliasberg from Ivenets”, who died in 1873.This Rivkah was the daughter of Hirsch Simhovich (died1852), and the granddaughter of Hayyim Simhovich (died1826) who was the son of Hirsch-Shamash Simhovich ofMinsk (died in 1799). The identity of name — RivkahSimhovich — points to the genealogical relationshipbetween the two women.Rivkah Lourie was a loyal helpmate to herhusband, Grigory. Besides actively assisting him inthe running of the Pinsk Trade School for Girls, sheall her life patiently and uncomplainingly bore theburden of her husband’s neglect of his own affairsin his selflessly devoted pursuit of his ideals. Thiswas the time of the early Zionist Congresses andthe establishment of the Colonial Bank in London,when Grigory’s thoughts and energies werecompletely taken up with organizing the sale of theBank’s shares throughout Russia. As one of thedirectors of the Bank (an office for which hereceived no emolument) he was obliged in thosedays to travel to meetings in London and Vienna,and sometimes also to stay in London to attend tothe affairs of the Bank. This life of constanttravelling, together with his numerous and variedactivities on behalf of the Pinsk Jewish community,had a disastrous effect (as already described) on hismanagement of his own business concerns, with theresult that he and Rivkah were compelled to turnfor assistance to their relatives and friends. Althoughall this must have caused Rivkah Lourie greatmental and emotional suffering, her understandingand admiration for her husband never wavered andshe nobly supported him in all his idealisticundertakings. She agreed to their home in Pinskbeing thrown open as a meeting-place for thetown’s Jewish intelligentsia, particularly forZionist activities; and it was thanks to her generousand hospitable spirit that anyone in need of helpor advice was made to feel welcome there at alltimes. It is no mere chance that Chaim Weizmann,when a pupil at the government “Realschule” inPinsk, was a frequent visitor to Grigory and RivkahLourie’s home, as he was again later when, asa student, he returned from abroad to his home-town.We have already described how, on the eveof the First World War, Grigory Lourie lost allhis money and, leaving all his property in Pinsk inthe hands of his creditors, moved with his familyto Petersburg. It is related that, when they wereabout to set out, penniless, on their way, his wifeexpressed a wish to take with her just one thing — herSabbath candlesticks. But Grigory would not lether, on the grounds that the candlesticks too werenow no longer his, but also belonged to theircreditors. In Petersburg, Rivkah lived in verydifficult circumstances. When Grigory died at the— 50 —end of 1917, she returned to Pinsk with her youngerson, Miron, and was very warmly welcomed by herfamily (the Louries and Eliasbergs) and oldfriends. But Miron left Pinsk and went to Odessato continue his training as a sailor; while Sasha,Rivkah’s elder son, remained in Western Europeand she lost touch with him too, thus being leftcompletely alone, without husband or children.Nevertheless, despite all her hardships and troubles,Rivkah Lourie did not lose her energetic determi-nation and earned her own living as a cashier inone of the Pinsk banks. She thus worked as aclerk in a public institution the prototype of whichhad been established in Pinsk forty years earlierby her father-in-law, Aharon Lourie, and in thevery same bank of whose board of directors herhusband, Grigory, had been the chairman. She diedin Pinsk (in 1935 or 1936).Sasha Lourie, Grigory’s and Rivkah’s eldestson (born, probably in Pinsk, in 1891), completedhis studies at the Pinsk government “Realschule”at the age of seventeen. During Sasha’s schooldays,the student Chaim Weizmann boarded in hisparents’ house and helped him by giving himprivate lessons. Sasha grew up to be a man ofoutstanding intellect and wide reading, a polyglot,and a gifted orator. When the Russian-languagenewspaper “Pinski Listok” [“The PinskBulletin”] began to appear in Pinsk (1910/11),Sasha Lourie was one of the three members of theeditorial board, contributing mainly popular reviewsand articles on current questions. Before the FirstWorld War he left Pinsk and moved with his parentsto Petersburg. There, in 1912, he began to studyarcheology and joined the Jewish Students’Association. In 1915 he proceeded to Stockholm,where he edited the Russian-language paper“Skandinavski Vestnik” [“The Scandinav-ian Herald”]. At the end of the First World War,an attempt was made to set up a “NationalByelorussian Republic”; and this idea of autonomyfor Byelorussia, as for Poland and the Balticcountries, continued to be supported by the AlliedPowers even after most of the territory in question,including the intended capital, Minsk, had beenoccupied by the Bolsheviks, as well as the remainingwestern part by Poland. This “AutonomousByelorussian Republic” had “representatives” invarious countries. In 1921, Sasha Lourie was the“Byelorussian representative” in the Lithuaniancapital, Kovno. It was in this state — Lithuania —that one of Grigory Lourie’s friends and fellow-townsmen, the lawyer Shimshon Rosenbaum, setup an autonomous Jewish political unit which hehimself headed, first as the Chairman of theJewish National Council, and afterwards as theMinister for Jewish Affairs. At the same time and inthe same country, one of Grigory Lourie’s sons wasserving as the representative of a foreign — thoughactually fictitious — state, and devoting all hisenergies to the cause of obtaining independence forit. This meeting of two men from the same townand the same Jewish background, but with suchdiametrically opposed outlooks, is symbolical ofthe two main courses taken by modern Jewishhistory, and in particular it strikingly brings out thegreat contrast between the way chosen by SashaLourie and that followed by his ancestors. In 1922,Sasha was the Byelorussian representative inDanzig. While in Kovno and Danzig, in the yearsof the great movements of population following onthe First World War, he helped many statelesspeople by providing them with passports andofficial documents. I myself was so helped by himin 1921, when I escaped to Lithuanian Kovno fromthe advancing Polish army, Sasha Lourie marrieda Finnish Christian woman, the owner of an estatenear Zoppot, which was close to Danzig where helived. After the hopes of establishing an independentByelorussia had finally come to nothing, we findSasha Lourie working as the correspondent of aGerman newspaper and living in Kiel, in northernGermany, a town without any Jewish populationand notorious for its anti-semitism even in the timeof the Weimar Republic. He remained there untilthe Nazis came to power. When last heard of, hewas living in the negro republic of Haiti.Here, then, is the history of six generations:Shaul Karliner (Levin) — communalleader and philanthropist.Hayyah Lourie, his daughter — philan-thropist.Moshe Lourie, her son — a patriarchalJewish figure.Aharon Louri6, son of Moshe — one ofthe leaders of the Pinsk and Karlincommunities.Grigory Louri6, son of Aharon — nation-alist, Zionist, worker for Jewry.— 51 —Sasha Louri^, son of Grigory — remotefrom Judaism and unable to find hisplace in the world.Six generations representing six chapters ofJewish history.Miron Lourie was Grigory and RivkahLourie’s younger son. His Jewish name wasapparently Meir, after his father’s and mother’sgrandfather Meir Levin, the eldest son of Moshe-Yitshak Levin (see above). Miron was born in1900. He made the sea his career and sailed onships based on the port of Odessa. After the FirstWorld War, when his mother returned to Pinsk, hejoined her there, but soon returned to his port.Further details of his life are unknown.Grigory Lourie’s brother Leopold, was alsoa man of wide learning and a Zionist. Wishing todiffuse general education among the young genera-tion of Jews in his town, he in 1888 taught secularsubjects in the Karlin Talmud Torah. Nothaving a licence to teach, he was fined by thepolice, but only the nominal sum of three roublessince “he did his work without remuneration”. Hethen moved to Lodz, and attended the Fifth ZionistCongress as one of that town’s delegates. His nameappears in the list of those who took part in thedebates on the Jewish National Fund and theColonial Bank. In 1903 he attended the vSixthZionist Congress. In the thirties of this century,Leopold Lourie, with his wife Dora and hisbrother A s i r (Asher), returned from Lodz to spendtheir last years in their na^^ive town, but tookno part in public life there. They were presumablywiped out in the Nazi holocaust.The other children of Aharon Louriewere : a son S h e m u e 1 who, together with hisbrother Grigory, opened the previously mentionedbanks in Homel and in the small towns of Klintsi,Pochep, and Zhlobin; a son, Alexander, whoremained in Moscow; a son. Ovsei (Hoshea?,Asher?) whose own son Alexander is nowliving in Tel Aviv and whose daughter Maria isliving in Paris ; a son S h a u 1, now in Dresden; ason, Y i t s h a k, who lived in Warsaw ; a daughter,Rahe 1, who married Shaul Weinreich andwho also went, with her mother, to live in Dresden.Her two daughters immigrated to Israel. One ofthem, Frieda Hanf-Weinreich lived inHaifa till her death there (1965) ; the other daughter.Dr. Anni Samuelsdorf lived in Tel Aviv andwas an active worker in the Zionist Organizationtill her death there in 1971. A brother of theirs.Ismar, lives in London. Another brother. Max,lived in Tel Aviv and died there.On Dec. 2nd 1917, an “Association to Help theJews of Pinsk” was founded in the Moscow homeof Yitshak-Asher Naidich. Its members were allnatives of Pinsk (like Naidich himself), who, in thelight of the report by the Central Jewish Committeein Copenhagen, had decided to band together tohelp relieve the hardships of their brethren in Pinsk.Among their number we find the names of “As[ir]and Y[itshak], the sons of A[haron] Lourie”.All the above details show the extent to whichthe members of one branch of the Louri6 familyfrom Pinsk became scattered in various parts of theworld.Next, the other children of MosheLourie:Shemuel Lourie (born in 1850), whowas married to T i r z a h, the sister of YosefHalpern, and died young (1888).Iser — Isidore Lourie (born in1851), who established large industrial enterprisesin Libau (Latvia). His wife was Agatha, thedaughter of his maternal uncle and brother-in-lawEliyahu Eliasberg, who built the Pinsk tallowcandle factory. In 1880, Isidore Lourie donated alarge sum for the building of the Pinsk TalmudTorah school to be named after his first wife,B e i 1 e h He also took charge of the KarlinTalmud Torah and provided for its needs,after Mikhal Ettinger left Pinsk (in about 1879). Ajournalist of those days calls on “... the noblegevir [rich man] Isidore Lourie (who shouldintervene in the affairs of the Talmud Torahschool and be greatly moved by the fate of itsyoung pupils) to see... and note every shortcom-ing”^^. And in a subsequent article we read thefollowing : “... Those in charge of the TalmudTorah school, the noble gevir, Isidore Louri6,and the maskil, H. Ratin, have also ceased toexercise any supervision or control over it and payno attention to the pupils’ conduct and the methodsof teaching... Rouse yourself and take newcourage, Isidore Lourie, noble and generous46. S. M. Rabinowitsch, op. cit., p. 11.47. H a m a g g i d , 1880, No. 35, p. 300.— SI —g e V i r Isidore Lourie died in Wiesbaden in1920.A daughter, Beil eh, (born in 1844) whowas married to I d e 1 Lourie, the son of her paternaluncle, Shemuel Lourie. As already noted, this IdelLourie was the pioneer of private banking in Pinskand in other towns in the Jewish “Pale”.A daughter Zeld ah (born in 1845, diedat the age of 33) who was married to her maternaluncle, Eliyahu Eliasberg.A daughter Rahel (born in 1847, diedin Pinsk in 1931) who was the wife of Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg, the son of her mother’scousin (see below).These marriage details have been mentioned herein illustration of the practice then prevalent amongthe Louries, as among the Rothschilds, ofmarrying either within their own family or intoother well-known families that were related to them.Shemuel Lourie, the second son of Hayyahand Aharon Lourie, (born 1826 in Pinsk) moved tothe provincial capital, Minsk, where he opened aprivate bank. His son Idel (born 1845) returnedto Pinsk, after marrying Beileh, the daughter of hispaternal uncle, Moshe Lourie, in 1861. His father-in-law had made Pinsk an industrial centre in thesecond half of the 19th century; now, at thecentury’s end, Idel Lourie established a privatebanking system for the town’s factory-owners andbusinessmen. Together with his cousin, Shemuelthe son of David Lourie, he set up — in additionto the Pinsk bank — a whole banking network withbranches in the towns of Dubno, Lutsk, Zhitomir,Polonnoye and other places. Since the main officewas in Rovno (Volhynia), the whole network wascalled “the Rovno Bureau” (“Rovner Kontor”).Run on the pattern of all the large Europeanbanking houses of the day, these banks were knownin the Russian business world as “the bank of Ideland Sam[uel] D[avidovich] Lourie”. They financeddeals in agricultural produce in three provinces, andemployed a large staff of Jewish clerks. The regularappeals made by the Jews of Pinsk to this financialconcern for contributions to charity and to insti-tutions of social welfare were usually answered,though not with that devoted concern for theJewish poor which was so characteristic of the48. Ham a gg id, 1880, No. 47, p. 400, and No. 48,p. 408.Lourie tradition. Idel Lourie spent his last years inWiesbaden where he died in 1928.Round about the year 1890, Chaim Weizmannwas living in Idel Lourie’s house as private tutorto his son, Shaul. In the Weizmann Archives thereare six letters from Weizmann to Ovsei (Yehoshua)Lourie, Shaul’s brother, written after Ovsei hadgone to the town of Mitau (in Courland) to continuehis studies. These letters from the years 1890—1892,which were written by Weizmann while he wasliving in Idel Lourie’s house, testify to the sincerefriendship between Weizmann and Ovsei Lourie,and also to the atmosphere in which the youngergeneration grew up in such Pinsk Jewish homes asthose of the Lourie and Weizmann families. In theletters, Weizmann adopts a tone of pedagogicalexhortation to his friend (who was only one yearyounger than himself). He quotes (inaccurately) anexample from the t a 1 m u d, but mostly he writesabout Russian literature — the letters are actuallywritten in Russian — and about the reading of itsbasic texts. The influence of Weizmann’s educationat the government “Realschule” in Pinsk can befelt throughout the letters, but without any dimmingof his Jewish consciousness. Idel Lourie’s viewson Jewish education are described by Weizmann in aletter of Nov. 11th 1890 to Ovsei Lourie, as follows :“Your parents... want you to be a virtuous andnoble youth, and to grow up into a well-educatedand mentally developed man and an exemplaryJew”. This combination of a general and a Jewisheducation, of polished social manners and pride inbeing Jewish, was also, according to Weizmann, theideal of the whole Lourie family. Ovsei Louriesubsquently studied in Riga. Till 1914, he assistedhis father. During the First World War the lattertransferred his banks to Yekaterinoslav, where theywere finally closed. In 1920, Ovsei went to Londonand became a business partner of his brother, Shaul.He died in London in 1941.Idel Lourie’s son, Shaul (born 1879), wasChaim Weizmann’s private pupil from about 1888to 1892. From the above-mentioned letters ofWeizmann to Ovsei Lourie it can be seen how muchcare Weizmann took with the education of Shaul,who was five years his younger. In 1897, at theage of 18 Shaul Louri6 went to Germany. Afterregistering there as a student at the Darmstadttechnical institute, he travelled to Basel to attendthe First Zionist Congress. For this reason, I^ ^ ^X;,. >X V: x : :- ’^x- ^ • x'. -.x: ■ f xx' , " x x„ ^ ^.i||^lii#:'::p^.■'-~x■ „ 1-^Grigory Louri^’s letter to Dr. Herzl, attached to the copyof the printed letter to Sokolov (16th September 1902)rPMropiM ilyPbEn M H CKT>MHUCKOH rVS.  Grigory Lourier»I IMSK.yf y- ^ y . ^ y  .X^Grigory Louri6’s letter to Dr. Herzl about the crisis in theaffairs of the Colonial Bank (Pinsk 1900)<'A(<^ <*■/ ■' /C2x4 ^<>7 3^ :/Y ^ fv<fQ?A *'' C ' ■1/z/J /'^<,,,■/ .. ■'■ ^..■■■'- '^Jr' ^' ■' ' ^/^y! > /p<'-' ^ /> .V' '' <>?.Ay -^“O'' y-c?, «p' f i fy ■^- «> si* V <t ■ »■ -»'*-r:,. wO' .//y,*• -yTj^ ^jS ,/ ■ ■■' ■y yHX^/r«y ;^..A^-trZ O/■f jO -rai-t(T?-y/y<'<»y ^««^^y; y>y *z-c-'x-A.A y ■y "" yA■’■:•.■ ■ e(/^«r Y%yfAA. 4 ^■>••.■ ■ .:v- ■■■■■ <■•• -if / : '.::'3^ O' J5<y ..• y ■ . <</ y,••5^2(y^y.nyft^ . <^<-.a'v’^A</' n./y-i m- 'Ki/ i,y ,f. ■. ' / \. . y A#" X y--'^ , y y. y'j . ■ A- / y // y ' y'A/ :»*;>>-'i-«y A^y'-'< A^y ^y*/ y-x.i. C'/Y^'f/.^tyr: *• /<x a^fi. .•=»^ ^' ■■ • ■ 'XX.,: ■ X., y , y/. . // . -• ^••♦r' • sO <' ■ ■ ■ ■■ ^ '-'li/'•'■■’''/-'fZ <S>,yy< a/^i ^t. t*/<;*<>* .» .y■x. y X*'■'/-' ' c/f ' /^'"V^ j? '*'-'^ / /x ^ ^I'-'y, / y ■• - y / Xx' : '' ::’-y y-A 'A '*< . -—•' ^ >X .y >/f' '/X \//^y'v*/'^- yy^^jf <"■'•*'■■ y a.•*^ 'Oy* * ^Z'/.A' ,yy f A-f^., y y y yy ■ ■/<x' . / /f/^- 'ty / /' 4if .-’■<:* f: <f!!^ ■y^ry^x'? .y,y« .-^j-. ^ ■ X , nX ■y'■ ^ 'f: - y / / \ y '^/v. ^y^AtXy yc-^ ofA cJ^ -'A*///yf.A* A> /f /< «■ '"ty/'^y& i. < <yyA A* M f< y *».y .' -,/ y y ^• y, • ✓■ /> *■il»'<<'>,; ■i/ f ^ Ayt.f, .4fi^-jf%.,<' iS-'ii/ . ■ : ■, •' ' ' 0t .yt* *y ‘^'*-,yf .^,^ic..-9-y ./ ■<■/' /y**^ yv. y- y Y y.\|yr«-;*r<«<K,(>^-'4':yx<^#.yx,;;x: r<» ,,xxxx X,,;x: x:..,;.:X. ...,,xx-. ^ • ..x ■■. , x-. v,x0;. «A'y'' yy, -..yi...«., '^yt-f/Cy ^yy.v oAA'eyy - .^y' ■ ' /., y ■: - ^ /' " -• ■\ / A , Xy y ■ ^ yn /*k. r %yy -f ,*yC '^. /Oy yfy yfy >/^ ^y^' ^ // f ^ ^'AyxA^.*x.*y'■ ;■■ ;x Xy  <y x ::.' ■■ x: :'X ✓" ■ , •, ■ X X , ,: X. ■, :x . // ' y ^yIz, a/^ Z <i.XA.A^A/Ay ^Xz.A,<c..'y I ^ y   /h-X^a-JAL^^^ <^y^y x^^yVe- (bA^^» cyy^vy/^ . - y <riy ^X A . yX/-A-*tty.-^ /* *C',.vV x«. .yy-^ixi.x x,<y-?--j!><'.i^ :,^^.-_;^-^^yy.K,-- :. fA,.«<■':•■.•••■■■•. X. ■ >• X- :■ •..•■,.• . . ■ • .:..;:x •.••■•, ,•• ■•■ ,•■■•.• •:■ . . .. .;....;■ . .-x.- .•••••. . . , .yfAtt,. '■:.X.'0-■Ayy^-jyAixX • Xxxx x; ,X;X ;x;;ixX:xXxX :X..XXx:xV.X;VX:;;;;::.XxX::i.Xx:-XxXr ;:X;'X ; : XXXx ■ -XXXXX':..^y^. : «•)**y«\ ~.) 'yX-A* A r^ / X' „ --. t'x.^-/'•-• :.-x.; x. .■ :-■•■- . :;•:> :;w\x;:xx >;>:v: rxx'.y-..i^y/f X;«fx x^..^ X ,x e,-^^s- »,-*ty>y-. fAAo ; /<y %.. A^Ai^AyA'- < a Ay ^y *\/ A'i ' ' '' ^ ^ ■'' ' . r v'’ " - y' - < 'f^y y ^■ ' - ^ '■ "■ Ar: 'AA’:!<y ./^..»,.(M»y A ^ ■'^y'y\:>... - . \ -yw*^ v.*'" . t>y^x. N .y'.-mGrigory Louri6’s letter to Nahum Sokolov (16th September 1902)/! -y'. y. ■'."<y. W-v..a %:.» >A4i4Editorial board of the “Pinski Listok”Newspaper. In the middle — SashahLouri6. On the left — the editor AsherHoltsman. On the right — member of theboard Bonie Rubinstein (1910) • .iliiisiiiilpiiiiiiiiiii‘.fc.k : ■■ 'SiJ.. *.I II '•y\ , ■4 4y ^T\!'iiiliiiilfiilj#£>„I '•■■'•' ■‘*‘S       —,iM* **4f^W ..fI¥4^iK-:.aggRg^gass»a■ ;, •■ ■■■ ^ ■■if' ■■'■■ ^■s:i i-.: -y.::-:&!?f. fT ■■ ■■■ . ■■:-;'-i- ■The signatures of the participants inthe founding conference of the ColonialBank at Cologne on Aug. 25th 1898.Grigory Lourie’s signature appears atthe bottom right, and Moshe-HayyimEliasberg’s in the margin at the topW0■>&HK44^^n «Idel, the son of Shemuel Louri6, and his family (Pinsk 1900)— 55 —reproduce here some of his reminiscences of thattime, as written by him in a letter to me in replyto my questions: “I went to Basel, because theCongress aroused my interest. I remember the greatimpression made on me by the large banners withZionist slogans on them flying over the Congressbuilding, when in Russia everyone was afraid ofmentioning the name ‘Jew’ in public. I telephonedthe secretary of the Congress, Herr Reich fromAustria, to enquire whether I could take part inthe Congress. He replied: ‘Yes. There are somecommunities in South Africa which were unableto send delegates and have therefore asked me tofind people to volunteer to serve as their represen-tatives and report to them on the proceedings’. 1think that I represented Bulawayo in SouthernRhodesia; at any rate, in the report published byHerr Reich after the Congress my name appears asthe representative of that country. Another similarlyappointed ‘representative’ of a Jewish communityin South Africa was Leon Simon, who later becamea wellknown Zionist and translated Ahad Haam’sworks. At the Uganda Conference I was not actuallya delegate, but was in close contact withWeizmann. I also knew Herzl. At the time of thesplit over the Uganda Programme, 1 sided with theopposition. Later, I helped to bring about areconciliation between the supporters of theProgramme and the Democratic Faction. In one ofthe published photographs from the Congress, Iappear together with Herzl and Weizmann” In1901 Shaul Lourie worked in Chaim Weizmann’slaboratory in Geneva. On his return to Darmstadthe became one of the founders of the “Maccabiah”Zionist Students Organization. We find his name,together with those of Motzkin, Weizmann, Buber,Leib Yafe, his relative and fellow-townsman GeorgHalpern, and others, in a list of leading Zionistswho undertook (in 1903) to travel to university49. See A. Zenzifer, Paamei ha-Geulah, p.112, PI. 300, Tel Aviv 1952. In the Weizmann archivesthere are many letters testifying to the friendship betweenWeizmann and Shaul Louri6 (Shaichik) and referring totheir meetings in Pinsk, to the close personal relationsbetween them in foreign countries, and to Shaul Lourie’sactive participation in the planning of the HebrewUniversity and in the problems of the Democratic Faction.See; Letters and Papers of Chaim Weizmann, IndexedLetters, Vol. I, II, III. In the archives there are also sixletters from Weizmann to Ovsei Louri6, ibid, Vol. I,Letters 3—8.towns in Germany, Switzerland, Belgium and othercountries, in order to propagate the ideas of theDemocratic Faction. During the years 1905—1939Shaul Lourie was a businessman in London. Hethen went to the United States (Santa Monica,California), and died there, at the age of 91, onAugust 1970, one of the last surviving participantsin the First Zionist Congress.David Lourie (born 1828), the third son ofHayyah and Aharon Lourie, was associated withhis brother Moshe in the establishment of the firmof “The Brothers Louri6 & Co.”, which was thefirst Jewish commercial company in Pinsk. Thetwo brothers brought there steamboats fromGermany and were among the first to put thesevessels into operation between Pinsk and the townsof southern Russia. The author of a contemporarymonograph on Pinsk (Janson), who writes approv-ingly of their work, notes that the firm of “TheBrothers Lourie & Co,” owned three ships whichin 1867 plied the waters of the Pripet and theDniepr. And Y. L. Gordon, in one of his lettersto Moshe Lourie’s son Aharon, writes in 1868:... Tell me... what kind of business is carriedon by your firm ‘The Brothers Louri6 & Co.’. Ihave heard that you have a steamboat... Do youdeal in timber and grain, as your family has donefor generations ?”. The Lourie steamboats wereused for the transportation of timber, corn, andfats. David Lourie took no active part in Jewishcommunal life. However, it is known that in 1887he and his brother Moshe gave a free weeklydistribution of bread to the poor, and he wasundoubtedly one of the “Karlin philanthropists”who in 1878 provided two free meals a day —breakfast and lunch — for seventy pupils of theKarlin Talmud Torah, and also supplied themwith winter and summer clothing. A contemporarywitness (Mordekhai Kerman) records David Lourie’sreadiness to help needy individuals, and also relateshow, like all the other members of the Louri6 family,he used to visit the Karlin Av Beth-Din, thegaon R. David Friedman, on the eve of RoshHashanah, to exchange greetings with him forthe New Year. David Lourie is included among thepeople referred to in the anonymous article (signed‘B.’) of the year 1880 which has been quotedabove50: “...After them [sc. after Moshe-Yitshak50. Ham el its, 1880, No. 14, p. 277.— 56 —Levin, Hayyah Lourie, Gad-Asher Levin] there arestill their sons, the famous gevirim, who alsocontinue to perform innumerable works of charityand to maintain the Talmud Torah and theBikkur Holim [hospital], so that all the peopleof Karlin look to them for support... How muchlonger will they [sc. the people of Karlin] say, ‘Letthe gevirim [sc. the Lourie’s] give; we need notbother’?”. David Lourie lived in Karlin andcontributed to the upkeep of the TalmudTorah built by his motherThe fact that all the Lourie family, in thosedays resided in Karlin gave Karlin a certain pre-eminence over Pinsk. Thus, in the article justquoted, we read : “Among the leaders of the Pinskcommunity... there are no gevirim... Whereasin our town Karlin there have always been famousgevirim, and to this day their renowned andglorious sons still live there... If you ask... whois called a gevir, you will immediately be told‘the wealthy Louries’”. On the other hand, in thesame year another article-writer from Pinsk voicesthe following complaint: “Why does the respectedLourie family remain silent when the poor aresuffering? Moreover, I marvel at the great unfeel-ingness ... that our philanthropists do not bestirthemselves to do something for them” Thesewords were, of course, directed at the whole Louriefamily.David Lourie died in 1888. He had four sons,all of whom took up banking. But, whereas MosheLourie s son Aharon established a bank to servethe whole community — The Mutual CreditSociety — in his native town Pinsk, David Lourie’ssons opened private banks in other towns. Oneson, Aharon, started a bank in Kiev; another,Isidore(?), in Minsk; a third, Iser, in Warsaw;and only the fourth son S h e m u e 1, opened a bankin Pinsk, which was later amalgamated with thatof his cousin, Idel. These two cousins also startedup banks in other towns, including Rovno, Dubno,Lutsk, Zhitomir, Polonnoye (see above). AndShemuel alone opened a bank in Korbin. DavidLourie himself had nothing to do with theestablishment or management of social institutions,but his wife R u s h k a (the daughter of ShemuelEliasberg from Ivenets) and his son-in-law Y o n a h51. Hamaggid, 1880, No. 35, pp. 300—301.52. Hamel its, 1880, No. 3, p. 57.Simhovich (his daughter Od 1 ’s husband) wereactive in this respect. Rushka Lourie, together withher sister Miriam-Lea Lourie (the wife of MosheLourie) and her husband’s step-sister, Gite Ettinger,and Yosef Halpern, ran the Somekh Nofelim[Supporter of the Falling] social welfare society.While Yonah Simhovich, aided by Moshe-HayyimEliasberg (the son-in-law of Moshe Lourie) andAharon Lourie, took over the management of theKarlin Talmud Torah built by Hayyah Lourie,and also founded a trade school in the town ^3. Thetreasurer of this Talmud Torah was DavidLourie’s above - mentioned step - sister GiteEttinger, the wife of Yosef Ettinger and motherof Mikhal Ettinger, all of whom took their sharein the work of running the institution.Yosef Ettinger also occupies a significantplace in the annals of Pinsk (see the respectfulreference to him in Y.L. Gordon’s above-quotedletter of 1862 to Aharon Lourie). He took anactive interest in the Pinsk Talmud Torah®*,befriended rabbinical scholars and used to lead thetalmudic study-circle in the Karlin “Neistat”synagogue (as reported by Mordekhai Kerman in hisreminiscences). His name appears among those ofthe Pinsk merchants who signed the petition ofNov, 8th 1862 to the Minsk provincial governor(see above).Mikhal Ettinger, the son of Yosef andGite, was (as already stated) the principal of theKarlin Talmud Torah from 1876 onwards, inplace of Meir Levin, who had left Pinsk. Acontemporary writer reports that people then began“to bring their sons to the school very willingly.The principal is the keen-witted, wise and highlyestimable rav and gevir, Mikhal Ettinger (longmay his light shine!), who has this year raised thenumber of pupils to three hundred” ®®. Mikhalcontinued as the successful head of this institutionfor three years, till 1879 when he left Pinsk. In anarticle about the Karlin Talmud Torah datedthe 28th Elul, 1880, we read: “However, onegreat lack is also evident in this school. For sincethe respected gevir M. Ettinger left our town inpursuance of his business affairs, the TalmdTorah has been without a trustworthy supervisor53. Hamel its, 1887, No. 114, p. 1203.54. Hamel its, 1863, No. 20, p. 312.■pil *d ‘^1 •ojs[ ‘qBJiJssjBH '£9— 57to keep close watch over the pupils’ conduct..Yonah Simhovich, the son-in-law of DavidLouri6, had four daughters. The first, T e k 1 a h ,was married to Sigmund Frumkin, a member ofthe Warsaw communal council and a road-building contractor. His son settled in Geneva. Thesecond daughter, Rahel, was married to a mannamed Kogan, the owner of a sugar factory inKiev. The third, Clara, was the wife of a lawyernamed Ettinger. She too left Pinsk. Whathappened to the fourth daughter. Aka (Rivkah),is not known. Surviving descendants of thisSimhovich family lived in Warsaw, Geneva, andEngland.The Eliasberg FamilyFor all their public activities and their manycontributions to social welfare, the members ofthe Lourie family held themselves aloof from thecommunity as a whole. On the one hand, we havethe testimony of one of their descendants, YaakovEliasberg (a grandson of Hayyah Lourie’s son,Moshe) that, in addition to their active concernfor communal institutions, the Louries were alwaysready to help anyone with their advice, or to aidhim in getting a position, obtaining credit, and thelike. But, at the same time, they kept strictly tothemselves and married only within their ownfamily, as described above. In the course of time,however, the Lourie family circle was widened toinclude the members of the Eliasberg family, whobelonged to “the aristocrats of Ivenets” (a smalltown in the province of Minsk) and who pridedthemselves on their descent from the gaon R.Yehezkeel Landau of Brody and Prague (the authorof the book “Nod'a bi-Yehudah”). Thewealthy and cultured Eliasbergs were, like theLouries, part of the 19th century Lithuanian Jewisharistocracy. After intermarrying with the Louries,56. Hamaggid, 1880, No. 35, p. 300.57. There were at least nine marriage connectionsbetween these two families. Alexander-Sender,the son of Aharon Lourie (by his second marriage),married the daughter of E1 i y a h u, the son ofYitshak-Isaac Eliasberg of Ivenets, who washimself the son-in-law of Wolf Levin, the brother ofHayyah Louri6. Two of Hayyah Lourie’s sons,Moshe and David, married the two daughters ofShemuel Eliasberg of Ivenets, Miriam-Leahand R u s h k e; and their brother, Eliyahu Eliasbergmarried the daughter of Moshe Louri6, Zeldah.the Eliasbergs joined them in their work on behalfof communal institutions in Pinsk. The marriageconnections between the two families go back tothe time of the Levin family’s ascendancy in Pinsk.The daughter of Wolf Levin, the third son of ShaulKarliner (see above), was given in marriage toYitshak — Isaac Eliasberg of Ivenets. Herhusband was a man of wide education and culturewho is reported by the Pinsk writer, A.D.Dobzevich, to have befriended the first maskil-i m in the town He was also one of thesignatories to the already mentioned petitionsubmitted, on behalf of the merchants of Pinsk, tothe Minsk provincial governor on Nov. 8th 1862.Miriam-Leah, the wife of Moshe Lourie, togetherwith her relative Feigel Levin, founded (c.1875) the Somekh Nofelim ve-Yoledoth[Sick Aid and Maternity] society in Karlin, and wasalso one of the directors of the Karlin Beth OsefZekenim [Old Age Home] which had beenestablished by her mother-in-law, Hayyah Lourie.Miriam-Leah’s sister, Rushka, the wife of DavidLourie, was also a director of the SomekhNofelim society. Their brother, EliyahuEliasberg, a son-in-law of Moshe Louri6, wasone of the owners of the candle factory in Albrekh-tovo, a suburb of Karlin (1872). He was the lastHer sister, Rahel, was married to Moshe-HayyimEliasberg of Minsk, the son of Yeshayahu, hermother’s cousin; and her brother, Iser - IsidoreLourie, married Agatha (Gitl), the daughter ofEliyahu Eliasberg, who was Iser’s maternal uncleand brother-in-law. The son of this EliyahuEliasberg, Shemuel Yonah, married a Louri6girl, and Shemuel, the son of Moshe-Hayyim andRahel (nee Lourie) Eliasberg, married Frieda,the daughter of his mother’s uncle, David Louri6 ofPinsk. Lippa (Leopold), the son of MosheLourie, gave his daughter Elizabeth in marriageto Dr. Vladimir Eliasberg, the grandson ofYeshayahu Eliasberg of Minsk. This Elizabethimmigrated to Israel (1951) and died there in 1965. Herdaughter, Hannah is married to Ehud Avriel of theIsraeli Foreign Ministry. Another daughter, Havvah,also works in this government office. The third daughter,Shoshannah lives in Jerusalem, and the fourth,Miriam, in America (see A. Epstein, K e t h a v i m ,Vol. I, p. 326, Jerusalem 1950. S. Ginsburg, MegillahRabbath Inyan, Yeda Am, Vol. VIII, pp. 36—39;idem, Historische Werk, Vol. IV, p. 290; andgenealogical trees supplied to me by Havvah and BenjaminHareli — Eliasberg).58. Dobzevich, op. c i t., pp. 40, 42.— 58 —member of the Eliasbergs to hold the title of“gabbai of the Volozhin y e s h i v a h and wasknown as one of the fiercest opponents of Zionismin the Lx)uri^ family. He was a particularly generoussupporter of the Karlin Talmud TorahMoshe-Hayyim Eliasberg, another son-in-law of Moshe Lourie (through his marriage to thelatter’s daughter, Rahel), was the son of YeshayahuEliasberg from Ivenets, later of Minsk. As a Pinsktimber merchant, Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg hadbusiness connections with Memel, Danzig,Konigsberg, and Berlin. Of the town’s communalinstitutions, he displayed a particularly activeinterest in the Talmud Torah built by HayyahLourie in Karlin. He was one of this school’sprincipals (together with his brother-in-law, AharonLourie, and another member of the family, YonahSimhovich), and used personally to examine thepupils in their studies. He and these two relativesof his also founded a trade school in the town“for the unpromising boys who have no talentfor intellectual studies” (see above). Moshe-HayyimEliasberg was a widely read thinker, the course ofwhose life reflects the pattern of Jewish thoughtin the second half of the 19th century : H a s k a 1 a h— Hibbath Tsion — Zionism. Of his personalqualities his son, Yaakov Eliasberg, writes in hisautobiography as follows : “My father... made dowith a talmudic and self taught general education ...He spent all his spare time reading books,newspapers, and journals. He was an annualsubscriber to ‘Hamelits’, ‘Novosti’,‘Voshod’, ‘Berliner Tageblatt’, and theRussian monthly ‘Ruskoye Bogatstvo’.Later, ‘Die Welt’ and ‘ H a s h i 1 o a h ’ wereadded to this list. Even before the founding of theZionist movement, my father was a member ofHovevei Tsion, the Pinsk representative ofthe Odessa Committee, and a serious student ofAhad Haam’s teachings... He was a devotee ofHebrew, of which he had a fluent command, thoughnot as a spoken language, since it was not spokenthen... He used to read... the works of Y.L.Gordon, Avraham Mapu, and eventually AhadHaam too... He had the writings of the bestRussian authors and critics in his house... for inhis youth he had studied not only t a 1 m u d , butalso Russian, and had got to know Russian59. Hamaggid, 1880, No. 35, p. 300.literature... so that his father-in-law regarded himas a man of wide general culture”. Moshe-HayyimEliasberg joined the Hovevei Tsion in theeighties of the last century, after Eliezer Ben-Yehudah had visited Pinsk together with YaakovShertok (a native of Pinsk and the father of MosheSharett). According to Mordekhai Kerman, it wasthrough the influence of the well-known preacher,Hirsch Maslianski, that Eliasberg became the Pinskrepresentative of the Odessa Committee and one ofthe leading active members of Hovevei Tsionin the town. When Herzl brought political Zionisminto being, Eliasberg was one of the first to jointhe movement. He was a Pinsk delegate to theSecond and Sixth Congresses; and his signatureappears among those of the participants at theconference held in Cologne (on Aug. 25th 1898)before the Second Congress, to discuss the settingup of the Colonial Bank According to one source,he was also appointed by the Russian governmentto be inspector of the Jewish schools in Pinsk. In1904, Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg left Pinsk with hisfamily and settled in Berlin, though he still for sometime continued to maintain his office in Pinsk andto export timber to Germany. He died in 1920.His wife, Rahel, returned at the age of 81 toPinsk, to the home of her son Yaakov, and diedthere in 1931.Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg’s eldest son.She mu el, completed his studies at the “Gymnas-ium” in Riga, where his paternal grandfather wasthen living. In 1900 he moved to Berlin and livedthere for most of his life. He was the owner of afactory and a partner in an architect’s office. Duringthe Nazi regim.e he was in Warsaw, where hesuffered a severe nervous breakdown and died inthe hospital in the Jewish ghetto.Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg’s second son, Aharon(born in Pinsk in 1879), followed in his father’sfootsteps, both politically and culturally. He joinedthe Zionist Organization, and was director of thepublishing press of the “Jiidischer Verlag”in Berlin. After a childhood spent in Pinsk, hemoved as a young man, for health reasons, toWiesbaden where he lived in the house of thelocal rav and attended the “Gymnasium”. Afterthat, he became a university student in Heidelberg,60. H. H. Bodenheimer, op. c i t., the first signatureat the left-hand margin in the photocopy.— 59 —together with Yosef Klausner, Tschernihovski, andothers. He was at that time very closely associatedwith his fellow-townsman and family-friend, ChaimWeizmann, both as a member of the DemocraticFaction and as an active supporter of Weizmann’sidea of establishing a Hebrew university inJerusalem. Before the Fifth Congress, the office ofthe Democratic Faction was requested by theZionist Executive Committee to name those of itsmembers who wanted to attend the Congress asdelegates, but had not received mandates. AharonEliasberg’s name was one of those submitted by theoffice, and he was one of the Faction’s 37 delegatesto this Congress. In the debate that took place duringthe conference of German Zionists (1902), he spokein defence of the Faction. He also appears in thephotograph of the members of the Faction with Dr.Herzl, taken at Basel in 1901 Among thedelegates to the Fifth Congress who walked out ofthe proceedings in protest against the attitude ofthe Congress to the Faction’s demands we findthree members of the Louri6 family: AharonEliasberg, Shaul the son of Idel Lourie, and Grigorythe son of Aharon Lourie (though the last was notactually a member of the Faction). YaakovEliasberg records that his brother Aharon wasprevented by illness from attending the SixthCongress. During this Congress (1903), Weizmannexpressed to Yaakov Eliasberg his regret at Aharon’sbeing compelled by his illness to discontinue hisshare in the work of collecting and preparing thematerial for the founding of the university inJerusalem. After his recovery, Aharon resumedhis assistance to Weizmann in these efforts. In theWeizmann archives there are appreciative lettersfrom Weizmann to Aharon Eliasberg which testify,to the friendly relations between the two men(Weizmann refers to Eliasberg by the affectionatediminuitive “Aharonchik”, presumably a habit fromtheir childhood and youth in Pinsk). Eliasbergsettled in Berlin, where he ran a publishing firm. In1907 the “Jiidischer Verlag” was takenover by the Zionist Organization, and when in 1911its offices were transferred from Cologne toBerlin, Aharon Eliasberg became its director, apost that he held until 1920. The publishing housedeveloped and prospered under his management61. A. Zenzifer, Paamei ha-Geulah, p. 112,photo 360, no. 33, Tel Aviv 1952.and printed important books on Zionist and Jewishsubjects. The warm nostalgic regard that AharonEliasberg continued to feel for Pinsk throughout hisresidence in Berlin is illustrated by the followingstory told by the well-known journalist Dr.Yehoshua Gottlieb, himself a native of Pinsk: “Oneday, I visited the main office of the ZionistOrganization in Berlin. Suddenly, a man enteredthe room, came up to me, and said: ‘Mr. Gottlieb,I invite you to my home for supper.’ — ‘Thankyou ... but... I don’t yet know... with whom...I have the honour...’, I stammered out in surprise.‘What difference does that make ?’ replied the man,with a smile. ‘I heard that you were from Pinsk,and I too am from Pinsk. Isn’t that fact sufficientto warrant our spending the evening together ?’. Theman who spoke to me was A. [Aharon] E-g[Eliasberg]. Although he was a very busy publisher,he spent from seven in the evening till two in themorning talking and thinking of nothing morelofty than the town where Jews sink into the mudto above their knees” Aharon Eliasberg immigra-ted to Palestine in 1933, and worked for KerenHayesod. He died in 1937Yaakov Eliasberg, the youngest ofMoshe-Hayyim Eliasberg’s sons (born in Pinsk in1881), was already 84 when he published his book“Be-Olam ha-Hafekhoth” [“In the Worldof Revolutions”] (Jerusalem 1965). This autobio-graphical work begins with memories from hischildhood and youth in the Eliasberg and Louriehomes in Pinsk and goes on to tell of his wanderingsin Germany and Russia during the revolutions, hisreturn to Pinsk after the First World War and hislife there for fifteen years under Polish rule till theBolshevik occupation of the town (1939), and hisimmigration to Palestine during the Second WorldWar (1943). As a background to these details ofhis own life, the author gives a description of themembers of his family and of Jewish society as a62. PinskerShtime, Pinsk 1930.63. Y. Eliasberg, Be-Olam ha-Hafekhoth,pp. 24—25, 33, 45, 59—61, 56—66, 182, Tel Aviv 1965. TheLetters and Papers of Chaim Weizmann, Indexed Letters,Vols. I, II, III. Y. Klausner, op. cit., pp. 94, 141, 168,193. A. Bohm, Die Zionistische Bewegung,p. 605, Tel Aviv 1935. Judisches Lexikon, Vol. V,p. 1189, s.v. : Jiidischer Verlag”, Berlin 1930.60 —whole, particularly that of his own town Pinsk. Hisbook is therefore an important historical source ofinformation — occasionally the only such source —about Pinsk and the importance of the Lourie andEliasberg families in the life of the town duringthe second half of the 19th century and the first partof the 20th, from the time of Hayyah Lourie, themother of the author’s grandfather, Moshe Lourie,down to the author’s own day. As in all autobio-graphies, the author from time to time expresses hisown personal opinion on the society and eventsthat he describes. But in this case, the sober realismcharacteristic of advancing years can be felt in hisjudgments. He tells us that he was, in his time,“the only descendant of Moshe Lourie in Pinsk”.From his description of the Louries of his owngeneration who had left Pinsk, we learn that, whilea minority of them remained loyal to their ancestralheritage in foreign lands, many of them turnedaside — some of their own free will, other undercompulsion — from the historical path of Judaism.Yaakov Eliasberg’s life exemplifies both of theseopposite developments, as he himself tells us in hisbook. On the one hand, he conducted prayers onthe Day of Atonement for political prisoners inthe Moscow gaol where he was himself detained,and wrote with great respect of the hasidicr e b b e s of Stolin and Chernobil. The youthfulChaim Weizmann, in one of his letters, advised hisfriends to apply to Yaakov Eliasberg for financialsupport for the programmes of the DemocraticFaction He also attended the meeting of theJewish Agency in Basel as a member of theKeren Hayesod delegation, accompanied hisfather to the Sixth Zionist Congress, and visitedPalestine in 1933. He fought with courageous andvigorous determination to protect the rights of theJewish workers in the factory under his direction(including the right not to work on the Sabbath),despite the strong pressure brought to bear onhim by the anti-semitic Polish government. Hewrote with affectionate pride of the abilities of theJewish worker, stressing that the unity of all thefactory workers was an expression of their nationalconsciousness. He was a member of Jewish self-defence organizations, both in his student days inRiga, and in later years in Pinsk. He kept up the64. The Letters and Papers of Chaim Weizmann, Vol.IT, Letter 396.family tradition that he first learnt on his return toPinsk after the First World War, from the ownerof the family factory, his cousin Paul, the son ofLeopold Lourie: “For our enterprise regularlysupports all the local Jewish institutions, and thissocial aid is simply the necessary continuation ofthe traditional acts of charity performed forgenerations by the Lourie family”. On the otherhand, he married a Christian woman from a familyof Russian aristocrats, who had been brought upby a Russian general, whose brother was a studentat a naval officers’ academy in St. Petersburg, andone of whose relatives was a Russian admiral. Hewrites most affectionately of his Christian wife’sdaughter and also of her son, who emigrated to theU.S.A. where he became friendly with the descendantsof the Louiie family living there. YaakovEliasberg’s home ir Pinsk was a meeting place formembers of the Jewish, Polish, and Russianintelligentsia, including Jewish “renegades” who hadadopted Christianity to improve their materialposition and social prospects.In striking contrast to these assimilationisttendencies was the moral nobility displayed byYaakov Eliasberg’s Russian wife, Lydia, inbecoming a proselyte to Judaism. She took thisstep at the time of the Bolshevik revolution, whenher husband had been thrown into prison withoutcharge and without trial, and his propertyarbitrarily confiscated, so that she and herdaughter by her first, Christian husband were leftentirely dependent on the charity of friends. In thisdesperate situation she decided to embraceJudaism. What moved her to take this decision?Here is her own reply: “What made me decide todo this ? ... Neither I nor my husband had felt theneed of a religious ceremony [in addition to theircivil marriage] ... My desire to become a Jewesswas connected with a need to identify myself withmy husband’s people, and in this way I thoughtthat I could break down the prison walls”. Whenshe told their family-friend, Lifshits, of herintention, he asked her, “ ‘Why do you have to dothis?’. ‘I don‘t actually have to do it’, I replied,and explained my state of mind to him... Thenext day he tried to dissuade me: ‘Remain aChristian and a Russian aristocrat... Does he [sc.her husband] know of your decision?’. ‘No’”. Whenshe went, on the day after this, to Rabbi Mazeh inMoscow, he asked her: “ ‘Why is it that you have— 61come to me ?’. I explained the matter to him. ‘I begyou not to change your ancestral faith, but toremain faithful to your church’, he said. ‘We aresatisfied, I told him, ‘with only a civil marriage.But my husband has now been shut up in prisonfor five months and heaven alone knows what worsefate may yet befall him. By becoming a member ofhis people I shall feel closer to him’... He bowedcourteously to me and I left him with a lighterheart... He said to Lifshits: ‘Arrange for them i k V e h... and then come to fetch me’... Ireturned from the m i k v e h in a carriage togetherwith Rabbi Mazeh, who was sunk in silentthought”.After his return to Pinsk, Yaakov Eliasbergplayed an active and important part in the Jewisheconomic life of the town. He was, together withBeni Halpern chairman of the board of directorsof the Jewish Commercial and Industrial Bank;was a great worker for the artisans’ association,the “Oze” society and the orphans’ home, and amember of the Benei Brith lodge; was electedconsultant member of the Vilna office of commerceand industry; was arbiter in the dispute betweenthe directorate of the T a r b u t h high school andthe teaching staff; and the like. At the height of theSecond World War, in 1943, he emigrated withhis wife and daughter (Tamar) from Russiato Palestine and settled in Jerusalem. There helived in modest circumstances and workedindefatigably at the writing of his memoirs, whichwere published byHa-Sifriah ha-Tsionith,with an introduction by S. Y. Agnon. YaakovEliasberg died in Jerusalem in 1966, and was followedshortly afterwards by his wife. They are survivedby a daughter, Tamar Shrik, who lives inBath Yam.★The story of the “Rothschild” families of Pinskand Karlin is a reflection of six generations of thehistory of Russian Jewry. First, the growth andramification of the families in their own town, andthen, towards the end of the period, theirdispersion all over the world. First, the influenceon them of the centripetal pull towards Jewishvalues within Pinsk itself, followed by the effect ofthe centrifugal drift away from Judaism in foreignlands. In the clash between these two opposingforces, a minority of the latter-day descendants ofthese families succeeded in preserving their ancestralfaith and tradition even in distant parts of the world.They found an outlet for their Jewish loyaltiesmainly in the Zionist movement and in settlementin Palestine, or in memories and stories of thelegendary figure of the family’s founder, ShaulKarliner, of “grandmother Hayyah”, and of thepatriarchalism of her brothers and sons. But manywere the “grandsons” who were lost to Judaismthrough assimilation. At this same time, Pinsk wasoccupied by the Bolsheviks who put a stop to allJewish religious and cultural life in the town. Andafter them came the Nazis who exterminated theJewish population, leaving behind nothing of theJewish communities of Pinsk but heaps of ruins andmartyrs’ graves.i3^Wr>C.L'i£|&'jO'60jE»'o'Q^^; ttrr .-/.Trr*. .•.’g»T»B‘r.-iTrrr,T««-«trtV«.-.»v;-jt.-;.YT...>..‘,,vrTfc.i.v.g:w>.ima !OC5 ^ou^^rRs shares.I f ^ N !:. M-. -sa^o ■ 1>* *.i_sJ'^W«*i«iit8= V.« »- —^  p. T.Jpy PF3m-. 1-:// /^ // ///^'///44f//4f Vnilfl / ////^.> ^^aiifi/i/r vy/////y'/,//'//« Ce/(/n‘a//Hm/,\ilmi/€ii,■ ///zr/ /^■‘ z^A-’ fi^//f/ff//rf(.'>r^//^r-,)ffu/f>tWi^Hlfif^'f‘/'/ffZillf/'/z-^tt'('.f^-A/nri(/-Z-/ //f f ^AA i/ i/,t /f f///,^tf/f, (n/f///‘f^tt Az-A/Zf/AA/AyZ'/ z{^/ /f 0ir A f ,fty /i(/u yi. f ^ < •' a//^z A////Az/,/z</4'//^zZ////,///z/^-'<^zi/-4/zJy//-/'i/ . AA-' , / '// /' /  I, . . A i, ,SIh**"* 'z-n-’T rcffTr -«■«t- ;n:-‘-x'r'--p rr----*i.>',>y,i«i« jr—rtr x"'* rcrr. --trir~^ , ^r-K-; fn-'cr. r":~z *>‘A) h-^ -c'-•<•■' —••'••rn .K""^ ' rrx “C'C^ r* xs iwr t'st r-X - r'-tz-■ r'x‘- kt-cZr ■: •' 'zz -T' ic -«:!:=}.-'t rs ■■ ; -r-rr-zw r—vx’ j::.^ki^c=CT c-x> = ;> - r-:rr r>" -x ,-, ’ k "• ''irt-c-»:rr- ‘ jo tr~> - *-r t-—ptr rzz trT—‘r-■t '~i •*«."■ »“■*--r'‘"jTrKi ;e’ ‘*:i ■‘"r- -kkz-,-x f-x*-r- E '•r ■-~‘- '“c'x c—c" ^_w„- c-,-r- —' -STK rST —ST p- Cl- r; .c-rc-r-es *-•;.- .—st tr-r v'--" -1-."'tr'. cZrxr •;[W * *tv' *''5;.•w!n<'Vwts»J5i-.”’ *■"»y ///., X// Tf A T ^ T/TT VA . r , , y - , . . . ... y .... j    ///(’ .;///f/^v/y/////^^/-Z ./////<( Yy///|Ay/A'/«Vz//A/f^y//ZZZFN /////7A' ZZ'A/vwi'zz//-/^ • 4''//A/Z/tr ,>.</./Zt’nt^ttPlH jj"*'/ .5,'» ' .^) j’Y/ ,44/,.a* - ytM•■■ ■•' - - -'X. uO ^■.'•/j- ^yj-TJ* «k ' S »VSv'a fC*1 '^•.iJ8ii*». -iii&J-iif'i 'P I'V », \k '>A vV'.lSl■ ^ vMig“r3e:VKA-f“’''-^1%%¥i4lsasaaja^^fcaaiii^KS-■V ♦ ,1 1. '->V54 8■' w: ' '.11,,y • ■■’-*■ 'J " n'ttfr..iV*‘ J*>' 1 v-a ^ .1 ^ 1i'll- ■‘-'v -v^ i ^ 1. €w' ‘ 4 •'¥_«S.y|:I ■■■ :.:■■■■•■■1■'"4;^’i>fHpi£hFHfaisii i.^-it-SiiSfSAharon Eliasberg (1879-1937)— 63 —LIST OF THE INSTITUTIONS ESTABLISHED OR DIRECTEDBY MEMBERS OF THE LEVIN---LOURIE — HALPERN — ELIASBERG FAMILIESThe dates for the earlier period have been taken from the article “A1 Pinsk, Karlin ve-Yosheveihen” [“On Pinsk, Karlin and their Inhabitants”] by Shaul Mendl Rabinowitsch, thesection on Kehilloth Yaakov, Talpiyoth, Berdichev 1895, and from the daily pr^s of thetime. Many dates are given approximately, for want of reliable sources of information.YearName of FounderName of InstitutionBefore 1819Shaul Karliner (Levin)Before 1819id.1834id.c. 1860Moshe-Yitshak Levinc. 1862Hayyah Louri6c. 1862—1875Meir Levinc. 1862Meir Levin1862 onwardsAharon, son of Moshe Lou1862—1888id.1863 onwardsYosef Ettinger (husbandof Gite, nee Louri6)1863 onwardsShabbethai Simhovichc. 1865Moshe-Yitshak LevinBefore 1865Dinah Levin1865Aharon-Moshe Padva,son of Akhsah Levinc. 1865Wolf Levinc. 1865id.c. 1865Hayyah Louri6c, 1865Hayyah Louri6 andFeigel Levin1866/67Hayyah Louri6c. 1867Meir Levinc. 1870Gad-Asher Levinc 1870id.1872The Louri6 Families1875Miriam-Leah Louri6and Feigel LevinBuilt a beth midrash in Karlin.Built a beth midrash in Pinsk.Left sums of money in his will for the above batei midrash,for social welfare institutions in Pinsk, Karlin and the neigh-bouring towns and for Jewish settlement in Palestine.A synagogue bearing his name in Karlin (in Albrechtov-Kupecheski Street).Built a Talmud Torah school in Karlin which was directed,successively by Meir Levin, Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg, Aharon Louri6,Gite, Yosef and Mikhal Ettinger, Shabbethai and Yonah Simhovich.Ran the Karlin Talmud Torah, and the town’s h e d e r s[(religious) classes].Built a public bath for the Jews of Karlin.Contributed articles to “ H a C a r m e 1 ” and “ T s i o n ”.Corresponded with Y. L. Gordon.One of the directors of the Pinsk Talmud Torah.One of the directors of the Pinsk Talmud Torah.Built the Karlin hospital, managed by Aharon Louri6.Built a synagogue in Karlin (in Siever Street).Published his book “Beur Haram” [“The Commentary ofR. Aharon Moshe”].Established the agricultural farm Ivanik.Built(?) the beth midrash known as the “Pinsker Kloiz'*.Built a synagogue in Karlin, in the “Synagogue Square”.Built an old-age home in Karlin, which was under the successivemanagement of Miriam-Leah Lourie, Gite Ettinger, and YosefHalpern.Set up a transit camp for refugees from the famine in the Kovnodistrict.Built a synagogue in Karlin.Established a trade school for orphans and children of the poor.Built an old-age home in Pinsk.Among the founders of the Karlin Gemiluth Hasadimcharity fund, which was managed by Aharon Louri6 and GiteEttinger.Founded the Somekh Nofelim ve-Yoledoth [Sick Aidand Maternity] Society in Karlin, which was managed by thefounders, Gite Ettinger, and Yosef Halpern.64YearName of Founder1876—1879Mikhal Ettinger1877Gad-Asher Levin1878Moshe and David Lourie1880Iser-Isidore Louri61880Aharon, son of Moshe Louriec. 1880Yosef Halpern1885—1888The Louri6 Families1887Moshe and David Louri61888Leopold, son of Aharon Louri61890Moshe Louri61890id.1894Grigory Louri61895 onwardsid.1895 onwardsid.c. 1889id.1897—1913id.1897Shaul, son of Idel Lourie1897/98Grigory Louri61898—1900id.1898id.1898, 1903Moshe-Hayyim Eliasberg1898id.c. 1898id.c. 1898Eliyahu Eliasberg1900Moshe Louri61900Aharon Louri61901id.1901Aharon and Alexander Louri61901, 1903Leopold, son of Aharon Lourie1901Shaul, son of Idel Louri61901id.Name of InstitutionDirector of the Karlin Talmud Torah.Left a sum of money for the setting up of a charity fund for thesick and aged.Among the “Karlin Philanthropists” who provided the TalmudTorah pupils with food and clothing.Renovated the structure of the Pinsk Talmud Torah, andwas president of the Karlin Talmud Torah.Founded the Mutual Credit Society of which he was directoruntil 1905.Life president of the Pinsk hospital.Established a trade school in Hayyah Louri^’s house, under thedirection of Moshe Louri6’s son, Aharon, Moshe-Hayyim Eliasbergand Yonah Simhovich.Made a weekly allocation of bread to the poor, during a period offood shortage.Voluntarily taught secular subjects in the Karlin Talmud Torah.Donated a thousand roubles to the Talmud Torah, hospital,and old-age home built by his mother in Karlin.Provided the necessary financial support for the establishment ofthe Association of Jewish Shipowners in Pinsk.One of the organizers of the “progressive h e d e r ” in Pinsk.An active member of Hovevei Tsion.Chairman of the Pinsk Mutual Credit Society.Instituted an 8-hour day for his workers.Delegate to the 1st, 2nd, (3rd), 4th, 5th, 7th, and 11th ZionistCongresses.Delegate to the 1st Zionist Congress.One of the founders of the Pinsk Zionist Club.One of the founders of the Colonial Bank, and its director.Member of the founding conference of the Colonial Bank at Cologne.Delegate to the 2nd and 6th Zionist Cingresses.Member of the founding conference of the Colonial Bank at Cologne.Appointed by the Russian government honorary inspector of theJewish schools in Pinsk.Last member of the Eliasberg family to bear the title “ G a b b a iof the Volozhin Y e s h iv a h ” .Donated 10,000 roubles towards the erection of a new building forthe Karlin Talmud Torah.One of the founders of the Jewish Charitable Society.Founded the Halvaah ve-Hisakhon Bank.Headed the rescue committee after the great fire.Delegate to the 5th and 6th Zionist Congresses.Guest participant in the 5th Congress ; member of the DemocraticFaction.One of the founders of the “Maccabiah” student organizationin Darmstadt.— 65YearName of FounderName of Institution1901/2Aharon Louri61901Aharon Eliasberg1901Georg Halpern1902Aharon Eliasberg1902 onwardsid.1902Grigory Louri61903Moshe Louri61903Alexander Louri61903Yaakov Eliasberg1904Leopold, son of Moshe Loi1904Grigory Louri6c. 1904id.1905Alexander Louriec. 1905Grigory Louri6c. 1909Grigory Louri6 andhis wife Rivkah1910/11Sasha Lourie1911—1920Aharon Eliasberg1915/16Alexander Louri61915Sasha Louri61917As[ir] and Yi[tshak?]sons of A[haron] Louri61921Beni (Bernhard) Halpern1921id.1921Georg Halpern1921/2L.Sasha Louri61924Beni Halpern1924Yaakov Eliasberg1924—1939The sons of Leopold andAlexander Louri61924—1939Yaakov Eliasberg1927Leopold Louri61934Yaakov Eliasberg1937id.1965id.Supervised the construction of the new building of the KarlinTalmud Torah with money left by his father.Delegate to the 5th Congress, member of the Democratic Faction.Member of the Democratic Faction at the time of the 5th Congress.Delegate to the Conference of German Zionists.One of Weizmann’s close associates in the preparation of the planfor setting up the Hebrew University in Jerusalem.Delegate to the Minsk Zionist Conference.Contributed to the repair of the Pinsk hospital.Contributed to the repair of the Pinsk hospital.Guest participant in the 6th Zionist Congress.Chairman of the Vienna rescue committee for the pogrom refugees.Established a library in Pinsk. Representative of the monthly journal“Yevreiskaya Shkola”.Representative in Pinsk of the ICA Society for Jewish emigration.“Advisor” in the Pinsk municipality, representing the town’sJewish population.Headed the Pinsk Women’s Charitable Association.Ran the girls’ trade school of the above association.Member of the editorial board of the “Pinsk i List ok”.Director of the “ J u d i s c h e r V e r 1 a g ” in Berlin.Head of the “Citizens Committee” during the German occupation.Edited a Russian newspaper in Stockholm.Members of the Moscow association to aid Pinsk Jewry.Head of the Pinsk Committee for war refugees.Made over his family home to be turned into an orphanage.Member of the Zionist Executive Committee ; one of the directorsof the economic bodies of the Zionist Movement.Representative of the “National Byelorussian Republic” in Kovnoand Danzig.One of the founders of the Pinsk Commercial and Industrial Bank.One of the founders of the Pinsk Commercial and Industrial Bank.Supported social welfare institutions in Pinsk, particularly thosefounded by Hayyah Lourie.Resisted the Polish authorities in defence of the rights of theJewish worker and of Sabbath observance in the Louri6factories.Contributed to the setting up of the Gemiluth Hasadimcharity fund.Advisor to the Vilna commercial and indirstrial bureau, on behalfof the Jewish merchants and industrialists.Member of the Keren Hayesod delegation at the meeting of[“In the World of Revolutions”].Published his autobiography “Be-Olam ha-Hafekhoth”[“In a World of Revolutions”].66 —COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ENTERPRISES ESTABLISHED IN PINSKBY MEMBERS OF THE LEVIN —LOURIE—HALPERN —ELIASBERG FAMILIESYearFounderEnterprisec. 1800—1834Shaul Karliner (Levin)Very well-established merchant. Dealer in timber and contractorfor government works. Large property owner.c. 1825Zalman LevinWell-established merchant. Probably dealt in timber and grain.c. 1835—1872Moshe-Yitshak LevinVery well-established merchant, apparently from timber, grain,fats, and government contracts. “Merchant of the second guild”.c. 1835—1870(7)Wolf LevinVery well-established merchant. Dealer in timber, and apparentlyalso in grain and fats, and contractor for government works.c. 1835—1873Hayyah Louri6Developed Pinsk as an inland port and transport link between theUkraine and the Baltic countries and Poland. Dealt, apparently,in timber, grain, fats, and salt. The wealthiest woman of her timein Pinsk. The title “Honorary Citizen of the Russian Empire’*was bestowed upon her and her descendants by the Tsar Alexander II.c. 1840Heshe RokeahVery wealthy man. Dealt in loans.Before 1862Meir LevinOperated a steamboat on the Pina and Dniepr rivers. “Merchant ofthe second guild”.1865Moshe Louri6Built a flour mill.1867 onwards“The Brothers Mosheand David Louri6”Did business in timber, grain, and fats.1867id.Operated 3 steamboats on the Pina and Dniepr.1868Meir LevinOperated 2 river steam-boats.1868Gad-Asher LevinOperated 2 river steam-boats.c. 1868—1877id.Timber deals.c. 1870Idel, son of Shemuel LouricBank.c. 1870Shemuel, son of David LouricBank.1872Eliyahu Eliasberg & Co.Candle and fat factory.1872Shemuel Rabinovich & Co.Candle and fat factory.1872Moshe Loirri6Steam-powered flour factoryc. 1872id.Steam-powered oil-press.1879/80id.Factory for wooden nails.1880Aharon Louri6Mutual Credit Bank.c. 1881Moshe Louri6Factory for wooden boxes.1888Grigory Louri6Fat-processing mill.1890Moshe, Lippa andAlexander LourieSaw-mill.1894/5Lippa-Leopold Louri6Improved and enlarged the factory for wooden boxes.Before 1895Grigory Louri6Chemical works.1897Yosef HalpemBought and enlarged the match factory.1898/99“The Brothers L. [Leopold]and A1 [Alexander] Louri6”Plywood factory.— 67YearFounderEnterpriseBefore1899Grigory Louri6Bank.Before1899Idel and Sam. D. Louri6Amalgamation of the banks of Idel and Shemuel, son of DavidLoirri6 (“The Rovno Bureau’*).1901Aharon Louri6Halvaah ve-Hisakhon Bank.c. 1905Grigory Louri6Chalk-manufacture works.1919Beni HalpernRe-established the match factory, after the war.1921“The Brothers L. andAl. Louri6”Re-established the match factory, after the war.1923Beni HalpernRebuilt the match factory after the fire.1924id.One of the founders of the Commercial and Industrial Bank.1924Yaakov EliasbergOne of the founders of the Commercial and Industrial Bank.GENEALOGICAL TABLES•-)CQiSVcc43cSJSUioMMo>oVCed314j:ac>upjIj::u:3eS•C 5^ r*TDesa>o3 -!«<CO'S0^jMi<u(400llC4o4>Cii«>a,c4a«>oM(4e4^ P«5IM >« -aS 0^J41 2« o2> ■§p< n>&oinC4.c.<uCOOe4>•o4Sa.o3<Be4tie4ffi3«OQ>opAooJH(/)oUt•s<"Oe4auJ3</i4>X<4J2t/i’H3O»-lo■s 1V, ^J3o>ujCc4a>oP<XJC4uOQ<u33 ■X• G4>caQOk.OitO"OC4C4J3GlxUCQv>3u33X(/>aTJ4>J3•♦X34*jda(2.:>4CXccoi-«oIhoQ*cS3*cc2"cS*oa>OffiCQ,uC9cn>, cSM .sS -00a>Wi•S«9a>C ^z)X3i ^•xa>CO  •tjaeS— X<uT3a>Vi SS~ OcuimU<a>CO(4-1oGOlxO• •mt-iUouJSGO(43«-4Oe«(4-1w><txjoJC3w C•S 2Oto .'2 >•-3 is ^»<-• o So i-j 42e4lOa>>oJ3•s—-X<Moa(4Xoco•it• —4lxGCA>• ^oi<L>«*-4*Coco(OCH53Ousee  « 3 >c4HaoIHC4<(4X4>oJQCOcOoca2it O• "Nlx3Oite4H-3 GX nJo6oitJSf/l>itpA.9tiI .s>3 >C4 ON U•oCu00u«?Jaoe3(4Qcc4.9aoc/irgTABLE IIMoshe, son of Aharon and Hayyah Loufri6AharonPinskseeTableVBeileh Zeldah Rahel Eltasberg Shemuelwife of Eliasberg Pinsk-Berlin- Louri6Idel Louri6 -Pinsk WiesbadenseeTable111ShemuelPinsk-•Berlin,killedin theHolocaustin WarsawAharon Yaakovpinsk- Pinsk--Bcrlin- -Moscow--Jerusalem -Pinsk--Kazakhstan--JerusalemTamar ShrikIserLouri6LibauLeopold-Lippa LouridPinsk-V ienna-LondonAlexanderLouridElizabethEliasbergVienna--JerusalemPaulLouridVienna-AntonLouridVienna-ArthurLouridVienna--Vancouver -Los Angeles -DublinArthurBath Yam. i; ^ iCite Ettinger Mikhal Ettinger Yosef EttingerMiriamShosblannahHawahHannahdaughter ofUnitedJerusalemHareliAvrielAharon LouridStatesJerusalemNe<Hhby his first- wifeMordekhaiPaula StrausVienna--TorontoTABLE IIIShemuel, son of Aharon and Hayyah LouridPeshkeLouridKievIdel Lourid Aharon Emma MirlPinsk-Yekaterinoslav* killed Bernstein LouridWiesbaden in the j Holocaust1 in Warsaw I1Shaul1Ovsei1Tekla1Frieda1Heshl1MosheLouridLouridFriedlandEndelmannNew YorkJerusalemPinsk-Pinsk--London--London-SantaMonicaShaul FriedaOdessa KaiifmannTwo sons Two daughtersIn Russia in ParisTABLE IVDavid, son of Aharon and Hayyah Louri6IserWarsawAharonKievSallyRoseLosAngelesSally-KlaraSouthAfricaDashaBulovajoShemuelPinsk(?)OlgaLouri6killedin theHolocaustson inBelgiumIsidor (?)MinskLeopoldSelmaKlaraGurionGitlSelikindSmolenskMirl Odl, wife ofSusmann Yonah SimhovichKlaraFreudenbergkilledin Warsawby the Nazistwo sonsin Rio deJaneiroTadek Irene Klara RivkahLos Angeles in Spain Ettinger Simhovichdaughter1Rahel1TeklaKoganFrumkinKievWarsawG(rigory)FrumkinGeneveTABLE VAharon, son of Mosbe Louri6GrigoryPinsk- PetrogradSashaPinsk--Petrograd--Stockholm--Danzig--Germany--Haiti(?)ShemuelPinsk(?)LeopoldPinsk- Lodz-PinskRahel WeinreichPinsk- DresdenMironFriedaDr. AnniIsmarMaxPinsk-HanfSamuelsdorf,LondonTelyPetrograd-^OdessaHaifaTel AvivAvivShaulOvseiAsirAlexanderYitshakDresdenLodzPinsk-Pinsk-Pinsk-1-Lodz--Moscow-Warsaw-PinskAlexanderTel AvivMariaParisTABLE VIMarriage between descendants of the brothersShemuel and David, sons of Aharon and' Hayyah Louri6Descendans of Shemuel Louri61. Peshke (Pauline)  2. Aharon (killed in Warsaw)3. Mirl  Descendants of David Louri6- Aharon (Kiev)- Olga, granddaughter of David Louri6 (killed in Warsaw)- Leopold— 71B IBLIOGRAPH YPersonal communications from:Eliasberg YaakovGriinbaum YitshakHalpern GeorgKlebanow YaakovLourie PaulLourie ShaulSamuelsdorf AnniWritten sources :Archives of Bank Leumi le-Israel,Jerusalem, LondonCentral Zionist Archives, JerusalemUniversity Library, JerusalemWeizmann Archives, RehovothApel, Y., Betokh Reshithha-Tehiyah, Tel Aviv1936.Bein, A., Im Herzl u-be-Ikvothav, Tel Aviv1954.Idem, Mivhar Kithvei Herzl, Vol. I, Pt. 2,Tel Aviv 1939.Bodenheimer, H. H., Be-Reshith ha-Tenuah,Jerusalem 1965.Broides, Y., Vilna ha-Tsionith ve-Askaneha,Tel Aviv 1939.Dobzevich, A. D., Lo Dubbim ve-lo-Yaar,Berdichev 1890.Eisenstat, Y. T. and S. Y. Viener, Daath Kedoshim,Peterburg 1897/8.Eliasberg, Y., Be-Olam ha-Hafekhoth, Jerusalem1965.Epstein, A., Kethavim, Jerusalem 1950.Ettingen, A., 50 Shanah la-Veidah Tsionithbe-Rusiyah, Haolam, No. 49, 1948.Feinstein, A. A., Megillath Puranuyoth, TelAviv 1929.Friedman David, Sheeloth David, Petrikov 1913.Ginsburg, S., Megillah Rabbath Inyan, YedaAm, Vol. VIII, No. 26, Tel Aviv 1963.Gordon, Y. L., Iggeroth, Warsaw 1894.Idem, Olam ke-Minhago, Warsaw 1864.Had or (paper), 1901, No. 21.Hacarmel (paper), 1863, No. 30.Hamaggid (paper), 1880, Nos. 35, 47, 48.Hamelits (paper), 1862, No. 2; 1863, No. 20; 1868, No.5; 1872, No. 11; 1878, No. 20; 1880, No. 3. 14, 17;1885, No. 46; 1887, No. 114; 1888, No. 139;1890, No. 47; 1891, No. 291.Hatsefirah (paper), 1876, No. 15; 1877, Nos. 47, 49;1900, No. 76; 1901, Nos. 97, 104, 105, 113; 1903,No. 181; 1905, No. 201.Ha-Protokol shel ha-Kongres ha-Tsioniha-Rishon, Jerusalem 1947.Herzl, T., Mivhar Kithvei Herzl, Tel Aviv 1939.Idem, Iggeroth, Vol. Ill, Jerusalem 1957.Hevrath Mefitsei Haskalah, Reports, Peters-burg, 1869, 1872, 1873, 1888—1893.Iggeroth Soferim... mi-M ishpahathEiger-Sofer, Vienna 1933.Klausner, Yisrael, Opozitsiyah le-Herzl,Jerusalem 1960.Levinson, Y. B., Efes Damim, Warsaw 1884.Lifshits, N. M., Di Tsionistishe Bevegung inPinsk, Pinsker Stot Luah, Vilna 1903/4.Lifshits, Y., Zikhron Yaakov, Pt. 2, Kovno-Slobodka 1927; Pt. 3, 1968 (no place of publi-cation).Lourie, Aharon, Ha-Yehudim be-Morocco,Hacarmel, 1864, Nos. 41—43.Maor, Y., Yehudei Rusyah bi-TekufathPleve, Heavar, Vol. VI, Tel Aviv 1958.Nurok, M,, Veidath Tsionei Rusyah be-Minsk, Jerusalem 1963.Padva, A. M., Midrash Shoher Tov... im BeurHaram, Warsaw 1865.Rabinowitsch, S. M., A1 Pinsk, Karlin ve-Yosheveihen, Talpiyoth. Pt. Ke-hilloth Yaakov, Berdichev 1895.Rabinowitsch, Z., R. Gad-Asher Levin mi-Pinsk, Heavar, Vol. XIV, Tel Aviv 1967.Idem, Ha-Hasiduth ha-Litaith, Jerusalem 1961.Shatskes, M. A., Ha-Mafteah, Warsaw 1866, 1869.Stern, Yosef Zekharia, Zekher Yehosef, Warsaw1860.Tokhnith Beth ha-Otsar ha-Leumi...asher nasa ha-Doktor Bodenheimer...neetak mi-Sefath Ashkenaz al yedeiEfraim-Dov Lifshits, Vilna 1898.Weizmann-Lichtenstein, H., Be-Tsel Korathenu,Tel Aviv 1948.Zenzifer, A., Paamei ha-Geulah, Tel Aviv 1952.★Fried, M. Y., Di Greise Tsionisten Asife inMinsk, Krakau 1903.Gottlieb, Y., Di Legende Pinsk, PinskerShtime, Pinsk 1930.— 72Ginsburg, S., Historishe Werk, Vols. I, II, NewYork 1937.Haint (paper), 1911, No. 301, p. 3.Kerman, M., Hundert Yor Pinsk, MeineZikhreines (stencil) [Haifa 1953].Lourie, Anton, Di Tsavoe fun a Pinsker Baalha-Baith fun Onheib NeintsentenYorhundert, YIVO Bleter, Vol. XIII, Nos.5/6, 1938.Moment (paper), 1911, No. 299, p. 4.Mukdoni, A., Meine Begegenishen, Buenos Aires1949.Pinsker Stot-Luah, Vilna 1903/4.Toysent Yor Pinsk, ed. Hofman, B., New York1941.* ♦ * Gad-Asher Levin, Pinsker Stot Luah, Vilna1903/4.★Bohm A., Die Zionistische Bewegung, Tel Aviv 1935.Encyclopaedia Judaica, Vol. VI, s. v. Eger, Salomo benAkiba, Berlin 1930.Herzl Th., Gesammelte Zionistische Werke, Vol. Ill, TelAviv 1934.Karliner [Leopold Louri6], Eine JUdische Arbeiterstadt, DieWelt, Wien 1898, Nr. 11, p. 3.Lourie A., Die Familie Louri6, Wien 1923.Louri6 P., Leopold Louri6... in Commemoration, 1959.Rabinowitsch W. Z., Lithuanian Hasidism, London 1970.Stenographisches Protokoll... des II. Zionisten-Congresses,Wien 1898.Stenographisches Protokoll... des IV. Zionisten-Congresses,Wien 1900.Stenographisches Protokoll... des V. Zionisten-Congresses,Wien 1901.Stenographisches Protokoll... des XI. Zionisten-Congresses,Berlin 1914.Die Welt, Wien 1898, No. 17, p. 1; No. 31, p. 6; No. 34,p. 4; No. 50, p. 9; No. 52, p. 12, 13; 1899, No. 5,p. 10; No. 12, p. 4; No. 14, p. 5; No. 17, p. 7;No. 18, p. 8; No. 19, p. 5, 7; No. 30, p. 6; No. 34,p. 8, 9; No. 35, p. 3; No. 45, p. 16; No. 46, p. 16;No. 49, p. 9; 1900, No. 18, p. 16; 1901, No. 51, p. 5;1902, No. 1, 2; No. 38, p. 56; No. 44, p. 2; 1903,No. 31, p. 3; No. 33, p. 1, 2; 1905, No. 29, p. 27.★Russian sourcesGinsburg C. M., Otechestvennaya voyna i russkiye yevreyi,Peterburg 1912.Yevreyskaya shkola, avgust-sentyabr 1905.Lourie, A., Korrespondentsii, Hakarmel, Vilna 1861, 1868.Lourie, G., Korrespondentsiya, Russki Yevrey, Peterburg1880, No. 4.Otchot obshchestva dlya rasprostraneniya prosveshcheniyamezhdu yevreyami v Rossii, Peterburg 1865-1895.Pinski Listok, Pinsk 1910/11.Pochivshiye chleny 1-vo sionistskavo kongressa, “Safrut”,Sbornik pod red. L. Yaffe, Tom II, Moskva 1918.Russkiy Yevrey, 1879, No. 11, str. 394; 1882, No. 23,str. 871-872 ; 1884, No. 37/38, str. 12.Yanson Y., Pinsk i yevo rayon, Peterburg 1869.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLINCONTENTSPageNotes on the Transliteration 75Foreword by Simon Duhnoiv 76Author's Note 76KARLIN HASIDISM 77—142A. R. Aharon the Great (1765—1772) 77— 86B. R. Shelomo of Karlin (1772—1792) 86— 97C. The Second Ascendancy of KarlinHasidism (1792—1794) 97—101D. Struggle and Victory (1794—1801) 101—107E. R. Asher the First (1793—1826) 107—116F. R. Aharon the Second (1826—1872) 116—132G. Ha-Yenuka [‘The Child’] (1873—1921) 132—136H. The Final Tragedy and the PresentSituation (1921—1974) 136—142THE LIBESHEI DYNASTY 142—145THE HORODOK DYNASTY 145—147THE BEREZNA DYNASTY 147—149MANUSCRIPTS OP THE STOLIN GENIZAH 150PLEDGE OP ALLEGIANCE BY THE DIS-CIPLES OF THE ARI AND R. HAYYIMVITAL (1575) 151Page^SEFER HA-TSOREF^ BY R. YEHOSHUAHESHEL TSOREF 151—153A MAP OF LITHUANIAN HASIDISM 153GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE KARLINDYNASTY AND ITS BRANCHES 154GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE LIBESHEIAND BEREZNA DYNASTIES 155GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE HORODOKDYNASTY 155MUSICAL SCORES OF HASIDICMELODIES: 156—157Ekhsof Noam Shahbath (Karlin Melody) 156Esheth Hayil (Karlin Melody) 156Kol Beruei Moolah (Karlin Melody) 157Menuhah ve-Simhah (Libeshei Melody) 157Hatsileni Na mi-Yad AM (Karlin Melody) 157GLOSSARY 158—160BIBLIOGRAPHY 160—163* The sources for this Monograph are the followingbooks by the author: Ha-Hasiduth ha-Litaith (Heb-rew), Mosad Bialik, Jerusalem 1961; Lithuanian Ha-sidism, Vallentine, Mitchell, London 1970; LithuanianHasidism, Schocken New York 1971.ILLUSTRATIONSPageR. RAFAEL HACOHEN, RAV OP PINSK 77TITLE-PAGE OP THE ‘TESTAMENT’ OFR. AHARON THE GREAT OP KARLIN(CHERNOVITS 1855) 85THE GRAVE OP R. AHARON THE GREATIN KARLIN 86LETTER FROM R. AHARON THE SECONDOP KARLIN TO HIS SON R. ASHERTHE SECOND 122LETTER FROM R. AHARON THE SECONDOP KARLIN TO HIS FAMILY (Letter A) 123LETTER FROM R. AHARON THE SECONDOF KARLIN TO HIS DAUGHTERMIRY AM, JULY 1866 (Letter B) 125LETTER FROM R. AHARON THE SECONDOP KARLIN TO HIS DAUGHTERMIRYAM AND TO HIS SON-IN-LAWPageR. AVRAHAM-YAAKOV OF SADAGORA,29.7.1866 (Letter C) 126TITLE-PAGE OF THE VOLUME ‘BETHAHARON’, BRODY 1875 131LETTER PROM R. ASHER THE SECONDOP KARLIN-STOLIN TO HIS FOLLOWERS,1872/1873 132PICTURE OP R. YISRAEL ‘THE CHILD'OF KARLIN-STOLIN 134THE GRAVE OP R. YISRAEL OP KARLIN-STOLIN IN FRANKFURT AM MAIN 136SIGNATURES OF THE KARLIN TSADDIKIM 140THE PRAYER HOUSE OP THE KARLINHASIDIM IN TIBERIAS 141SIGNATURES OP THE DISCIPLES OPR. YITSHAK LURIA (‘HA-ARI’) ANDR. HAYYIM VITAL, 1575 (From the StolinGenizah) 151NOTES ON THE TRANSLITERATIONThe transliteration of Hebrew names and words inthis monograph follows the Sephardi pronunciation,and is based on the phonetic method employed in scho-larly works. Special note should be taken of the fol-lowing conventions:Hebrew beth with dagesh is represented by b.„ beth without dagesh is represented by v(e.g., Avraham).„ heth is represented by h (e.g, hasiduth),„ kaf without dagesh is represented by kh(e.g. Barukh).„ peh without dagesh is represented by /(e.g., sefer),„ tav with dagesh is represented by t(e.g. toledoth).tav without dagesh is represented by th(e.g. toledoth).„ tsaddi is represented by ts (e.g. tsaddik).The dagesh forte is represented by a doubled letter(except in the words mithnaged, mithnagdim).The sheva mobile is represented by e.Proper names from the Old Testsmaent have beenwritten as spelt in the Revised Standard Version of theEnglish Bible.Russian place names appear in the text according totheir usual Jewish prommciation. Both these placenames and the names of Russian writers, books andarticles have been transliterated phonetically for theconvenience of the reader. Note should be taken ofthe following ligatures:kh as in Scottish loch (e.g., Lafchovich).ch „ „ church (e.g., Lakhovich).sh „ „ bush (e.g., Shneur).zh „ „ pleasure (e.g.,ZMtomir).The titles of books and articles written in Hebrew,Yiddish and Russian appear in the text only in trans-literation. A translation has been added in the Biblio-graphy.The author’s explanatory additions to the text oforiginal documents and to Hebrew terms have beenplaced in square brackets, thus [ ]. Additions or va-riants forming part of the original text appear in or-dinary brackets, thus ( ).FOREWORD BY SIMON DUBNOWThere was a period in Jewish historiography whenhasidism was written about with partisan passion, thequestion debated being whether the movement wasbeneficial or harmful to the development of Judaism.Scholars were divided into an anti-hasidic and a pro-hasidic school, and even in our time some writers havetried to continue this controversy. Today, however,we have reached the point at which dogmatism isgiving way to a historical approach, and partisan ar-gumentation is being replaced by objective scientificresearch into the nature and interconnection of theevents.Now that we possess a general history of hasidismin the period of its origin and growth, the time hascome for more detailed individual studies on thistopic—^monographs on various schools of thought with-in hasidism and their founders, or on dynasties ofTsaddikim which had an effect on the Jewish massesin various countries.One excellent monograph of this kind that hascome to my notice is Dr. Zeev Rabinowitsch's bookon the Karlin hasidic dynasty. The very great im-portance of this family of Tsaddikim lies not so muchin the extent of its influence, as in the fact that itsorigins go back to the first period of the hasidic move-ment—to the period of the Great Maggid, whose dis-ciple, R. Aharon 'the Great' of Karlin, founded thefirst 'sect' of hasidism in Lithuania, and thereby setoff the first polemical attack on hasidism by the Gaon,R. Eliyahu of Vilna. By discovering new source-ma-terial relating to this important chapter of history ornew combinations of old material, the author has suc-ceeded in presenting us with a complete history ofthe dynasty from its beginnings to the present day.For this he has earned the gratitude of all lovers ofJewish history, including myself.Berlin, Nisan 1933. Simon DubnowAUTHOR'S NOTEWhen I found the 'holy writings’ in the 'court' ofthe Karlin dynasty in Stolin, i.e., 'The Stolin genizah\and made this collection the basis of my research intoKarlin hasidism, the cradle of the whole Lithuanianmovement, I sent the manuscript to the distinguishedJewish historian, Simon Dubnow, who was at thattime writing his book Toledoth ha-Hasiduth (The His-tory of Hasidism). It was Dubnow that urged me topublish my research, and he was even good enoughto write a foreword to it.KARLIN HASIDISMA. R, Aharon the Great (1765-1772)History willed that Karlin, a suburb of Pinsk,should be the scene of the rise of hasidism in Lithu-ania, the movement’s centre in the early days, andone of the main causes of the mithnaged attack onhasidism.After the death of the Besht, his disciple andsuccessor, R. Dov Baer, the Great Maggid, establisheda new centre for the movement in the small town ofMezerich, in Volhynia. From Volhynia, which lay tothe north of Podolia, R. Baer was able to extend hisinfluence over Lithuania and White Russia. The per-sonality of the Great Maggid, his efforts to base hasid-ism on the historical tradition of Judaism, and ap-parently also his organisational talents, compelled theRabbanim, particularly in Lithuania, to pay seriousattention to the new movement. For Lithuania, wehave two different pieces of information on this sub-ject, one from hasidic sources and the other of mith-naged provenance; and, in addition there is the tes-timony of Solomon Maimon.In the well-known collection of mithnaged writ-ings, Zimrath Am ha-Arets^ there is a letter from themithnaged preacher, R. David of Makov, to R. She-lomo-Zalman, the Av Beth-Din [Head of the Rab-binical Court] of the community of Nashelsk. In thisletter it is stated that the Rosh Yeshivah [Head ofthe Talmudic School] and the Av Beth~Din in Pinsk,R. Rafael Hacohen, paid a visit to the Great Maggidof Mezerich, in order to become acquainted with boththe man and his doctrine.^ On his return, he madea report to the Gaon of Vilna. To the Gaon*s questionTs he [sc. R. Baer] a scholar?’ R. Rafael answered^No.’ When the Gaon asked R. Rafael about R. Baer’sknowledge of Kabbalah, he replied: T do not know,1 Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth^ p. 463 ff., Tel Aviv1932.2 R Rafael Hacohen, later Rav in Hamburg, wasone of the greatest talmudists of his time and authorof numerous rabbinic works; see: S.M. Rabinowitsch,^Al Pinshy Karlin ve-Yoshveihen^, Talpiyoth, Pt. Kehil-loth YaakoVy p. 8 ff., Berdichev 1895, and other sources.since I myself am not conversant with this lore. I canonly judge his knowledge of hidden doctrine from hisknowledge of revealed teaching [i.e., Gemard\»^ Fur-ther on in his letter, R. David of Makov writes thatin the year 1765-1766 R. Baer became widely knownin the Jewish world, and Rabbanim and talmudic scho-lars began flocking to him to study hasidic doctrine un-der his instruction. Hence, it may be assumed that inthis year (1765-1766) the penetration of hasidism intoLithunania was already in process. Among R. Baer’sdisciples we find the kabbalist and talmudic scholar,R. Pinhas Horowitz (the author of the work Haflaah),who was at that time a Rav in the small Lithuaniantown of Lakhovich. In the introduction to the bookMaggid Devarav le-Yaakov by ‘R. Dov-Baer ... ofthe holy community of Mezerich,’ mention is made of^the learned, pious and humble aged Rav, our TeacherR. Zeev-Wolf of the holy community of Greater Ho-rodno [Grodno] in the P'rovince of Lithuania.’ ThisR. Zeev-Wolf was a disciple of the Great Maggid,and wrote down his master’s teachings. R. Baer’sgreat success is also attributed to the emissaries whomR. Rafael Hacohen—Rav of Pinsk(Toysend Johr Pinsk, p. 255)78W. Z. RABINOWITSCHhe sent out to every Jewish community, includingthose in Lithuania.Solomon Maimon, himself a Lithuanian Jew—fromNesvizh, near Slutsk—has the following to say aboutthese emissaries in his autobiography^: ‘Its leaders[sc. of hasidism] sent emissaries to every place topreach the new doctrine and gain adherents to it...It once happened that a young man, who had alreadyjoined this society and had had the privilege of speak-ing in person to its leaders, passed through the townwhere I was living... His words so fired my imagin-ation that I was completely carried away. Seized byan overhelming desire to attain to true happiness bybecoming a member of this noble society of men, Iresolved to go to the town of M.[ezerich] where theRebbe B.[aer] was living.^ The events described herebelong to the middle of the 1760s, and there must nodoubt have been many young Lithuanian Jews whoat that time made their way to Mezerich, like SolomonMaimon, to hear ‘the new doctrine’ there. Amongthem was the future founder of the Karlin branchof Hasidism, R. Aharon, known to the hasidim as ‘R.Aharon the Great,’ who became one of the Great Mag-gid*s most distinguished disciples.R. Aharon of Karlin was born in 1736.“^ His fa-ther, R. Yaakov, was a native of the small town ofYanovo (close to Pinsk) who earned a meagre liveli-hood as the shamash [caretaker and usher] of a bethmidrash [house of prayer and study] At about the® Salomon Maimom Lehensgeschichte, pp. 188, 198,201 ff. Munich 1911. The above-mentioned book, Mag-gid Devarav le-Yaakov (Lublin 1927 and many otherprintings), is the original source for the teaching ofthe Great Maggid.^ A. E. Shapiro, Mishnath Hahhamim, p. 39, Jerusa-lem 1934.5 Y. M. Kleinbaum, Shema Shelomo, Pt. 11, p. 25,Petrokov 1928. Karlin, which was later incorporated inPinsk, gained its communal independence and kept italmost until the Nazi Holocaust. Cf., Rabinowitsch, ^AlPinsk, Karlin ve-Yoshveihen/ p. 15; R. Mahler, Tole-doth ha-Yehudim be-Polin, p. 394, Merhavyah 1946;Toyzend Yor Pinsk, ed. Hof man, p. 56 ff.. New York1941.Hasidic tradition relates, that R. Aharon the Greathad an imcle in Karlin, R. Manele, who also found hisway to the Great Maggid, and that it was this unclethat influenced R. Aharon to go to Mezerich. M.H.Kleinman, Zikhron la-Rishonim, p. 28, Petrokov 1912;A. Eizen, Aharon ha-Gadol/ Ha-Modia (daily pa-per), 6.X.1954, Jerusalem; Y. Yaakov, Ha-Maggid mi-Mezerich, pp. 62-64, 143-144, Benei Berak 1972.same time as the Pinsk Av Beth-Din, R. Rafael Ha-cohen, returned disappointed from Mezerich, theyoung man from the Pinsk suburb of Karlin was soattracted to R. Baer’s doctrine that he became notonly the Maggid's devoted disciple, but also one ofthe main propagators of his teachings. He travelledregularly through the small Lithuanian towns preach^ing hasidism, as he later wrote of himself in his will:‘He used to admonish the masses with a sternnessthat concealed an inner love, in order to bring allJews closer to their heavenly Father.’ Hence he cameto be popularly known as ‘the admonisher.’® R. Aha-ron w^as the one and only hasidic Rebbe in Lithuaniaat that time. R. Mendel of Vitebsk and R. Yisrael ofPolotsk were mainly active in White Russia, eventhough the town of Minsk where R. Mendel thenlived was within the borders of ‘the Province of Lithu-ania’; and R. Shneur-Zalman does not appear on thescene until about 1781. R. Aharon was thus the pioneerof hasidism in Lithuania.So it was that Karlin became the centre of thehasidic movement in Lithuania, particularly in thatpart of it known as ‘Polesia.’ In the years 1770-1772there were Karlin hasidim in Vilna and the other Li-thuanian towns,^ as we know from several contemporaryreferences to their existence. Thus, for example, So-lomon Maimon writes in his autobiography: ‘Thesepeople [sc. the hasidim] used to make pilgrimages toK.Iarlin], M.iezerich], and other “holy” places wherethe leaders, teachers, and great lights of this sect lived.Young men would leave their parents, wives, andsmall children and travel in groups to visit these great“Rebbes” and to receive instruction from them in thenew doctrine.’® Karlin is also described as a hasidiccentre by Gregoire.® The full extent of R. Aharon’s® It is possible that the young hasidic preacher des-cribed by Salomon Maimon (Lcbcnsgeschichte, p. 205,note) might be R. Aharon, despite the difference be-tween the age of the preacher, as conjectured by Mai-mon (22), and that of R. Aharon who was then about30. See below the comments added by R. Aharon to thepinkas of Maimon’s birthplace, Nesvizh. R. Aharon con-tinued to be referred to as ‘the admonisher’ for morethan a hundred years after his death. See: Had minHavraya, 'Hithgalluth ha-Yenuka hc-Stolm/ Ha-Shahar,Vol. VI, p. 31, Vienna 1875.^Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim/ published byDubnow, Chassidiana, supplement to He-Avar, Vol. II,pp. 22, 23, 25, Petrograd 1918.8 Salomon Maimon, op. cit., p. 188.9 ‘Chassidim appel6s aussi Carolins en Lithuania, duHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN79influence, not only in Karlin, but also in the wholesurrounding district, can be inferred from two post-scripts added by him in the communal pinkas ofNesvizh, which was found among the ‘holy writings’of the Karlin Tsaddikim}^ Preserved in these Karlinhasidic archives (the Stolin genizah) are several pagesfrom the above pinkas, containing the resolutionspassed by the heads of the kahal in the matter of com-munal taxes. Appended to the resolutions are two post-scripts by R. Aharon, indicating his assent to the re-solutions passed. From internal evidence it is clearthat both the resolutions and the postscripts belongto the year 1769.^^The resolutions in the Nesvizh pinkas are wordedas follows:‘These are the ordinances which were enacted .. .by the drafting committee chosen.. . together withthe leaders of the assembly, on Friday ... 10th Adar I,1769,nom d’un village nomme Carolin non loin de Pinsko, oula secte a pris naissance;’ cited by Graetz, Geschichteder Juden, Vol XI, p. 557, Leipzig 1900.In connection with the rise of Karlin hasidism, men-tion should be made of the words spoken, according tohasidic tradition, by the Karlin Rebbe, R. Yisrael ofStolin, before his death in 1921: ‘Our hasidism is onehundred and sixty years old.’ According to this state-ment, Karlin hasidism came into being in the earlysixties of the eighteenth century. A. Hausman, DivreiAharon, p. 119, Jerusalem 1964.In my search for these writings I was aided bythe teacher David-Tsevi Bakhlinski and his assistantShuchman, both of whom apparently died martyrs’deaths in the Nazi Holocaust. The archives of the Kar-lin Tsaddikim were housed in the cellar of the old Reb-be’s residence (the ‘court’) in Stolin—this is the Stolingenizah. They comprised correspondence of the KarlinTsaddikim and of the Tsaddikim of other dynasties;public appeals; pinkasim; a pledge of loyalty [shetarhithkashruth] signed in 1575 in Safed by disciples ofR. Yitshak Luria and R. Hayyim Vital; a manuscriptof Sefer ha-Tsoref, written by the Shabbatean, R. Ye-hoshua-Heshel Tsoref, and other writings. Cf., W. Z.Rabinowitsch, ^Min ha-Genizah ha-Stolinaith/ Zion, 5thyear, pp. 125-132, 244-247, Jerusalem 1910; Idem, ^Al*^8efer ha-Tsoref^ Zion, 6th year, pp. 80-84, Jerusa-lem 1941; and below, the last paragraph of this mono-graph.HR. Aharon’s postscripts are published in part byDubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 478. Cf., also: Ben-zion Dinur, Be-Mifneh ha-Doroth, pp. 144-146, Jerusa-lem 155; I. Halpem, *Yahaso shel R. Aharon ha-Gadolmi-Karlin klappei Mishtar ha-Kehilloth/ Zion, 22ndyear, p, 86 ff., Jerusalem 1957.‘In the ordinances concerning the meat tax [ko-robka] which were drawn up in the year 1765 thereare several seeming iniquities to be put right. More-over, there is even a contradiction, and this must becorrected. But it is not expressly stated that the headsof the kahal are empowered to amend the meat-taxordinances. Therefore, we have confined ourselves tomaking only this amendment—that in future neitherthe heads of the kahal nor the leaders of the assemblymay impose a double meat-tax, but only a single one.If the money [raised does not] suffice for the needs ofthe community, then everything shall be done [in con-formity with the amendment] and with the ordinancesmentioned below, which the heads of the kahal willhave to make in addition to the meat-tax of 1765, butwithout doubling it.’The drafters of the enactments then go on to ex-plain how the communal tax was to be collected. Thiswas apparently a joint property-and-income tax whichall the Jews had to pay. After the signatures of theRahbanim of Kletsk and Slutsk [?], we find the fol-lowing two postscripts by R. Aharon:I. ‘After I have beheld the poverty of our Jewishpeople, how can I hold my peace, when I have seenthe bitter plight of the poor of Israel and heard thecry which they utter in their great pain, and I am con-cerned that the leaders of the community should notgo astray (Heaven forbid!) in this bitter iniquity ofrobbing the poor? Wherefore an assembly was con-vened and chose some of its number to draw up enact-ments to deliver the oppressed poor, and they ap-parently formulated these enactments according totheir own opinion. The whole assembly then solemnlyundertook to confirm and observe every detail of theenactments... I therefore decree that whosoevershall nullify these enactments and infringe the rightsof the poor shall be utterly excommunicated and ac-cursed. Seeing that I am authorised by our Teacher ...the learned Sage of the whole golah [diaspora], theMaggid of the holy community of Mezerich, to removeany stumbling block from the path of the children ofIsrael as far as my power extends, even to the pro-claiming of a herein [ban]. Wherefore my advice isnot to breach the fence [erected round the Law] bythe Sages, so as not to be caught (Heaven forbid!) inthe trap [of sin]. He that hearkens [to this dercee]will be blessed with every good. Such are the words ofAharon, the son of our Teacher R. Yaakov (of bless-ed memory) of Karlin.’80W. Z. RABINOWITSCHII. 1 hereby require that it be recorded as my so-lemn decree that, on pain of excommunication, nomeat-tax shall be collected from melammedim [child-ren’s teachers], i.e., deducted from their tuition fees.Moreover, I hereby decree, under pain of excommuni-cation, that no one shall lease double the meat-tax ofthe year [5]525 [ = 1765] as registered there, with-out the agreement of the drafters of the enactmentswhose signatures appear on the previous page, p. 160,or of all the inhabitants of the city, all the poor andpenniless listed in the meat-tax register. Even a singleone of the taxpayers can prevent [a double meat-tax].If someone should innocently ask the reason for theenactment [not to permit a double meat-tax], theanswer is that, according to the law of our sacredTorah, no meat-tax at all is permitted. Those who askquestions like this in order to strip the poor of Israelof their last penny are most certainly of the seed ofthe Gibeonites... Whosoever shall seek to nullifythe enactments signed on the foregoing page is herebyplaced under the ban and excommunicated from allthe communities of Israel. But he that hearkens untothem shall be blessed with every good, for whoeveris merciful to his fellow-creatures shall receive mercyfrom Heaven. Such are the words of Aliaron of Kar-lin.’The strong wording of R. Aharon’s postscriptstestifies to the powerfulness of his position and to hisprofound concern for the poor. At this time, the ka-haVs jurisdiction over the Jewish community was stilllegally recognised by the secular power, and therewas bitter antagonism between the leaders of thekahal and the masses, even to the extent of open con-flict. R. Aharon, as we see from the postscripts, fear-lessly takes the side of the poorer classes and in doingso evidently acts as an influential leader. Apparentlythen, by about 1769 the hasidic movement had alreadygained support in Lithuania, too. The first clash withthe mithnagdim (1772) had not yet occurred, other-wise R. Aharon would not have been bold enough orstrong enough to write in the pinkas of another Lithu-anian town his own opinions and instructions aboutthe resolutions passed by an assembly of Rabbanimand kahal leaders. R. Aharon’s assertion, 1 am author-ised by our Teacher ... the learned Sage of the wholegolah, the Maggid of the holy community of Meze-rich,’ shows that R. Baer was not only well knownbut was also apparently recognised as an authorityeven by the Jews of Lithuania.This was the period of the hasidic movement’staking root and first flowering in Lithuania. However,on account of R. Aharon’s untimely death, and as aresult of the persecutions of the hasidim which beganat that time (1772), the importance of Karlin forhasidism in those years was forgotten.Karlin’s sister town, Pinsk, was a stronghold ofrabbinism. It was here that the first shots in thewar against hasidism were fired, and they were aimedprincipally at R. Aharon. This much is evident fromthe following letter, found in the Stolin gentzah, fromR. Baer of Mezerich to R. Eliezer Halevi, a Moreh-Tsedek [rabbinical judge] in Pinsk and author ofseveral homiletical works,^^ and to R. Hayyim, alsoof Pinsk. The text runs as follows:^®^Greetings to my dear friend, the learned and ve-nerable Rav Eliezer Halevi, and to his compeer thelearned and renowned Rav, the Teacher R. Hayyim.I write to urge you to live together in peace and towork in partnership and harmony with our disting-uished and renowned friend, R. Aharon. It is wellknown that his guidance is pleasing to God (?). Why,then, should you turn away [from him] ? What wrong,Heaven forbid, has been found [in his conduct] thatprovides any ground or doubt? Set aside evil thoughts,that there may be no schism between you (Heavenforbid!). Let the previous good relations be restored,and let not this matter be unimportant to you. Thenyou will be granted peace from the Lord of peace,and from me, your friend and well-wisher, Dov-Baer,the son of R. Avraham of blessed memory.‘These words are also addressed to the learnedscholar, the Teacher R. Shelomo, that he should strivein his wisdom to establish peace in your camp.’The letter bears no date, but it was most probablywritten between 1769 and 1772 and is thus evidenceof the first persecutions of the Karlin hasidim led byR. Aharon. It also shows that R. Baer, who here takeshis disciple, R. Aharon, under his protection, was wellknown in Lithuania and felt sufficiently sure of his12 siah ha-Sadeh, Shklov 1787; Reiah ha-Sadeh,Shklov 1795. R. Eliezer, son of R. Meir Halevi, wasformerly Av Beth-Din in Homsk (a small town nearPinsk) and afterwards ^Rav of the synagogue andMoreh’Tsedek of the holy community of Pinsk.* See:A. Yaari, ^Ha-Defus ha-Ivri hi-Shklov/ Kiryath Sefer,Vol. XXn, p. 63, Jerusalem 1945.13 The letter is published by Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 477 and by Kleinbaum, Shema Shelomo,Pt. II, p. 21.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN81own authority to intervene with a Moreh-Tsedek inPinsk. The R. Shelomo mentioned in this letter isR. Shelomo of Karlin, one of the outstanding dis-ciples of the Great Maggid, a disciple and associate ofR. Aharon and subsequently his successor as Rebbe.R. Shelomo was at that time living with R. Aharonin Karlin and was his chief aide in the campaign topropagate the hasidic doctrine among the Jewishmasses.According to hasidic sources, at this same timeanother of R. Baer of Mezerich^s outstanding dis-ciples, R. Levi-Yitshak (later known as R. Levi-Yits-hak of Berdichev) was officiating as Rav in Pinsk.These sources state that, in 1771, R. Levi-Yitshakwas elected the Av Beth-Din and Rosh Yeshivah ofPinsk.^^ However, from his written approvals to thevolumes Hovath ha-Levavoth (1772) and Erkhei ha-Kinnuyim (1775) we learn that, in those years, R.Levi-Yitshak was in fact still officiating as Rav inZhelikhov.^® Nor does hasidic literature contain anyhistorical material, or even legendary traditions, aboutthe relations between R. Aharon and R. Levi-Yitshakin Karlin or Pinsk. We do know that a bitter disputebroke out between R. Levi-Yitshak and the mithnagedpopulation of Pinsk, which resulted in R. Levi-Yits-hak’s deposition from the office of Rav and his ex-pulsion from Pinsk. But this event occurred after thedeath of R. Aharon.^®While in Lithuania the attacks on hasidism werebeing directed against individual adherents of themovement,^the first assembly of the communal re-M. Teitelbaum, Ha-Rav mi-Ladi u-Miflegeth Habad,Pt. I, p. 23, n. 2, Warsaw 1910; H. M. Heilman, BethRabbi, Pt. I, p. 8, n. 4 and p. 125, Berdichev 1903.H. Lieberman, ^Hearoth Bibliografiyoth/ Sefer ha-Yovel le-Alexander Marx, p. 15 ff.. New York 1943.16 Cf. infr. Similarly we find no historical datain hasidic literature on the relations between R. Aha-ron and R. Tsevi, son of the Besht, who lived in Pinskand died and was buried there.1"^ See above the letter of the Great Maggid of Me-zerich to the Pinsk Moreh-Tsedek R. Eliezer Halevi.Nadav, in his study Toledoth Kehillath Pinsk 1506-1880 (Pinsk, Vol. I, Pt. I„ pp. 187-193, edited by W. Z.Rabinowitsch, Tel Aviv 1973), holds that R. Eliezer, theson of R. Meir Halevi—^whom the Great Maggid of Me-zerich, R . Baer, requests in his letter ‘to live together inpeace and to work in partnership and harmony withour distinguished and renowned friend, R. Aharon...Why, then, should you turn away [from him] ? ... Setaside evil thoughts, that there be no schism betweenyou’—^was, at the time when this letter was written.presentatives and Rabbanim of neighbouring WhiteRussia was convened in Shklov, in White Russia.This assembly issued the first public anti-hasidic pro-clamation drawing the attention of the communalleaders, and in particular of the Gaon of Vilna, tothe danger in the new movement.^® From a letter writ-ten by R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi to R. Avraham ofKalisk (Kolishki, in White Russia) we learn that thisassembly took place in the winter of 1771-1772.^® Itwas called primarily on account of the strange con-duct of R. Avraham of Kalisk, on his return homefrom the beth midrash of Mezerich. His strange anticswhile praying (‘turning repeated somersaults,’ and thelike) and his contemptuous and abusive attitude totalmudic scholars outraged not only the Rabbanimbut even the Great Maggid himself. R. Avraham andhis followers were popularly known as the Talk[=530] hasidim, with reference to the year 5530 [==1769-1770], when they first made their appearance inKalisk. The above-mentioned letter by R. Shneur-Zalman goes on to state that in the ensuing publicdebate between the communal leaders and the Mag-gid's disciples, R. Avraham of Kalisk was obliged toapologise. The Shklov assembly of 1771 decided topersecute the hasidim, and appealed to the Gaon ofVilna for his support.®®In spite of the persecutions and the general atmos-phere of hatred all around them, the Karlin hasidim,led by R. Aharon, continued their vigourous propa-gation of hasidic doctrine among the Jews of Lithu-ania. The collection of anti-hasidic writings known asZemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim, published in 1772,not one of the mithnagdim but, on the contrary, closelyconnected with hasidism in Pinsk and with the GreatMaggid of Mezerich and a friend of R. Aharon andR. Shelomo of Karlin.With regard to the problem of the date of the pene-tration of hasidism into Lithuania, v. Tishby’s view:‘Ha-Rayon ha-Meshihi ve-ha-Megammoth ha-Meshihi-yoth bi-Tsemihath ha-Hasiduth/ Zion, 32nd year, p. 23,Jerusalem 1967; and cf., ibid. (pp. 16-24) on R. She-muel the son of R. Eliezer of Kalvariya and his bookDarkhei Noam.18 ^Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim/ published byDubnow, op. cit., pp. 24, 25; Heilman, op. cit., p. 85.16 Heilman, op. cit., p. 85.20 There is a legend among hasidim that in theShklov debate the hasidim were represented by R. Aha-ron the Great, but there is no historical substantiationfor this. On the name ‘Talk hasidim* see: D. T. Hilman,Iggeroth Baal ha-Tanya, p. 156 ff., Jerusalem 1953;Heilman, op. cit., Pt. I, p. 8, n. 1.82W. Z. RABINOWITSCHgives US a picture of contemporary hasidism as seenby the mithnagdim. In this volume the hasidim arereferred to as ‘Karliners': ‘Lament for the hasidim ofthis time who are called Mezerichers and Karliners.’^^The hasidim in Vilna were also called ‘Karliners^: ‘Itwas resolved to drive out and scatter forthwith theKarliner minyan [in Vilna]We also read that ‘inthese times we have heard to our sore amazement ofthe flourishing of the wicked in the Province of Lithu-ania, how they have multiplied and become verystrong... And because of our many transgressionsthe plague has spread to every province, and to everycity.’^^ The hasidim formed their own minyanim[prayer quorums], so as to be able to follow the Se-phardi form of prayer and to pray with their customarynoisy fervour. They distributed large numbers ofbroadsheets containing the tenets of hasidism, and per-haps also propaganda letters from R. Aharon, who wasnot permitted to preach the hasidic doctrine publiclyand freely, like his comrades in the south. Thesesheets, however, have not been preserved, since themithnagdim, as is clear from their own broadsheets,used to burn all hasidic writings that they could layh^nds on.^^‘It was already the custom, in those early days, fora hasidic leader to wear white garments on Sabbathsand Festivals.^® His disciples would assemble in hishome—so hasidic tradition relates—for the ‘thirdmeal’ [eaten on the Sabbath in the late afternoon]and i\it melaveh malkah [gathering of hasidim on theSabbath night to eat and to sing liturgical songs to-gether]. Then the Rebbe would deliver a discourse,and his assembled followers would sing zemiroth [li-turgical poems]. According to the tradition of theKarlin hasidim, these customs were already practisedby R. Aharon the Great. These, then, would be thefirst signs of tsaddikism. However, in the actual writ-21 ^Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim/ in Dubnow,op. cit.f p. 25.22 Ihid.23 lUd., p. 21, 22.24 md.y p. 11 ff. and p. 26.25 Ihid., p. 14:\Maimons LehensgescMchte, p. 203. TheTsaddik R. Aharon the Second of Karlin (the grandsonof R. Aharon the Great) used to relate the followinghasidic tradition: ‘My revered Grandfather... used toset on the table in front of his holy teacher [sc. R.Baer] twelve haloth [round loaves] at every meal ofthe holy Sabbath’ (Beth Aharon, by R. Aharon of Kar-lin, p. 289, Brody 1875).ings of R. Aharon the Great—his letter and will—there is no allusion to any such cult of the Tsaddik.The tendency of the hasidim to segregate them-selves from the rest of the community greatly alarmedthe Lithuanian communal leaders and Rabbanim, whofeared the appearance of a new messianic movement.The hasidic demand that ritual slaughtering be per-ormed with ‘polished knives’ also aroused great in-dignation. In the larger cities—^Vilna, Minsk andShklov—the hasidim began to be severely harassed.R. Mendel of Vitebsk, who was then living in Minsk,travelled to Vilna in an attempt to see the Gaon, R.Eliyahu, but was not received by him.^® Karlin is notmentioned in contemporary documents, even thoughin Karlin R. Aharon had his own house of prayerand hasidic community, and his followers flocked tohim from the whole surrounding district.^'^ His mostimportant disciples in those days were his friend andfuture successor, R. Shelomo of Karlin, and R.Hayyim-Heikel of Amdur.^® They were both drawnto hasidism through the influence of R. Aharon andsubsequently became disciples of the Great Maggid,The increasing success of hasidism in Lithuaniabrought home to the leaders of Lithuanian Jewry thealarming realisation that what they were confrontedwith was not just a series of isolated incidents, but alarge-scale popular movement. After the Passover Feshtival in 1772 the first herem against the hasidim wasproclaimed, on the authority of the Gaon of Vilna,in every beth midrash and synagogue in Vilna. Theprayer-houses of the hasidim were forcibly closed,their preachers assaulted, and their writings burnt.^®Moreover, the formation of new hasidic groups wasproclaimed unlawful. The Vilna community furtherpublished a manifesto, signed by the Gaon, calling onthe four other principal Lithuanian communities(Pinsk, Grodno, Brest-Litovsk, Slutsk) and on thoseof White Russia (Shklov and Minsk) to outlaw thehasidim, as the Vilna community had done, and topersecute them relentlessly.^®At the very time when the Vilna hasidim were be-23 ^Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim/ ibid., pp. 10,24, 25 ff.; Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 113, n. 4.27 See above the account by Maimon of pilgrimagesto the Tsaddik.28 Cf. W. Z. Rabinowitsch, Lithuanian Hasidism,Chap. 3, p. 121-149, London 1970.29 *Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim/ ibid., p. 11 ff.30 /bid., p. 12 ff., 21 ff.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN83ing subjected to persecution and excommunication,^^there occurred in Karlin an event which was to havea great effect on the future development of Karlinhasidism and of Lithuanian hasidism in general. Onthe fourth intermediate day of Passover, 19th Nisan,1772, R. Aharon the Great died suddenly in Karlin,at the early age of thirty-six. The Karlin hasidismthus found themselves bereft of their Teacher andRebbe, while the hasidic movement as a whole lostone of its most important leaders and the Great Mag-gid one of his most loyal and active disciples. ^TheTsaddik, R. Aharon the Great, was devoured by theflame of piety that burnt in him,^ said the hasidim toone another.^2R. Aharon the Great^s personality is revealed inhis ‘Exhortations,’ his letter and his will,^^ as well asin sayings and thoughts attributed to him and legendstold about him.^^ The Besht, as is reported, hadbased his doctrine on three loves. Every one of hisdisciples subsequently concentrated all his efforts andaspirations on one of these three: to R. Levi-Yitshakof Berdichev the most important principle was thelove of Israel; for R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi, thefounder of the Habad school of hasidism, it was loveof the Torah; and for R. Aharon the Great it was thelove of the Creator—‘bringing Israel closer to theirheavenly Father,’ as he wrote in his will. R. Aharon’sstrong sense of religious awe transported him into astate of constant spiritual devotion and mysticalecstasy. According to hasidic tradition, R. Shneur-Zal-man of Ladi said of him: ‘R. Aharon’s fear of theHoly One Blessed Be He was like the fear of a con-demned man who stands bound to the stake while asoldier in front of him aims the arrow at him, and hesees the head of the arrow leaving the bow and speed-ing towards him. Such was his fear in small matters.In great matters, it was beyond all conceiving.’ Hasidic31 Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 114.32 M. H. Kleinman, Mazkereth Shem Ha-Gedolhn,p. 7, Petrokov 1908; Kehal Hasidim, pp. 53, 54 (noplace and date of publication).33 Tsavaah mi-Kethoveth Yad Kodesh... R. Aharon.,. mi-Karlin ... ve-Hanhagoth... mi-Beno ... R. Asher...mi-Karlin, Chernovits, 1849, 1855; Beth Aharon, pp.1, 11, 15-16, 293.34 On the legends concerning R. Aharon’s religiousfeeling see: Heilman, op. cit., p. 127; M. H. Kleinman,Zikhron la-Rishonim, pp. 22-45, Petrokov 1912;Mazkereth Shem ha-Gedolim, pp. 6-13; Kehal Hasidimhe-Hadash passim, Lemberg 1904; [M. Bodek], Sederha-Doroth mi-Talmidei ha-Besht, p. 35 (no place andlegend further relates that, whenever R. Aharon re-cited the Song of Songs, there would be a commotionin Heaven and the angels would cease singing theirpaeans of praise to the Holy One Blessed Be He andgather together to listen to R. Aharon’s holy melody.The ecstatic fervour which is still seen to this day inthe praying of the Karlin hasidim is said by the ha-sidim themselves to take its origin from R. Aharon theGreat.R. Aharon demanded that every one of his dis-ciples should ‘shut himself up in solitude in a specialroom for one day of every week and spend the timein fasting, repentance and study of the Torah... Andif possible, he should shut himself up alone every day.Even without fasting let him take care to withdrawfor not less than an hour, and let him make confessionto his Creator and entreat His forgiveness.’^® Thisshows that R. Aharon did not completely shake offthe kabbalistic tendency to asceticism. He himself usedto fast frequency, though he would warn his disciplesagainst excessive fasting. In a letter to one of his dis-ciples he writes: ‘Frequent fasts, ascetic practices, andritual immersions are a device of the evil impulse todistract you from your study and prayer, to makeyou pray with a weakened body and a confusedmind.’^® To his advice to his disciples to study thevolume Reshith Hokhmah he adds: ‘You shall carryout all that is written in it, except the self-mortifica-tions and fasts prescribed in it, and then it will bewell with you.’^'^ R. Aharon also required of his dis-ciples that they should study the Aggadah, a demandthat was also alien to the Lithuanian Jew who wasprimarily interested in the Halakhah. In his ‘Exhor-tations’ R. Aharon writes: ‘Beware of pride and angereven in the performance of a mitsvah, still more ofdissension (Heaven forbid!), and be particularly care-ful in this even with one’s own family.’^® ‘ “KnowHim in all your ways” means that eating, drinking,sleeping, and sexual intercourse are all to be directedonly to the worship of the Creator, blessed be HisName.’^®R. Aharon the Great was the author of the lyricalSabbath song ^Yah Ekhsof Noam Shabbath^ [‘Lord,date of publication).35 Beth Aharon, p. 1.36 Op. cit., p. 293.37 Ibid.38 Op. cit., p. 1.33 Ibid.84W. Z. RABINOWITSCHI yearn for the Sabbath’s delight’], a poem filled withspiritual love and religious longings.This liturgical poem was sung by the adherentsof Karlin hasidism and its offshoots—Lakhovich, Koi-danov, Kobrin, Slonim and others—privately in theirown homes, or all together on the Sabbath eve and atHhe third meal’.^® The Karlin hasidim have abouttwenty different tunes for his song^^ which is calledby them simply Ha-Zemer Vthe liturgical poem’]. Oneof these tunes has become widely known as Ha-Niggunha-Kadosh [Hhe holy tune’]. There are also hasidicstories about R. Aharon’s special customs on SimhathTorah.^^In hasidic tradition R. Aharon is described as pos-sessing a keen capacity to distinguish ‘between pureand impure.’ He could also discern lofty souls in simpleJews and, on the contrary, lay bare the true characterof hypocrites. This is why the Great Maggid used fre-quently to send him out ‘to purge away impurity.The apocryphal hasidic literature contains various say-ing and ideas attributed to R. Aharon the Great^^Op. cit., p. 11. The ‘Zemer’ was subsequently in-cluded among the Sabbath songs in several siddurim[prayer-books], such as the following: Beth Yaakov,compiled by R. Yaakov Emden, p. 318, Warsaw 1881;the collection of Sabbath songs, Sheloshah Sefarim Nif-tahim... ed. by Y. A. L. Oppenheim ... p. 60, Petrokov1910; the Koidanov siddur, Or ha-Yashar, Vilna 1928;cf. W. Z. Rabinowitsch, ibid., chap. 4, n. 32; the siddurZemiroth le-Shabbathoth ve-Yamim Tovim, publishedby A.B., Jerusalem 1947.Entsiklopediyah Yisraelith (Eshkol), Vol. I, s.v.Aharon Ben Yaakov mi-Karlin, Berlin 1929; A. Ben-Ezra, Ha-Yenuka^ mi-Stolin, New York 1951; Horodets,edited by A. Ben-Ezra and Y. Zusman, p. 52, New York1949; M. S. Geshuri, ^Niggunei Karlin u-Stolin/ Stolin,Sefer Zikkaron, edited by A. Avatihi and Y. Zakai,p. 167, Tel Aviv 1952.42 Kleinman, Zikhron la-Rishonim, p. 28.43 Shivhei ha-Besht, edited by Horodezki, p. 38, Ber-lin 1922.44 Besides the works listed in n.34, hasidic literaturecontains many other stories about R. Aharon the Great.There is reason to suspect that the hasidim were notparticularly careful in their handing down of the de-tails and mixed up words spoken by R. Aharon theGreat with those spoken by one of his descendants,especially by his grandson, R. Aharon the Second.As regards the vidduy [confession] printed in BethAharon (pp. 12-15) as the personal confession of R.Aharon the Great, it has already been proved by Y.Tishby that this is merely a copy of an original com-posed by the author of the book Hemdath Yamim.Tishby rightly maintains that R. Aharon the Greatwhich, though of doubtful authenticity, combine togive us a picture of his character and his influence onhis adherents down the generations. Thus, he is re-ported to have said that melancholy is not a sin, butthat it dulls the heart more than the gravest sin. ‘Andwhat is actually the source of melancholy? It is whenI feel I am entitled to something or lack something,physical or spiritual. But all this is my own good.And what of it, if I lack something? What really mat-ters is that God should not be deprived of His due.’R. Aharon distinguishes between ‘melancholy, which isa bad quality, and bitterness which is really wilful-ness, because I have not made a start on doing gooddeeds. For nothing in the world, no matter how min-ute, can be achieved without devotion. And since Ihad no devotion, I have done nothing, and thereforeI do not deserve anything; so that I cannot main-tain that I lack anything. Nevertheless, I breatheGod’s air and have what I require. This in itselfshould make us happy. Hence bitterness is good.’ R.Aharon expatiates on this point: ‘There are someyoung scholars that think they are bitter, when in factthey are simply melancholy. A man must know howto distinguish between these two conditions. After thesoul-searching that comes from melancholy, a man goesto sleep, being unable to bear himself, much less hisfriend, and seething with anger. But after the soul-searching that comes from bitterness, a man cannotsleep. For what actually is bitterness? The recognitionthat you have not begun to do good deeds. So youforthwith make haste and set yourself to study andprayer. Now you feel that you are a Jew. You enjoyseeing another Jew. Nevertheless, you must know thatonly a hair’s breadth separates bitterness from melan-choly. The most spiritual bitterness touches on melan-choly, while even the coarsest joy springs from holi-ness.In another place, the following words are at-tributed to him: ‘When we speak of the value of joy-fulness, we do not mean the joy that comes from theperformance of the mitsvahy since this joy is alreadycopied the confession out into his own siddur, and thatthe hasidim mistakenly thought that he was the authorof it (TarbitSj Year 15, p. 175, note, Jerusalem 1944).This mistaken assumption is implied in the introductoryremarks to the confession in Beth Aharon: ‘Copiedletter for letter from the wording of the confession inhis holy siddur^ (Beth Aharon, p. 12).45 These sayings about melancholy and joyfulnessare of Yiddish origin. Kleinman, Zikhron la-Rishonim,p. 13.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN85a higher degree which not every Jew can be requiredto attain to. What we mean is the denial of melan-choly. Quite simply, a Jew who is not happy with hislot as a Jew is ungrateful to God. It shows that he hasnever once heard the blessing, ^‘That hast not mademe a Gentile.’’ But when he examines himself to seeif he is a hasid or not, that is pride. What does itmatter if he is a hasid or not? He is a Jew.’^®R. Aharon’s humility and self-effacement are illus-trated by the following story. On one occasion, one ofthe disciples of the Great Maggid happened to passthrough Karlin on his way home from a visit to hismaster in Mezerich. His desire to see R. Aharon wasso great that he decided to call on him, even thoughit was the middle of the night. So he went and knockedon the window of R. Aharon’s house and called: ^Aha-ron, open the door to me!’ When R. Aharon asked whowas there, the other answered simply, ‘I,’ because hewas sure that R. Aharon would recognise him by hisvoice. But R. Aharon did not reply, and did not openthe door. Again the disciple knocked, and again R.Aharon made no response. Then the disciple asked:‘Aharon, why do you not want to open the door tome?’ To this R. Aharon replied: ‘Who is it that ar-rogantly calls himself “I”, an appellation fitting andproper only to the Holy One Blessed Be He?’ Tn thatcase,’ said the disciple to himself, ‘I have not yetlearnt anything from my Teacher,’ and he at oncereturned to Mezerich.^”^Hasidic doctrine has its own special definition ofhumility. Man is merely dust and ashes, and musttherefore never forget his own imperfection in com-parison with the perfection of the Creator; yet, at thesame time, he must also know that he is the son ofa King. True humility consists in the proper syn-thesis of these two perceptions. This was the kind ofmodesty possessed by R. Aharon the Great. In his willhe calls himself ‘the greatest of sinners and worstof offenders’; but, at the same time, he enjoins ‘thatmy place of rest shall have a clear space, four cubitswide, left all around it—that is to say, that no oneshall be buried within four cubits of my grave, unlessThese sayings about melancholy, bitterness, andjoyfulness are also attributed, verbatim, to the TsaddikR. Hanokh of Alexander. A. Z. Eshkoli, ^Ha-Hasiduthhe-Polin/ in the book Beth YIsrael he-Polin, Pt. II,p. 129, ed. I. Halpern, Jerusalem 1953.This idea is also attributed to the Tsaddik R. Mor-dekhai of Lakhovich. M. H. Kleinman, Or Yesharim,p. 30, Petrokov 1924.nK'iT!jriy Niynsvwnw9'pw V110 u»np Dpi?K V'w 'pTp.*)D7ipDJCD1C7p 0^ Xf)'nmn... nW'rtrum ^a’VT n"n i"jnniH n"B n"y Hn’on Kw’np Ni'xu oon^n?"pwid’Ddw didtd noby'-p my3*1^3 \finn pnv’ , ^' ,ro73ftp»Dbii23n1S55.®ebnt(ff bet Sobann Sdbotbt uitb©obn.Title-page of the “Testament” of R. Aharonthe Great of Karlin(Chernovits 1855)it be someone whom you know I would certainly havewanted as my close neighbour. If anyone wishes totransgress this injunction and to bury there someonewhom it is known I certainly would not have agreedto have as a close neighbour, let him know that, justas in my life in this world I zealously punished anywho sinned against the Creator, so will he be punishedby the zealous God of vengeance... I further enjointhat no words of praise shall be spoken of me. Who-ever wishes to speak ill of me may do so, and I herebygive him leave; but let him know full well that, if heutters any falsehood, he will be judged for it in thecourt of heaven . .. Only the true disciples of ourTeacher and Master [sc. R. Baer], the God-fearingand perfect ones, may speak such praises of me asthey know for a certainty to be true and may intercede[sc. with God] on my behalf. But they too, must beextremely careful in any matter wherein they are notcertain of what was my real intention. The best wouldbe for them not to speak at all... Immediately afterthe seven days [of mourning], a memorial stone shall86HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLINbe erected on my grave, but no honorific titles shallbe inscribed on it. Only the following shall be engrav-ed on the stone: Here lies so and so, who was himselfvouchsafed Divine grace and was several times grantedto obtain it for others, devotedly sacrificing himselffor this purpose,^® according to his own understanding,in order to obtain Divine grace for the many; and whoused to admonish the masses with a sternness thatconcealed an inner love, in order to bring all Jewscloser to their heavenly Father and join them to Himin a perfect union.To his disciples he addressed the following lastwish: ^All those that have ever learnt from me aThe Grave of R. Aharon the Great of KarlinPhotographed in 1932This may be an allusion to the persecutions R.Aharon experienced at the hands of the mithnagdim.The fact that he had prepared his will at the age of 36perhaps indicates that his death was not a sudden one.Or perhaps it is to be explained by the belief that aman should face every day as his last.Beth Aharon, p. 15. Up to destruction of the Pinskcommunity (1941-1942) these words could be read onthe gravestone of R. Aharon in the Karlin cemetery.single letter of Divine worship, I do most solemnlyand earnestly request them, as if I were actually stand-ing in person in their presence . .. every day for awhole year [after my death] to study at least two orthree lines of Aggadah.’B. R, Shelomo of Karlin (1772-1792)The year 1772 was a hard year for the hasidicmovement as a whole, and in particular for Karlin ha-sidism. After the Passover Festival of that year, thefirst herem against the hasidim was proclaimed inVilna. Three weeks after the proclamation of the he-rem, the Vilna community sent letters to the Brisk[Brest-Litovsk] communityand to the other com-munities in Lithuania and White Russia®^ informingthem of the step taken. At the instigation of the Vilnacommunity, a herem was now also proclaimed inBrody. The Pinsk community, too, must undoubtedlyhave received the broadsheet announcing the excomrmunication of the hasidim, for in the minutes foundin the Vilna communal archives we read: ‘The leadersof the five principal communities in Lithuania havealready taken measures to put a stop to this aberra-tion, in the year [51532 [ = 1772].’®^ At the sametime, the collection of anti-hasidic writings, ZemirAritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim, was circulated among Li-thuanian Jewry. The Lithuanian communities werenow divided by a spirit of bitter factional strife. Inthe hasidic camp the worst sufferers were the Karlinhasidim, who lost their leader, R. Aharon the Great,just at that time when the Vilna kahal forcibly dis-persed the ‘Karlin minyan!At the end of 1772, in the month of Kislev, thehasidic movement suffered a further blow with thedeath of its teacher and leader, the Great Maggid ofMezerich. The same year saw the first partition ofPoland, which resulted in the severance of White Rus-sia from Lithuania. In consequence of this great poli-tical change, the Karlin hasidim were largely deprivedof the spiritual and organisational support which theyhad been receiving from the hasidim in neighbouringWhite Russia led by R. Mendel of Vitebsk and R. Yis-rael of Polotsk. The new political frontier did not,it is true, cut off the Jews on either side of it from allcommunication with each other. Thus, for example.50 * Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim^ Dubnow, op.cit., p. 21 ff.51 Op. cit,, pp. 12, 23.52 Graetz, op. cit„ Vol. XI, p. 557.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN87the decisions on religious questions and on points ofMosaic law handed down by the Beth-Din of the Briskor Vilna community®^ were still binding on all theJewish communities. Similarly, the relations betweenthe Lithuanian hasidim and their counterparts inWhite Russia continued uninterrupted. But since themain attack on hasidism was launched in Lithuania,the Karlin hasidim suffered more than those in WhiteRussia. It was not until after the second and thirdpartitions of Poland, in 1793 and 1795, that the tworegions were once again united under Russian rule.The war against the hasidim was jointly waged bythe Rabbanim and the heads of the kahal, which con-tinued to be recognised by the secular authorities evenafter the abolition of the Vaad ha-Medinah (1761).®^Thus, for example, the anti-hasidic broadsheets weresigned not only by the Rabbanim, but also by com-munal leaders,^^ and sometimes—as in the case of thebroadsheets of 1781—even by the latter alone.®® Thesheets were sent from one town to another addressedto both the Rabbanim and the kahal?’^ The partici-pation of the leaders of the kahal in these anti-hasidicactivities provoked the hasidim into a deliberate at-tempt to shake off the kahaVs jurisdiction, a strugglein which they were considerably helped by the generaldissatisfaction of the masses with the rule of the ka-hal. The fight against the kahal was begun by theKarlin hasidim and ended in their complete emanci-pation from its control (1793), but only after a longand bitter struggle.Prompted by the ^bans’ of 1772, the mithnagdimproceeded to hound the hasidim^ spying on them, boy-cotting them socially, and refusing to intermarry withthem. The kahal forcibly closed their prayer-houses,and the hasidim were compelled to say their prayersand hold their meetings clandestinely. In this criticalperiod, the heavy task of the physical and spiritualleadership of the hasidim was assumed by R. Aharonthe Great’s most devoted disciple, R. Shelomo, towhom the Karlin hasidim turned for protection. Heheaded the Karlin movement throughout these53 j, Hessen, Istoriya Yevreyskogo Naroda v Rossii,Vol. I, p. 54, Leningrad 1925.54 Hessen, op. cit., p. 49 f.55 ^Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim/ op. cit., p. 23.56 Cf., the Pinsk and Slutsk herem, published byE. T. Zweifel, Shalom dl YIsrael, Pt. II, pp. 41, 42,Zhitomir 1869.57 *Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim/ op. cit., pp.21, 22.troubled years (1772-1792).After a life full of sufferinghe was driven out of his native town, Karlin, and dieda martyr’s death in his place of banishment, Ludmir[ Vladimir-Volhynsk].R. Shelomo, the son of R. Meir Halevi of Karlin,was born, according to hasidic tradition, in 1738.®® Ofhis birthplace and childhood nothing certain is known.Even hasidic records on these points are very scanty.®®Like his teacher, R. Aharon the Great, R. Shelomowas also one of the Great Maggid’s chief disciples,and he is mentioned by the Maggid in the latter’s let-ter to the Pinsk Moreh-Tsedek, R. Eliezer Halevi.®®When R. Aharon set up his beth midrash in Karlin,R. Shelomo became one of his most devoted dis-ciples,®^ and used to travel together with him to Me-zerich. And when, after R. Aharon’s death, R. Shelomotook over the leadership of the Karlin hasidim, hemade himself responsible for the upbringing of R.Aharon’s son, R. Asher, who was to be the next Tsad-dik in the Karlin dynasty founded by his father.At this very same time (1772-1773), another ofthe Great Maggid^s disciples, R. Hayyim-Heikel, whowas also a disciple of R. Aharon’s and had in hisyouth been a hazzan [synagogue cantor] in Karlin,established another hasidic centre in Lithuania—^inthe small town of Amdur [Indura, near Grodno]. R.Hayyim-Heikel’s extreme and uncompromising anti-rabbinism still further exacerbated the relations be-tween Rabbanim and hasidim in Lithuania.®® Karlinand Amdur were the two main strongholds of Lithu-anian hasidism in those critical days. In the otherparts of Lithuania, especially in Vilna and the regionof Polesia, the hasidim were few in number. This diffi-58 Kleinman, Mazkereth Shem ha-Gedolim, p. 63;W. Z. Rabinowitsch, ^Min ha-Genizah ha-Stolinaith/Zion, 5th year, p. 244; Kleinbaum, Shema Shelomo,Pt. II, p. 1, note and p. 58.53 Kleinbaum, op. cit., Pt. II, passim.63 [Bodek], Seder ha-Doroth mi-Talmidei ha-Besht,p. 37; Valden, Shem ha-Gedolim he-Hadash, MaarekhethSefarim, p. 69; s.v.: Reiah ha-Sadeh, Warsaw 1874.Cf., supr.61 There is a hasidic story that, before R. Shelomobecame a disciple of the Great Maggid, R. Aharon saidto the Maggid: T have a young man in Karlin, namedShelomo, who, when he recites the Psalms on YomKippur after the Kol Nidrei, leaves no holy spark inPoland, Lithuania and White Russia which he does notbring before the throne of glory' (Kleinbaum, op. cit.,Pt. II, p. 3).62 V. supr., n. 28.88W. Z. RABINOWITSCHcult period in the history of Lithuanian hasidism iswell summed up in Solomon Maimon’s statement:^All that now remained of this sect was a few isolatedand scattered remnants.’®^In White Russia at this time were living R. Men-del of Vitebsk, R. Yisrael of Polotsk, R. Avraham ofKalisk, and R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi, then still ayoung man. The main hasidic leader in this regionwas R. Baer’s elderly disciple, R. Mendel of Vitebsk(who was also known as R. Mendel of Minsk) and, laterR. Mendel of Horodok, Still in the Great Maggid*slifetime, R. Mendel had taken up residence in Minskin the ‘Province of Lithuania,’ and made it his centrefor the propagation of hasidic doctrine. In the smallvolume Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim, publishedin 1772, we read the following: .. the holy commune*ity of Minsk where dwells the symbol of bigotry...in whose company there is a band of wicked men,like R. Mendel of Minsk. On this R. Mendel we havethe testimony of two and more witnesses [that he hasdone] disgraceful and ugly deeds such as are forbiddenin Israel...’ From a deposition made by a mithnagedin the year 1772, we learn that Minsk was then ahasidic pilgrimage centre: ‘R. Hirsch the son of R.Iser of Horodno [Grodno] wrote down all the names[of the men] .. . who wanted to travel to Minsk, and[the mithnagdim] prevented them from going.’ The‘house of the hasidim’ in Minsk, which served as arefuge for the persecuted adherents of the movement,is also mentioned by R. David of Makov.®^ It is quitepossible that R. Mendel’s presence and activities inMinsk were among the factors that decided the Minskkahal to intensify its attacks on the hasidim just atthat time. R. Mendel was forced by the harassment63 Maimon, op. cit., p. 210.64 ^Zemir Aritsim^... etc., op. cit, pp. 12, 26; SheverPosheim and Zimrath Am ha-Arets, cited by Dubnow,Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, pp. 369, 447.Dubnow discussed the authorship of these collectionsof polemical writings: Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth,pp. 412-417; Sefer Shimon Dubnow, ^Mikhtevei Dubnowel Pinhas Torberg/ ed. S. Rawidowicz, pp. 353-361,London 1954. An attempt to decide this question ismade by A. Rubinstein, ^Shever Posheim le-R, Davidmi-Makov—Zoth Torath ha-Kanauth le-R. Yehezkel mi-Radzimin/ Kiryath Sefer, Vol. XXXV, pp. 240-249, Je-rusalem 1960; Idem, ^Ha-Kuntres Zimrath Am ha-Arets*^ bi-Kethav-Yad/ Aresheth, ed. N. Ben-Menahemand Y. Rafael, Vol. Ill, p. 193 ff., Jerusalem 1961. Cf.:Wilensky, M., Hasidim u-Mithnagdim, passim, Jerusa-lem 1970.of the mithnagdim to leave Minsk and take up resid-ence in the small town of Horodok (close to Vitebsk).R. Mendel’s forced departure from Minsk took placeabout ten years before R. Shelomo’s banishment fromKarlin and R. Levi-Yitshak’s expulsion from Pinsk.In c. 1775 R. Mendel of Vitebsk and R. Shneur-Zalman went to Vilna in an attempt to explain thetenets of hasidism to the Gaon and to make peacebetween the two warring factions. But the Gaon re-fused to see them. They then tried to meet the mith-nagdim of Shklov for the same purpose, but there, too,they were rebuffed.®^ As a result of this hostile attitudeon the part of the mithnagdim, the leaders of the ha-sidim in White Russia, with the sole exception of R.Shneur-Zalman, decided in 1777 to emigrate to Pales-tine. Since R. Shneur-Zalman maintained that he wasnot yet fit to be their Rebbe, the hasidim of WhiteRussia were left without a leader and used to addresstheir enquiries to R. Mendel of Vitebsk in farawayPalestine.®® In this interregnum (1777-1781)—‘be-tween one king and the next,’ to use the hasidic ex-pression—R. Shelomo of Karlin began to extend hisinfluence into White Russia, and many hasidim therechose him as their Rebbe.®'^Preserved among the hasidic writings is a letterof farewell from R. Shelomo to the hasidim of Shklovin White Russia. He writes as a Tsaddik and leader tohis followers: T beseech the Lord that they [sc. the ha-sidim living in Shklov] may be granted grace throughme and no one else.’®® This provides further evidrence that the links between the Jews in the two north-ern provinces of Lithuania and Reissen were not brok-en by the political partition of Poland: R. Mendel ofVitebsk and R. Shneur-Zalman travel to the VilnaGaon to debate the doctrines of hasidism with him,and conversely R. Shelomo of Karlin’s influence pene-trates from Lithuania, across the frontiers of Poland,into White Russia.Found amongst the ‘holy writings’ in the Stolingenizah is the following letter from R. Shelomo ofKarlin to R. Aharon of Vitebsk:‘Greetings to my very dear friend, the learnedand renowned hasid . .. R. Aharon Segal, may his lightshine outl65 Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 133 ff.; Hilman,Iggeroth Baal ha-Tanya, p. 95.66 Peri ha-Arets, by R. Mendel of Vitebsk, at the endof the volume, Kopys 1814.67 Heilman, Beth Rabbi, Pt. I, p. 128.68 Idem, ibid.W. 2. RABINOWITSCH89^Now... about the matter that has occurred inyour province I have much to say to your honour,only it is not possible to explain everything in writ-ing, but only face to face. However, the truth is withus, for God performs wonders unaided, even againstthe laws of nature ... in all places and at all times.Fare you well. From him who prays that the love ofthe Creator shall be shown to Israel,Shelomo, the son of... R. Meir Segal of blessed me-mory.‘I request you to send me two glass bottles.^The letter bears no date nor does R. Shelomospecify what he means by The matter that has occur-red in your province [sc. Reissen: Vitebsk].^ But pos-sibly this letter, which is addressed to one of R. She-lomo’s followers or supporters, belongs to the periodunder discussion.®^As is well known, it early became one of the mostimportant principles of hasidism for every hasidicgroup to be headed by a leader and teacher. Henceit was inconceivable for any such group to exist with-out a Rebbe, i.e., without a Tsaddik. The anti-hasidicbroadsheets of 1781 show us how significant the roleof the Tsaddik was even in those early days.'^® Hencethe great importance of R. Shelomo of Karlin for thenow leaderless hasidim of White Russia. The condi-tions of the time made it impossible for R. Shelomoto extend the influence of the hasidic movement; andindeed any such attempt would have been foreign tohis wholly pacific temperament. His task was the moremodest one of holding together and strengthening thealready existing groups of hasidim in White Russia,by becoming their Rebbe after their own Tsaddikimhad left them to fend for themselves.In these same years—up to 1781—Karlin hasidismgradually began to provide itself with a proper intern-al organisation. During a lull in the attacks of themithnagdim, R. Shelomo was able to devote himselfto the task of giving Karlin hasidism its own distinct-ive form. He placed special emphasis on two principles.The first of these was the manner of praying that hehad taken over from his own teacher, R. Aharon—with the maximum of intellectual intensity [kavva-nah], emotional fervour, and spiritual devotion. ‘ForRabinowitsch, ^Min ha-Genizah ha^Stolinaith/ Zi-on, 5th year, p. 244; Hilman, op. cit., pp. 32, 107, 177.Cf. infr., the comment on this letter.70 Zweifel, op. cit., Pt. II, pp. 37, 38: The wording ofthe Grodno herem.he used to move mountains with the power of hisprayer, since he devoted his whole soul to the Al-mighty.’ Hasidic tradition relates that, when a friendonce invited R. Shelomo for the following day, he re-plied: ‘You stupid man! This evening I must say theevening prayer and read the Shema, which means de-voting my spirit to God. Then comes sleep, and thenext day I must pray again, and in prayer there areseveral worlds till the reading of the Shema is reached.And then there is prostration in prayer, which is alsoa devoting of the spirit to God, and it is still uncertainwhether the Almighty will grant my wish [sc. to remainalive]. Yet you want me to promise you that I shallcome to your house tomorrow 1 ’ A similar story is alsotold of R. Uri of Strelisk, a devoted disciple of R.Shelomo of Karlin. It is related that, before going tosay the morning prayer, he used every day to take afond farewell of his wife and children and tell themhis last wishes, in case he should depart this lifewhile praying, as a result of the intensity of his de-votion to God idevekuth). To illustrate the intensityof R. Shelomo’s belief in the power of prayer, par-ticularly of his own prayers, the hasidim relate that,once it was charged in the Court of Heaven that thechildren of Israel were no longer praying with truekavvanah. A certain king therefore determined toforbid all prayer. In the commotion that ensued, theTsaddikim in Heaven were first asked if they agreedto the decree. Then R. Shelomo of Karlin was asked.He prayed with such fervour that, when he passion-ately declared that he undertook to pray for all Israel,the decree was forthwith annulled.These and similar stories, as well as various teach-ings attributed to R. Shelomo, show that the ‘Karlinmanner of prayer’ was his creation. From his corres-pondence with R. Shneur-Zalman we learn that R.Shelomo ‘used to despise the natural piety [i.e., thenon-ecstatic prayer]’ of the mithnagdim all aroundhim. R. Aharon the Great, the thinker, taught thatevery act performed by man on earth should be a kindof Divine worship or prayer. R. Shelomo on the otherhand, the man of feeling, is said to have taught thatall other acts are only ways leading to the true wor-ship of the Creator which is prayer, and prayer istherefore of greater importance than anything else.He is reported to have said that the greatest miracleis to teach a single Jew to pour out his heart to theAlmighty.The second main principle developed by R. She-90W. 2. RABINOWITSCHlomo in Karlin hasidism was the concept of tsaddik-ism. The essence of this idea was that the Tsaddik isnot merely a spiritual leader and teacher, but alsohas the power to help his followers in wordly affairs.From being a spiritual leader, he thus becomes awonder-working saint. Hasidic tradition, which refersto R. Shelomo as ^the little Baal Shem/ re{)orts himas saying: Tn Heaven a measure is kept of the fieldsand woods traversed by the hasid on his journeys tothe Tsaddik.' In its conception of the Tsaddik, Kar-lin hasidism differs considerably from Habad hasidismand is closer to the southern branch of the movementin Volhynia and Podolia. R. Shelomo’s doctrine withregard to the importance and power of the Tsaddikwas still further developed by R. Asher, his successoras head of the Karlin dynasty, and reached its climaxin the time of R. Asher’s son, R. Aharon the Second.R. Shelomo’s teaching was also propagated after hisdeath by his two most important disciples, besidesR. Asher: R. Mordekhai of Lakhovich, and R. Uri ofStrelisk, ‘the Seraph.’^iThere was orginally nothing at all conceited orvainglorious in this exaggerated conception of theTsaddik s importance. On the contrary, it was ac-companied by a profound awareness of the value ofevery individual Jew, even the most insignificant. Thefollowing parable of R. Shelomo, which R. Aharonthe Second of Karlin was in the habit of quoting,testifies to this remarkable awareness of the great in-dividual worth of every single Jew in the sum totalof the whole Jewish nation: ‘All Israel together are asingle edifice, and every individual Jew is needed tomake this edifice complete. It is like a man who hasto get something lying in a very high place and whohasn’t a ladder to reach that place. What does he do?He stands many men on each other’s backs, from thefloor up to the place where the object he wants islying. Can it be said that a single one of these men,even the smallest of them, is superfluous? If a singleone of them moves, they will all fall down. So it iswith the whole p)eople of Israel. Every single Jewcompletes the edifice, each according to his own sizeand worth, small and great alike, and all togetherthey can ennoble this world and raise it to evergreater spiritual heights.’At this time, the well-known Tsaddik R. Levi-Yitshak (of Berdichev) was Av Beth-Din and RoshYeshivah in Pinsk. This R. Levi-Yitshak was remark-[Bodek,] op. c%t., p. 66-68.able, not only for his own individual interpretationof hasidic doctrine,^^ but also for his talmudic scholar-ship. He was elected Rav in Pinsk in 1775 or 1776,during the lull in the mithnaged attacks on the ha-sidim. The only information that has come down to usabout his pro-hasidic activities consists of a few po-pular legends, according to which the leaders of thekahal were displeased with him for devoting most ofhis time to prayer and the like, instead of dispensinghalakhic rulings. It was evidently the lull in the hos-tilities between mithnagdim and hasidim in the later1770s that made it possible for a Tsaddik like R.Levi-Yitshak, who aspired to putting hasidic doctrineinto practice in his daily life, to be elected Av Beth-Din in Pinsk."^^72 Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 193 ff.; Horo-dezki, Ha-Hasiduth ve-ha~Hasidim, Vol. II, p. 71 andothers.73 Regarding the time when R. Levi-Yitshak wasdriven out of Pinsk we have the following reports:From the approval given by R. Levi-Yitshak to thebook Erkhei ha-Kinnuyim on Lag ha-Omer 1775—which he signed ‘here in the holy community of Zheli-khov’—and from his approval to the book Meir Nathiv,dated the 4th Elul, 1776—^which he signed ^Rav of theholy community of Pinsk’—it may be deduced that R.Levi-Yitshak came to Pinsk between the above twodates (H. Lieberman, Hearoth Bihliografiyoth, Alexan-der Marx Jubilee Volume, p. 15, New York 1943).Among my late father’s papers there is a letter fromS. Dubnow, in which it is mentioned that my fathersaw in Pinsk a pinkas containing the signature of R.Levi-Yitshak in his capacity as the Av Beth-Din ofPinsk and dated the 8th Heshvan [=6th November],1780. But in the writings of the mithnagdim, R. Levi-Yitshak is referred to, even in later years—^the end of1781 and in 1784—as ‘the man of Zhelikhov,’ especiallyby the Rav of Brest-Litovsk, R. Avraham Katzenellen-bogen (Dubnow, ^Kithvei Hithnagduth/ Devir, Vol. I,pp. 304-305, No. 6, Berlin 1923; Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 152, n. 3).In the Stolin genizah there was a legal decisionsigned by R. Levi-Yitshak of Berdichev from the year1780, in the matter of a dispute between two Jews ofPetrikov (a small town not far from Pinsk). Althoughwe do not know in what capacity R. Levi-Yitshaksigned this judgment, it may be presumed that he gavehis verdict as the Av Beth-Din of Pinsk and its dis-trict, which is the title that appears at the head of hisapproval of R. Meir Margalioth’s books, Meir Nethivim(Polonnoye 1791) and Sod Yakhin u-Boaz (Ostrog1794).The evidence of the approvals and other documentsquoted here, to the effect that R. Levi-Yitshak heldthe office of Rav in Zhelikhov before he became Rav ofHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN91However, the wrath of the Lithuanian mithnagdimwas soon aroused again by a combination of factors—the great success of hasidism in the south, the stub-born resistance of the hasidim in the north, and thehasidic attack on the rabbinical method of talmudicstudy and on the whole rabbinical philosophy of life.The leaders of this attack were R. Shelomo of Karlin(as we learn from his correspondence with R. Shneur-Zalman), and also the second Lithuanian Tsaddik ofthat period, R. Hayyim-Heikel of Amdur, and others.Especially infuriating to the mithnagdim was the pub-lication of the first hasidic book, Toledoth YaakovYosef, by R. Yaakov-Yosef of Polonnoye (1780),without the consent of the Rabbonim. The renewedconflict which now (1781) broke out was even bittererthan that of 1772 and the Karlin hasidim were nowpersecuted even more severely.In the summer of 1781, the Lithuanian commu-nities for the second time proclaimed a herem on thehasidim. At about the same time, R. Levi-Yitshakdefended hasidism in a public debate in Warsaw withthe Rav of Brisk, R. Avraham Katzenellenbogen. Onthe 20th Av, 1781, the herem was read out in all syn-3^gogues and batei midrash in Vilna. Four days laterthe Vilna community sent a letter to all the otherLithuanian communities, calling on them, too, to im-pose the herem on the hasidim and to boycott them.Two emissaries were sent for this purpose to theLithuanian fair at Zelva (near Grodno), where all theheads of the Lithuanian comrnunities had gatheredtogether. At the instigation of these emissaries, andon the authority of the Vilna herem, a ban on thehasidim was now proclaimed in Zelva, too (1st Elul)?^The communal leaders informed their communities inwriting that the hasidim were to be placed under theRnsk, is confirmed by the order of the titles given himin hasidic literature. Thus, for example, the TsaddikR. Yaakov-Yitshak of Lantsut writes: T heard fromthe Rav of Pinsk (long may he live!), who was for-merly Rav in the holy community of Zhelikhov’ (quot-ed by Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 216, n. 1).R. Yosef Levinstein, in his letter to Dubnow datedthe 1st Av, 1895, mentions the rabbinical offices heldby R. Levi-Yitshak of Berdichev in the same order,Zhelikhov-Pinsk-Berdichev (Wilensky, ^Hearoth la-Pul-musim beln ha-Hasidim ve-ha-Mithnagdim/ Tarbits,Vol. XXX, p. 402, Jerusalem 1961; Rabinowitsch, Lithu-anian Hasidism, Chap. 3, n. 11).Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasidnth, pp. 141 ff., 146;idem, *Kithvei Hithnagduth al Kath ha-Hasidim,^ Devir,Vol. I, p. 297 ff., Berlin 1923.ban and persecuted relentlessly. The representativesof the Grodno community, headed by their Av Beth-Din, wrote to their members to this effect on the self-same dayJ^ On the next day, the Av Beth-Din ofBrisk, the well-known adversary of hasidism, R. Av-raham Katzenellenbogen, who was also present at theZelva fair, drew up a public proclamation containinga bitter, vengeful denunciation of the hasidim. Similaraction was taken by the representatives of Pinsk’^®and Slutsk.^^ On the return of the emissaries to Vilna(13 th Elul), the herem was again proclaimed in thatcity, this time with the solemn ritual of blasts on theshojar, lighting of black candles, and so on.The letter drawn up by the representatives of thePinsk community and sent from Zelva to Pinsk isimportant for our study, because of the proximity ofthe latter town to Karlin. The text of the letter readsas follows:‘On the occasion of our being here in the commun-ity of Zelva on the day of the market, the Lord willedthat we should meet... a great and esteemed memberof the holy community of Vilna, the learned scholar ...David Moreh-Tsedek ... and his compeer, the re-nowned scholar ... Zelig. They showed us a letter ...which the Lord prompted... the leaders of the holycommunity of Vilna [to write], together with the Ravof Vilna and also our Master the pious Gaon [sc. R.Eliyahu], who... girded up their strength to fightzealously for the Lord of Hosts and built a fence torepair the breached edifice [of the Torah] ... as wasexplained at length ... They were surely right in allthat they said, that there should be one Torah forthem all, joined together and united in a lastingbond ... Therefore we, too, do fully and firmly en-dorse ... all the words... of the leaders of the above-mentioned holy community [of Vilna] together withthe above-mentioned Gaon, as written... in theiraforementioned letter. It is fitting and proper for God-fearing men of perfect faith to strengthen and sup-port each other and restore the crown [sc. the To-rah] to its former glory, that they should not be se-■^5 Zweifel, op. cit., Pt. II, p. 37; Dubnow, Toledothha-Hasiduth, pp. 147, 148.Dubnow, ^Kithvei Hithnagduth/ op. cit., pp. 304,305; Zweifel, op. cit., p. 41. There are differences in thewording and the signatures between the version givenby Dubnow—^which is cited here—and that given byZweifel. But in both these versions the signature ofthe Pinsk Av Beth-Din is missing.77 Zweifel, op. cit., p. 41.92W. Z. RABINOWrrSCHparated from each other, but should be joined togetherlike one man, as of old. We have agreed to the en-forcement of the great herein proclaimed in the...glorious community of Vilna and of the words utteredand heard in the holy community of Zelva on theday of the market. All that hear this... shall ceaseto be... separated from the community of the Lord... and [shall cease] to reject the authority of theearly Sages, who from of old have followed theirthoughts which are based on ... the truth ...‘In confirmation whereof we, the leaders and of-ficers of the Pinsk community, gathered here in Zelvaon the day of the market, do herewith sign our names,on the sixth day of the week, the 3rd Elul, [5] 541[ = 17811.‘Signed: Nahman, the son of Eliezer Segal;Yaakov, the son of Avraham;Yehudah-Leib, the son of Elhanan;Menahem-Nahum, the son of R. Meir;David, the son of ... Feivel;Shalom, the son of Eliyahu;Tsevi-Hirsch, the son of Dov-Baer.^Unlike the public proclamation issued by the headsof the Grodno and Brisk communities, which wasalso signed by the Av Beth-Din of the town, the callof the Pinsk leaders does not bear the signature ofthe Av Beth-DiUj since in this particular year thisoffice in Pinsk was held by R. Levi-Yitshak.The letters from the Vilna kahal and from the Ravof Brisk, R. Avraham Katzenellenbogen, are particul-arly strongly worded. Realising that the weapons emrployed against the hasidim in 1772—the closure ofhasidic prayer-houses, the forcible breaking up of ha-sidic groups and the like—had been completely in-effective, the Rabbanim this time decided to ban thehasidim from all social contact with the Jewish com-munity and therefore decreed that no one should eatat their table or have any dealings with them at all.This new wave of bans and boycotts that sweptthrough the towns of Lithuania must have constrictedR. Shelomo of Karlinas sphere of influence again andconfined it to Karlin which, together with Amdur,once more became the refuge of Lithuanian hasidism.In this desperately critical time for the hasidicmovement, a new figure came to the fore—the young-est and most spiritually gifted of the Great Maggid'sdisciples, R. Shneur-Zalman. The main centre of R.Shneur-Zalman^s influence was in White Russia andhe was, in fact, the founder of hasidism in these north-ern districts. He gave this hasidism a distinctive cha-racter of its own, which marked it off from both thehasidism of Karlin and that of Volhynia and Podolia.R. Shneur-Zalman, known for short as ‘the Rav/was born and educated in White Russia. He acquiredan erudite knowledge of both revealed teaching [Ge-mara] and hidden lore \KabbalahA, At the age oftwenty (in 1768) he went to the Great Maggid inMezerich and became one of his most devoted dis-ciples. It was the Maggid that assigned him the taskof compiling a Shulhan Arukh [codification of hala-khic law] in the spirit of hasidism (the so-called Shtd-han Arukh shel Ha-Rav), In the course of two yearsR. Shneur-Zalman compiled the main sections of thiswork. After the Great Maggid^s death, R. Shneur-Zalman did not seek to become a Tsaddik, like mostof his Teacher’s disciples, but, together with the Mag-gid's son, R. Avraham Hamalakh, he continued hisstudy of Gemara and Kabbalah, Eventually, he be-came one of the close associates of R. Mendel ofVitebsk, whom he accompanied on his journeys toVilna (c. 1775) and Shklov to take part in debateson hasidism. When, as described above, the leadersof the White Russian hasidim emigrated in 1777 toPalestine, R. Shneur-Zalman—apparently at R. Men-del’s request—settled in White Russia. According tohasidic tradition, R. Mendel designated him his suc-cessor. Nevertheless, R. Shneur-Zalman refused totake over the leadership of the hasidim at once. It wasnot till three years later that he agreed to accept thisresponsibility. During these years, as already stated.White Russia came under the influence of R. Shelomoof Karlin. Also living in this region at this time wereR. Yisrael of Polotsk (who had returned from Pales-tine) and R. Yissakhar-Baer of Lubavich with theirown hasidic groups of followers.In c. 1781 R. Shneur-Zalman assumed the leader-ship of the hasidim in White Russia and created whatcame to be known as the Habad brand of hasidism[an acronym of the Hebrew words hokhmah = wis-dom, binah = understanding, daath = knowledge]. Heintroduced into hasidism something of the spirit andcharacter of the talmudic ‘Lithuanian’ Jews of thenorthern provinces. He also enriched hasidic literaturewith his work on the philosophy of hasidism, LikkuteiAmarinij better known as Tanya. In connection withthe polemical debate between the mithnagdim andthe hasidim, it is especially important to note that R.Shneur-Zalman did not regard hasidism as a protestHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN93against rabbinism, but rather as its complement; justas he did not consider the head of a hasidic commu-nity to be a wonder-working Tsaddik, but merely aspiritual guide and leader. A Jew needed to studyhasidism just as much as he needed to study the Tal-mud, and vice versa; and therefore the religiousopinions and way of life of talmudic scholars werenot to be despised. The essence and spirit of Judaismwere to be learnt from all the available sources; andevery form of prayer—not necessarily or solely thatof hasidism—^brought the Jew closer to his heavenlyFather.R. Shneur-Zalman’s name rapidly became widelyknown. His influence was not restricted to White Rus-sia (Vitebsk, Mohilev, Shklov, etc.), but spread alsoto a section of the Lithuanian hasidim, especially thosein nearby Vilna where the hasidim were being par-ticularly violently persecuted and had no Tsaddik orspiritual guide. The Vilna hasidim were called ^Kar-liners^ already in the time of the Great Maggid,'^^ andthe name continued to be applied to them still later(1800),'^® even though they had never actually beenfollowers of the Karlin Rebbe. We hear nothingabout any relations between R. Aharon the Greatand the two propagators of hasidism who werethen in Vilna—R. Hayyim and R. Iser—or indeedabout R. Aharon’s whole attitude to the Vilna hasi-dini. Hence, when R. Shneur-Zalman appeared on thehistorical scene, most of the hasidim in Vilna regard-ed him as their leader and Rebbe, though the mith-nagdim continued to refer to them as ‘Karliners,’ aname which had for them become synonymous with^hasidim.’ The hasidim of White Russia, some of whomhad from 1777 to 1781 looked to R. Shelomo of Kar-lin as their leader, now also went over to R. Shneur-Zalman. The sphere of influence of Karlin hasidimwithin the territory of Polesia was thus little by littlereduced at the beginning of the 1780s.Under the pressure of the mithnaged attacks fromoutside and of the contraction of his influence fromwithin, R. Shelomo was forced to abandon the oldhome of hasidism, Karlin, and seek another shelter forhimself and his heth midrash. According to hasidictradition, he had originally intended to withdraw to78 ^Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim/ op. cit., p. 25;‘And they decided to disperse the minyan of the Kar-lin hasidim [in Vilna, Passover 1772].’ V. supr.79 In the Russian government archives and in R.Avigdor of Pinsk’s denunciation of the hasidim. V. infr.the small White Russian town of Beshenkovich (inthe province of Vitebsk), where several of his followerslived. But, in the meantime, R. Shneur-Zalman’s in-fluence had become predominant there and R. Shelo-mo found himself obliged to ask his consent to themove.®® R. Shneur-Zalman is said to have made hisconsent conditional upon R. Shelomo’s undertakingnot to show contempt for talmudic scholars andscholarship, not to dismiss as worthless the perform-ance of mitsvoth even without kavvanah [true de-votion], and not to teach that the Tsaddik has thepower to help his followers in everything—that ‘theTsaddik carries the whole flock.’ R. Shelomo acceptedthe first two demands, but rejected the third, and wastherefore compelled to give up the idea of settling inWhite Russia. This hasidic tradition is evidence ofthe difference of opinion between these two hasidicteachers on the place and function of the Tsaddik inthe life of the hasidic community. It further confirmsthat, in Karlin hasidic circles just as in other branchesof the hasidic movement (R. Yaakov-Yosef of Polon-noye, R. Hayyim-Heikel of Amdur, R. Avraham ofKalisk, and others), the orthodoxy of the mithnagdimwas contemptuously dismissed as a purely formalisticobservance, and their method of talmudic study waslikewise treated with scorn. From the written approvalby R. Shelomo prefaced to the volume Kether ShemTov, we learn that in 1784—the year of the book^spublication—he was already in Ludmir. He signs theapproval as follows: ‘Shelomo of Karlin, at presentin the holy community of Ludmir.’®^From what is known of R. Aharon Segal of Vi-tebsk, to whom the above-quoted letter from R. She-lomo was addressed, it may be assumed that R. Shelo-mo’s words—‘about the matter that has occurred inyour province I have much to say to your honour,only it is not possible to explain everything in writ-ing. ... However, the truth is with us’—refer to dif-ferences of opinion, perhaps even to a dispute abouttheir respective authorities ‘in your province’ (i.e.,White Russia), between R. Shelomo and R. Shneur-Zalman. R. Aharon Segal of Vitebsk was originallya loyal adherent of R. Shneur-Zalman, and the latterso Heilman, Beth Rahhi, Pt. H, p. 128, n. 2. This ac-count is attributed to a descendant of R. Shneur Zal-man. S. Y. Zevin, Sippurei Hasidim, Kerekh Moadim,p. 158, Tel Aviv 1957.81 Cited by Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 157,n. 1.94W. Z. RABINOWITSCHrefers to him in one of his letters (apparently fromthe early 1780s) as Hhe renowned Rav and hasid.’Subsequently however, he became one of R. Shneur-Zalman’s opponents. R. Avraham of Kalisk was obligedto come to his defence in a letter which he wrote toR. Shneur-Zalman: ^..Let the wise man hearkenand learn to be reconciled with the friend of the Lord,the aged and venerable Rav, the Teacher R. AharonHalevi of Vitebsk; for it is to his honour to supporthim and to esteem him as formerly... There is nogreater profanation of the Divine Name than to hu-miliate such a man.’ In one of his later letters—after1805—R. Shneur-Zalman writes disparagingly of R.Aharon Segal: Tt is my duty to warn our followers. . .to keep far away from the band of agitators and se-ducers who travel with the letter of the Rebbe of Ti-berias [sc. R. Avraham of Kalisk], led by the well-known old man from beyond the river of Vitebsk.’ R.Shneur-Zalman here refers to R. Aharon Segal as the*old man’ (the appellation used by R. Avraham ofKalisk), without explicitly naming him. R. Shelomoof Karlin and R. Aharon of Vitebsk joined forces inopposing R. Shneur-Zalman. It is to the ferment cre-ated in hasidic circles as a result of this joint oppo-sition that R. Shelomo is referring in his above-quotedletter to R. Aharon.Just as R. Shelomo had been forced by the pres-sure of the mithnagdim to leave Karlin before 1784,so R. Levi-Yitshak was in 1785 driven out of Pinskby the local population. On the 18th Tammuz, 1785,he was still a Rav in Pinsk: that is the date on whichhe wrote his approval of the book Halakhah Pesukah(Shklov, 1787) by R. Shelomo Katz of Pinsk. But onthe 25th Tammuz, 1785, when he wrote his approvalof the book Kanfei Yonah, by R. Menahem-Azaryah(Korets, 1786), he signed it ^here in the communityof Berdichev.’ It follows then, that in the week be-tween the 18th and 25th Tammuz, 1785, R. Levi-Yitshak must have moved from Pinsk to Berdichev.According to the hasidic sources, physical force wasused to expel him and his family from Pinsk. Thisindignity was no doubt brought about by the violent-ly worded letter from the heads of the Vilna kahal,led by the Gaon R. Eliyahu and the Rav R. Shemuel,to The leaders of. . . the holy community of Pinsk.Here is the text of the letter:^May the righteous flourish.. . the leaders . .. andsages ... of the holy community of Pinsk ...‘We have reecived your appeal.. . couched inwords of truth and good will to come to your aid...against the man who has been set up in your com-munity as a Teacher and Gaon^ yet supports doers ofiniquity that throw off the yoke of the Torah andmitsvoth and have introduced new manners and prac-tices unthought of by our holy forefathers. They arethe sect of the suspect, the selLstyled hasidim [i.e.,pious ones] ... The leaders and officers of the prin-cipal communities, together with the Rabbanim andGeonim, after giving great thought to the matter, havefirmly resolved to fight zealously for the Lord ofHosts ... to root out the thorns... and to dispersethose wicked bands of men and drive them far awayfrom their confines, and to put an end to their prac-tices which are different from, and opposed to, thereligion of our holy Torah. It is the Lord’s will thatthey [sc. the leaders] have successfully stood firm inthe breach ... to subdue them and make them likethe dust of the earth, so as firmly to establish thetrue faith ... However, Satan is still at work amongus. .. for the above-mentioned sect have spread .. .their uncleanness ... so far that even the leaders ofour community are till now members of the sect, and... follow the new practices ... which they have in-troduced ... We warned them in letters, informingthem of the bans and excommunications ... proclaim-ed by ... the leaders... together with the Rabbanimand Geonim, against the above-mentioned sect andagainst those that support them .. . But the membersof your community did not incline their ears and shuttight their eyes, even though there have always beenin your community renowned and God-fearing men.Being oppressed by the supporters of the above-men-tioned sect, they longed [to shake off the oppression]but had not the strength, until they could endure nomore and determined to requite their adversaries.Whereupon the leaders of your community arose andtook the courage ... to lift up the stumbling-blockand remove the stones from the highway, and theygave instructions to the Gaon in your community...It was desirable that you should take away the crownfrom the Rav and Gaon. But after we saw that youagreed not to dismiss him ... we, too, confirmed youragreement, in the hope that he might turn back fromhis misguided way and no longer lead the people82 Dubnow, op. cit., p. 479. The chronology of hiscareer as Rav and the various places in which he heldhis office are listed by H. Lieberman. ^Hearoth Biblio^grafiyoth/ 8efer ha-Yovel le-Alexander Marx, p. 15 ff.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KAHLIN95astray. But if he obstinately refuses ... we have al-ready admonished you in our letter and do so nowagain... We order you, according to the resolutionof the province [sc. Lithuania], to remove the crownfrom the above-mentioned Rav, the Av Beth-Din ofyour community... He shall neither teach, nor judge. .. but shall be utterly expelled. As for their [sc. thesect’s] fabrication that the true Gaon... R. Eliyahu(may his light shine out!), has changed his mind andthat we, too, have had second thoughts about thebans . .. imposed till now, this is a lie and anothercrooked invention of theirs. On the contrary, everyday their shame is publicly made known accordingto the books of the above-mentioned men [sc. ofthe sect] .. . We have always supported all the bans,that you should take care to observe what our wholeprovince [sc. Lithuania] has undertaken to do—thatthe above-mentioned sect be neither seen nor foundin our province—and should proclaim... in your com-munity [sc. Pinsk] and the community of Karlin andthe districts which are now under your jurisdiction,that, under pain of utter excommunication, no oneshall perform... the abominations of that sect. Andas for those that support and assist them ... you shalldraw up a list of their names and deeds, for they area root from which poison grows and spreads. Theythat call their leader ‘‘Rebbe,’’ and he is the chief ofsinners, in your community and in the whole commu-nity of Karlin and in the other communities underour jurisdiction, those men must be rooted out. Bestrong... in zealously fighting the battle of the Lordof Hosts... and do not rest. We are confident thatyou will give heed to these our words and assert yourauthority in the land... to drive out the sinners.. .from the bounds of your holy land, to harass andpursue [the members of the sect] to the utmost ofyour power, and to utterly wipe out this filth. Suchis our just request.Written by the heads... of the holy communityof Vilna. . . together with our Master, the Teacherand RaVj the great and renowned Gaon, the Av Beth-Din of the community of Vilna and also the great,pious and famed Gaon, Eliyahu (may his light shineforth!). In witness whereof we have signed our nameson this fourth day of the week, the 6th Tammuz,r5]544[ = 1784].^Shemuel, Rav of the above-mentioned holycommunity,and Eliyahu, the son of R. Shelomo-Zalman ofblessed memory.^This letter is dated Wednesday, the 6th Tammuz,5544 [ = 1784].’ No names are mentioned in the letterand there is an error—as Dubnow pointed out—in onedetail of the date, since in the year 5544 the 6th Tam-muz fell on a Friday, not a Wednesday. Nevertheless,there is no doubt that the following passages—^‘theman who has been set up in your community as aTeacher and Gaon, yet supports doers of iniquity...to remove the crown from the above-mentioned Rav,the Av Beth-Din of your community... He shall nei-ther teach nor judge’—must refer to R. Levi-Yitshak,since these appellations do not fit R. Shelomo of Kar-lin. The letter also throws some light on the sequenceof events in Pinsk and on the attitude of the Pinskcommunity to R. Levi-Yitshak before his expulsionfrom the town. The Jews of Pinsk ‘did not inclinetheir ears and shut tight their eyes’ to the warningsof the Vilna kahal, ‘being oppressed by the supporterof the above-mentioned sect.’ Even though ‘the leadersof your community [sc. Pinsk] arose and took thecourage... to lift up the stumbling-block and removethe stones from the highway,’ and ‘it was desirablethat you should take away the crown from the Ravand Gaon* nevertheless ‘you agreed not to dismisshim... we, too [sc. the Vilna kahal], confirmed youragreement, in the hope that he might turn back fromhis misguided way.’ From another sentence in theletter—‘As for their [sc. the sect’s] fabrication thatthe true Gaon, the pious Rav R. Eliyahu... haschanged his mind and that we, too, have had secondthoughts about the bans’—vft learn that, even at thattime, the hasidim were already trying to spread itabroad that the Gaon of Vilna had revised his hostileopinion about them, a step which he did not actuallytake, as we know, until ten years later.At this very time—according to one document, onthe 8th Tammuz, 1784—R. Levi-Yitshak was violent-ly attacked by the Rav of Brest-Litovsk, R. AvrahamKatzenellenbogen, in a bitterly-worded open letter.®®The ‘officers of the kahal* in Pinsk this time accededto the demand of the leaders of the Vilna kahal that‘he shall be utterly expelled.’ R. Levi-Yitshak wouldappear to have continued to feel an attachment toPinsk and to have hoped to return there one day,since he signed his approval of the work Meir Nethi-vim by R. Meir Margolioth (Polonnoye 1791), datedthe 4th lyyar, 1791, as follows: ^Av Beth-Din andRav of the holy community of Pinsk and the district,83 Dubnow, Kithvei Bithnagduth, op. cit., p. 293.96W. 2. RABINOWITSCHat present Av Beth-Din of the holy community ofBerdichev.’ This is exactly the same formula as thatused by R. Shelomo of Karlin, when he signed hisapproval of the book Kether Shem Tov: ^Shelomo ofKarlin, at present in the holy community of Ludmir.^But the two men never returned to their respectivetowns.Karlin was thus left without a Tsaddik. Of R. She-lomo’s life in Ludmir very little is known, and wehave to rely on hasidic oral traditions. His authorityas a disciple of the Great Maggid and of R. Aharonthe Great must have helped him in rapidly gatheringa new circle of disciples and followers. His adherentsin Polesia, who remained faithful to him, must alsohave visited him regularly in his place of exile. Hisloyal disciples, R. Asher (the son of R. Aharon theGreat) and R. Mordekhai of Lakhovich, accompaniedtheir Rebbe to Ludmir; and there he was apparentlyjoined by a third disciple, R. Uri of Strelisk. R. She-lomo left no written works, unlike others of the GreatMaggid*s disciples, but teachings attributed to himand legends about him can be found in the followingworks by his own disciples: Imrei Kadosh ha-Shalemby R. Uri of Strelisk (Lvov, no date of publication),and Beth Aharon by R. Aharon (the Second) of Kar-lin (Brody, 1875).®^ All his life he was known as ^R.Shelomo of Karlin,’ and that is the name by which heis referred to in hasidic writings down to the pre-sent day.R. Shelomo died a martyr’s death during the warsbetween Russia and Poland, on the 22nd TammuZy1792. Many legends have grown up around his death.One of them, which is true to his spiritual nature,runs as follows: During the war between Russia andPoland, the Russian commander gave his troops per-Teachings attributed to R. Shelomo of Karlin andlegends about him were collected and published by Y.M. Kleinbaum in his book Shema Shelomo (two parts),Petrokov 1928, However, this apocryphal work cannotbe regarded as original source-material. The first partcontains hanhagoth [rules for good conduct] and ha-sidic teachings attributed to R. Shelomo of Karlin,most of them from the volume Beth Aharon by R.Aharon of Karlin. The second part contains hasidicwritings and traditional lore. Here and there in theselegendary tales an echo of certain historical eventscan be heard. The sayings and stories about R. She-lomo quoted in this chapter have been taken from thebooks Beth Aharon by R. Aharon of Karlin, and ImreiKadosh ha-Shalem, attributed to R. Uri of Strelisk, andalso from the book Shema Shlomo,mission to do as they pleased with the Jews of Lud-mir for two hours. This was on the Sabbath eve, whenalmost all the Jews of the town had taken refuge inthe synagogue in which R. Shelomo of Karlin was inthe habit of praying. R. Shelomo waas standing bythe table and saying the kiddush [blessing over thewine] with his usual intense devotion. Just then, alame Cossack passed by the synagogue and aimedhis rifle at R. Shelomo. R. Shelomo’s small grandson,who was standing next to him, saw what was happen-ing and tugged at R. Shelomo’s robe to rouse himfrom his trance. At that same moment the Cossackfired at him and wounded him. R. Shelomo said thatif his grandson had not roused him from his tranceof devotion, the Cossack would not have had thepower to harm him. The hasidim wanted to take R.Shelomo out of the synagogue, but he refused to moveuntil he had finished sanctifying the Sabbath. Whenhe had finished his prayer, they laid him on a bed,and while they were dressing his wound he asked forthe Zohar to be brought to him. The volume remain-ed open in front of him till his soul departed.The hasidic legend adds that the lame Cossackwas actually Armilus who, according to the Midrash,is to kill the Messiah the son of Joseph [the Messiahof suffering who was to precede the Messiah the sonof David]. R. Shelomo himself used to say: T amready to be the Messiah the son of Joseph, providedthat the Messiah the son of David comes at last.’The hasidim believe that every generation has its Mes-siah the son of Joseph, who by his sufferings and d^votion brings nearer the final redemption, and R. She-lomo was this Messiah in his generation. His namelessgrave was dug in Ludmir. Over it there is an ohel[structure over the gravel containing a large stonewith two holes in which written requests can beplaced, and a narrow opening for the lighting of aner tamid [perpetual light]. The hasidim used re-verently to point out the place where R. Shelomo, fortwenty years the leader of Karlin hasidism, was laidto rest after a life full of trials and tribulations.In addition to his role as Rebbe and spiritualguide in a period of crisis, R. Shelomo’s other greatclaim to a place of honour in the history of Lithuanianhasidism was that he provided it with its future lead-ers. After his death, the ‘Karliners’ overcame the op-position of the mithnagdim and achieved equal andindependent status in communal affairs. By the 1790sKarlin hasidism was already enjoying its second hey-HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN97day, which R. Shelomo had not been spared to see.Two of his disciples, R. Asher and R. Mordekhai, re-turned to Polesia and established hasidic centres there.What R. Shelomo himself had been unable to do wasachieved by his disciples and their successors, who, atthe end of the eighteenth century and throughout thenineteenth, succeeded in propagating the doctrine ofhasidism not only in Lithuania and White Russia (R.Asher of Stolin, R. Mordekhai and R. Noah of La-khovich, R. Shelomo-Hayyim of Koidanov, R. Mosheof Kobrin, R. Avraham of Slonim), but also in Volhy-nia (R. Moshe, the son of R. Shelomo, and his des-cendants) and Galicia (R. Uri of Strelisk, R. Yehu-dah-Tsevi of Stretin).C. The Second Ascendancy of Karlin Hasidism(1792-1794)After R. Shelomo left Karlin and moved to Lud-mir (before 1784), his followers in Karlin remainedfaithful to their Rebbe and his teachings. The hasidicway of life and mutual loyalty instilled into the Kar-lin hasidim by R. Aharon the Great proved strongenough to withstand the mithnaged excommunicationsand persecutions (in the period 1772-1781), just asthe hasidism of neighbouring White Russia withstoodthe decrees passed by the mithnaged assemblies inShklov and Mohilev (1784). Although the mithnag-dim impeded the spread of hasidism in Lithuania andundoubtedly slowed the pace of its development, theycould not check it entirely. The number of Karlinhasidim in the second half of the 1780s, and parti-cularly in the first half of the 1790s, steadily increased,until by 1793 they were strong enough to advancefrom passive to active resistance. Characteristicallyenough, the Karlin hasidim began their fight in thesmall towns, most of whose inhabitants were alreadyhasidim, directing their offensive against the mithna-ged community of Pinsk and, more particularly, itsRaVy R. Avigdor, who was also Rav of the entiredistrict.R. Avigdor the son of R. Yosef-Hayyim—in Rus-sian documents ^Haimovich’—^had formerly been Ravof the little town of Lesli in P'oland, and was probablycalled to the Rabbinate of Pinsk and its district in1785. This date can be inferred from the petitionpresented by him to the Russian government in 1800,in which he writes that the hasidim ‘drew out the85 Heilman, Beth Rahbi, Pt. I, pp. 8, 9; and otherwriters.matter for almost six more years,^ in addition to theone year that had passed after his deposition. It fol-lows, then, that R. Avigdor was removed from theposition of Rav in Pinsk seven years before he pre-sented his petition—that is, in 1793. In another placeR. Avigdor writes that he paid a large sum to obtainthe post of Rav in Pinsk for a period of ten years,and that he lent money without interest to the Pinskcommunity for the same period of time. He then adds:‘This sect... expelled me with great ignominy twoyears before my appointed time,^ i.e., after he hadserved as Rav of Pinsk for eight years. From this itwould follow that R. Avigdor was appointed Rav ofPinsk in 1785. This inference accords with the con-clusion reached above concerning the year of R. LeviYitshak’s expulsion from Pinsk and his withdrawal toBerdichev, for hasidic sources assume that it was R.Avigdor that was responsible for this expulsion.®® R.Avigdor’s approval of R. Eliezer the son of R. MeirHalevi’s book Siah ha-Sadeh (Shklov 1787) is dated1787, and his approval of the work Reiah ha-Sddehby the same author (Shklov 1795) is dated 1791, bothof them being signed by. him in his capacity as thePinsk Av Beth-Din, It will be remembered that RabbiEliezer son of R. Meir Halevi, ‘the Rav of the syn-agogue and Moreh-Tsedek of the holy community ofPinsk, was one of the first persecutors of the hasidim inPinsk, as early as the time of R. Aharon the Great,and, as has been described above, it was to him thatthe Great Maggid of Mezerich appealed concerningthese persecutions. The joint opposition to hasidismof the Moreh-Tsedek and of the Av Beth-Din, of theauthor of the two volumes and the writer of the ap-provals to them, apparently brought the two mencloser together.Chronological considerations apart, the date of R.Avigdor’s appointment as Rav in Pinsk cannot beplaced any earlier, since the description of contempor-ary events given in his petition does not accord withthe difficult plight of Karlin hasidism during the pe-riod of the first and second bans pronounced againstthem (1772-1781), nor with the time of R. Shelo-mo’s departure from Karlin (c. 1784). The fact thatR. Avigdor occupied the Pinsk rabbinical office whicha short time before had been occupied by the RavR. Rafael Hacohen Hamburger, and also the fact thathe was asked to give his approval of books, is evidencethat he was widely known as a great talmudic scholarand halakhic authority.98W. Z. RABINOWITSCHR. Avigdor^s petition (in Russian to the Russiangovernment), written in 1800, is an important docu-ment for our understanding of the development ofKarlin hasidism during the last fifteen years of theeighteenth century, containing as it does importantdetails about the struggle of those years, especially inPinsk itself.®®In the passages describing the situation in Pinskand its surroundings, including Karlin, we read asfollows:^ . I am now emboldened to lay my petition infear and awe before your Majesty’s revered throne.I confess that, when I was chosen Av Beth-Din ofPinsk and of the thirty small towns belonging to thecity [i.e., the district], I did not wish to have anydealings whatsoever with the sect that had arisenthere, and I was pleased not to have any. However,I endeavoured, through preaching, to persuade themto return from their errings to the right way, but whenI saw that this effort had no effect on them at all,and when there came into my hands their clandestinelyprinted books in which law and justice were mostinsolently distorted, I was perplexed in mind, for I didnot know how to frustrate their designs. Even thoughI was the Av Beth-Din^ I no longer had the powerto burn their books publicly, for in all the townsunder my jurisdiction the majority already belongedto that sect.'I was accordingly obliged to inform the late Gaon,R. Eliyahu of Vilna, of what had happened, since hewas the greatest of our Sages, both in revealed teach-ing [Talmud] and in hidden lore [Kabbalah], I toldhim of the contents of the books of this sect and re-quested wise counsel from him, for I feared that sincetheir books contain for the most part vain and in-solent words, and since they call themselves our breth-ren, the matter might come to the notice of the author-ities, and therefore [action must be taken] to preventthe innocent from suffering for the crimes of evil-doers. Moreover, I proved to him [sc. the Vilna Gaon]that, since their books lead the simple man astrayfrom the straight way, according to the Mosaic Lawtheir books should be publicly burnt in the presenceDubnow, Yevreyskaya Starina, Vol. m, p. 84 ff.,St. Petersburg 1910. On ^the lease of the Rabbinate ofPinsk in Lithuania... for ten years and also [the giv-ing of] a loan to the community of 400 chervontsywithout interest for the duration of that period,' seeDubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 276.of all the people. And this was indeed done in Vilna,where the order was given to burn the books of thissect in public in front of the synagogue [Tsavvaathha-Ribash]. When this became known to the sect andthey discovered that I was opposed to their ideas,they rose up as one man against me, and deprived meof my livelihood, and even eventually incited theothers [sc. the mithnagdim] not to give me my due.For who would not lend a willing ear to such advice?And so I was greatly impoverished. In the three townsof Zlobin, Stolin and Dobrovich, which were undermy jurisdiction but where the heads of the communitywere in each case members of this sect, they manytimes prevailed on the local authorities to forbid meto set foot in them. Afterwards they grew strongerand more numerous in Pinsk and, before the term ofmy appointment had come to an end and it was timeto choose another Av Beth-Din, they took the postfrom me by force and, to my great shame, removedthe chair intended for my use from the synagogue,and on the place where it had stood scattered sandand earth ... According to the religion of Israel it is acustom among us that he who serves 2iS Av Beth-Din,even if he has been appointed for a certain periodonly, cannot be dismissed [from his position as Ravbefore the end of his term of office]. But the sect didnot observe this custom, and expelled me with greatignominy two years before the appointed time, anddeprived me of all my income. When I saw howthey were treating me, without consulting me, unlaw-fully, I laid a complaint against them, in accordancewith your Majesty’s decree, before the magistrate,who ordered that it be publicly announced in our syn-agogue that I was to remain in the rabbinical seatuntil the court should pronounce its decision. In fur-therance of the execution of this order, the magistratesent his secretary to the synagogue to announce hisdecision in person. When this became known to thesect, they determined, on solemn oath, to bring aboutthe annulment of the magistrate’s decision. They choseone of their persuasion as head of the community and,when the secretary tried to enter the synagogue inorder to announce [the magistrate’s decision], theytook up their stand in front of him and did not lethim enter.^According to Your Majesty’s exalted decree it islaid down that, in every town where there are peopleof our religion, the Rabbanim shall be the judges inall matters pertaining to our faith. They [sc. the Rab-HASIDISM IN WNSK AND KARLIN99banim] must be men of learning. But the sect dis-missed them [sc. the men of learning] and chose intheir stead the people they wished, totally lacking inexperience. They elected Hershel Kolodner as head ofthe community, only because he and his family be-longed to the sect. He travelled to the governor ofthe province, Neplyuyev, and in return for libelloustale-bearing against me obtained an injunction not topay me the remainder of the salary due to me, bothfor the last six years and for the years before that.Further, he [sc. Hershel Kolodner] ordered, and thistoo in the name of the governor of the province, thatit be publicly announced that everyone whom I hadeither treated dishonestly or from whom I had takenmoney unlawfully should make a declaration to thiseffect in the town hall before the governor of theprovince. Despite the profound humiliation causedme by this order, I was glad of it, for I was sure thateven among the sect there would not be a single per-son capable of saying ill of me. I had never favoureda wealthy man, if he was guilty, and thereby ignoredthe rights of a poor man. On the contrary, I hadalways wished, to the utmost of my ability, to helpthe poor. When a full year had passed after the pub-lication of this same announcement and no complaintsagainst me had been received, the governor of theprovince issued me a certificate of probity. After thetown council had thus been convinced that I was inthe right, my enemies drew out the matter for almostsix more years. All this time I did not cease to de-mand the 3,000 chervontsy. And although I subse-quently went to Minsk more than ten times, andshowed the town council [in Pinsk] the order issuedby the governor of the province and by the governor-general, Tutelman [Tutolmin], my efforts have stillnot borne fruit. My case drags on and on, and mean-while I have been so greatly impoverished that I havebeen forced to sell all my possessions. I and my fa-mily have been left in utter destitution. But I havenot lost my faith in Almighty God, as it is written:‘Tf you do afflict them, and they cry out to me, I willsurely hear their cry’’ [Exodus xxii, 22]. I have placedmy trust in our exalted laws, that offer refuge to theoppressed. And, indeed, who is better fitted to do this[sc. to offer refuge to the oppressed] than our mightymaster, the Tsar Paul I? ...‘... It is, therefore, with a heart bursting with in-dignation that I humbly and respectfully present thispetition to Your Majesty. In years past I was rich,whereas now, in my old age, I have been reduced topoverty together with all my family. I therefore waithopefully for Your Majesty’s decision, seeing thatit is beyond my power to demonstrate by witnessesthe harm done to me by the sect...’The state of Karlin hasidism, both in the ‘prin-cipal community’ of Pinsk itself and in the smalltowns in the surrounding district, is well summed-upin the following sentences from R. Avidgor’s petition:‘Afterwards they [sc. the hasidim] grew stronger andmore numerous in Pinsk... They chose one of theirpersuasion as head of the community... They eveneventually incited the others [sc. the mithnagdim]not to give me my due.. . The heads of the com-munity [in the three towns] were in each case mem-bers of this sect.’The struggle against hasidism was waged by themithnagdim, from the start, as a ‘holy war’ fought forthe purpose of rooting-out a dangerous heresy. In thiswar, R. Avigdor sought the aid of the Gaon of Vil-na, since in the hasidic books, which were ‘clandes-tinely printed,’ ‘law and justice were most insolentlydistorted’ and the ‘books contain for the most partvain and insolent words’ which ‘lead the simple manastray from the straight way.’ In the end, the strugglespread outside the confines of the community in whichit had begun. R. Avigdor sought the protection of theRussian authorities, and the hasidim retaliated bydoing the same. The removal of R. Avigdor from theposition of Rav in Pinsk took place, as has alreadybeen shown, in 1793.^'^ This year, then, is to be re-garded as the year of the victory of Karlin hasidismover its opponents.This growth in the influence and power of theKarlin hasidim in Pinsk and its surroundings mustcertainly have been known to the disciples of R. She-lomo of Karlin, with whom the Karlin hasidim pre-sumably maintained contact. R. Shelomo’s successorin Ludmir was his son, R. Moshe. In the writings andhistory of hasidism neither this R. Moshe nor his87 Hessen is of the opinion that the deposition ofR. Avigdor from the office of Rav occurred in 1794-1795; Hessen, Yevreyi v Rossiyi, p. 151, n., St. Peters-burg 1906.In Dobrovich—i.e., Dombrovitsi—^which is mentionedby R. Avigdor in his appeal to the Russian governmentas having refused him entry, there was a shutkhen[prayer-house] of Karlin hasidim, built in the firstquarter of the nineteenth century. Yevreyskaya Entsi^kloyediya, Vol. VII, s.v.: Dombrovitsi.100W. Z. RABINOWITSCHdescendants—^his son, R. Shelomo; his grandson, R.Nahum; and his great-grandson, R. Gedalyah—^figureat all prominently. These descendants became Tsaddi-kim of the not so large Jewish community in Ludmirand the surrounding district, but only thanks to thereflected glory of their ancestor, R. Shelomo of Karlin.Two of R. Shelomo’s disciples, R. Asher and R. Mor-dekhai, went after their master’s death to R. Barukhof Mezhibozh,®® the grandson of the Besht and thefather of R. Shelomo’s daughter-in-law. R. Asher wasalso, for a short time, a disciple of the Maggid, R.Yisrael of Kozhenits.®® The study of hasidic doctrineas propounded by these two leading advocates oftsaddikhm, R. Barukh of Mezhibozh and R. Yisraelof Kozhenits, must undoubtedly have had an effect onthe future leaders of the hasidim of P'olesia.R. Asher apparently at first lacked the courage toreturn to his native province, Polesia. He lived for ashort time in Zhelikhov, which seems to have led toa dispute between him and R. Levi-Yitshak of Ber-dichev.^® Amongst the ^holy writings’ of the KarlinTsaddikim in the Stolin genlzah, there was a letterfrom R. Asher to R. Yisrael of Kozhenits in whichmention is made of the Zhelikhov dispute.®^ This let-ter also informs us that R. Asher was one of thedisciples of R. Yisrael of Kozhenits. From ZhelikhovR. Asher returned to his native province, but evidentlyfelt that the time was not yet ripe for him to go toKarlin itself and to try to revive the hasidic centrethere. He therefore first made his way to the nearbysmall town of Stolin where he remained for a while,only later (after 1810) returning to Karlin. The exactdate of R. Asher’s arrival in Stolin is difficult to de-termine. In Sejer ha-Vikkuah, the work of R. Yisrael-Leibel published in 1798, the author makes no men-tion at all of R. Asher, though he does mention—andeven challenges to a public debate—the two otherTsaddikim of the same region of Lithuania: R. Mor-Beth Aharon by R. Aharon of Karlin, p. 27; Klein-baum, Shema Shelomo, Pt. 11, p. 42. On descendantsof R. Shelomo of Karlin, see; Valden, Shem ha-Gedolimhe-Hadash, p. 104, s.v. Moshe... of... Lodmir; L.Grossman, Shem u-Sheerith, p. 69, 90, Tel Aviv 1943;S. N. Gottlieb, Oholei Shem, p. 264, Pinsk 1912; A.Hausman, Divrei Aharon, p. 252, Jerusalem 1962, andBirkath Aharon, p. 11, Jerusalem 1970; Toledoth An-shei Shem, Pt. I, ed. A. Z. Rand, p. 18, s.v. Uri-AharonGottlieb and Moshe Gottlieb, New York 1950.8^ Kleinbaum, op. cit., Pt. n, pp. 26, 30. V. infr.Kleinbaum, op. cit, Pt. II, pp. 26, 42.V. infr.dekhai of Lakhovich, and R. Shemuel, the son of R.Hayyim-Heikel of Amdur. Nor is there any referenceto R. Asher in R. Avigdor’s written petition of 1800,in which he recounts how he was not allowed to setfoot in Stolin, describes in detail the ‘holy war’ declar-ed against him by the hasidim, and demands that the‘Karliner leaders’ be imprisoned. As against this, thehasidic tradition informs us, in connection with ‘thefifth light’ of Hanukkah (see below), that in 1798R. Asher was being held in prison together with R.Mordekhai of Lakhovich. In a letter from R. Asherto R. Yisrael of Kozhenits, written (as will be shownbelow) between 1801-1802 and 1807, the address isexplicitly given as Stolin. Stolin, as already stated,was one of the three small towns that closed their gatesto R. Avigdor, since the majority of its Jewish com-munity and their leaders were Karlin hasidim.From the time that R. Asher settled in Stolin hebecame known throughout the hasidic world as ‘R.Asher of Karlin or Stolin’; and the Karlin hasidimwere henceforth called, in addition to ‘Karliners,’ ‘Sto-lin hasidim.’R. Shelomo of Karlin’s second disciple, R. Mor-dekhai, chose as his place of residence the small townof Lakhovich (also in Polesia) which, according to theadministrative division given in the ^Pinkas of theProvince of Lithuania,’ came under the jurisdiction ofthe Pinsk community.®^ Stolin and Lakhovich im-mediately became hasidic centres on the border be-tween Lithuania and White Russia.R. Shelomo of Karlin’s third disciple, R. Uri, wasalso installed as Rebbe. He settled in the small townof Strelisk in Galicia.®^ From hasidic writings we learnthat R. Uri was one of the Tsaddikim that aspiredand attained to lofty purity of soul, in the spirit andafter the manner of the first teachers of hasidism.His character is still a living influence in hasidicdoctrine. On account of his fervently impassionedmanner of praying, which he learnt from his master,R. Shelomo of Karlin, he is still known in hasidiccircles as ‘the Seraph.’®^Pinkos Medinath Lita, ed. Dubnow, p. 18, Berlin1952.^3 [Bodek], Seder ha-Doroth mi-Talmidei ha-Besht,pp. 66-68.Kleinman, Mazkereth Shem ha-Gedolim, pp. 134-142; [Y. Berger], Eser Tsahtsahoth, pp. 76-83, Petro-kov 1910; Imrei Kadosh ha-Shalem... Uri ha-Saraf mi-Strelisk, collected by... B. Z. Shenblum, Lvov (no dateof publication).Hasidism in pinsk and karlik101R. Asher in Stolin and R. Mordekhai in Lakho-vich soon made a name for themselves throughout Po-lesia, and even outside its borders. R. Mordekhai ofLakhovich is mentioned in the polemical pamphletsZimrath Am ha-Arets and Shever Posheim; and thewell-known fanatical mithnaged, R. Yisrael-Leibel,writes in his work Sefer ha-Vikkuah (published in1798) that R. Mordekhai had a great influence onthe hasidim, who believed in his bonders.’ Thus, forexample, they were sure that it was only through theinfluence of R. Mordekhai that the provincial govern-or, Radziwil, was dismissed from his post because ofhis hostility to the hasidim, and another governor ap-pointed in his place. Amongst the Tsaddikim whomR. Yisrael-Leibel challenged to a public debate on Theperverse ways of hasidism’ we find—together with theTsaddikim of Amdur, Ladi and Chernobyl—also R.Mordekhai of Lakhovich, who had gained adherentseven in the stronghold of rabbinism—in Vilna.®®This was the second period of ascendancy for Kar-lin hasidism. The first such period, in the time of R.Aharon the Great (1765-1772), had provoked a vio-lent mithnaged reaction which had plunged Karlinhasidism into a crisis lasting twenty long years (1772-1792). This time, the offensive was started by thehasidim and ended in their victory, the first fruits ofwhich were the deposition of R. Avigdor and theirown achievement of equal communal rights. By virtueof their determined struggle for equal and independ-ent status in the ‘principal communities’ of Lithuania,the Karlin hasidim occupy a special place in the his-tory of the mithnaged-hasidic conflict and of the hasi-dic movement as a whole. It was they that actuallytransformed the mithnaged attack on the hasidim intoa hasidic attack on the mithnagdim. From now onwardsit only remained for them to obtain de jure recognitionof the equality of communal status that they had pre-viously gained de facto. However, the mithnagdimalso showed that they were determined not to give upthe struggle. The Karlin hasidim were therefore ob-liged, together with other branches of the movement,to fight a further bitter engagement with the Rabba-nim and the kahals, which ended in their final victoryonly in the year 1801. The Pinsk Rav, R. Avigdor,was once again in the forefront of the fray on theDubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, pp. 223, 224, n.457; Zweifel, op. cit., Pt. II, p. 48; Rabinowitsch, op. cit.,p. 151.mithnaged side together with the Vilna kahal. Al-though, on the hasidic side this last engagement wasactually fought mainly by the founder of Habad hasid-ism, R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi, and not by the Karlinhasidim, yet in all the relevant documents R. Shneur-Zalman is referred to as ‘the leader of the Karliners.’D. Struggle and Victory (1794-1801)The spread of hasidism in the province of Polesiain the nineties of the eighteenth century is a clear in-dication that, by this time, the Jewish masses hadalready changed their originally extremely unfavourableattitude to the hasidic movement. Through daily con-tact with the hasidim, the ordinary Jew had grownused to their peculiar customs and characteristics, andhad thus ceased to feel ‘the danger from hasidism’against which his spiritual leaders, the rabbis, werecontinually fulminating. The thirty years of the exist-ence of hasidism had provided empirical proof thatthe religious and social innovations instituted by thenew movement had not resulted in a schism in Juda-ism, or even in any serious divergence from its norms.It is possible that hasidism would have developed dif-ferently and would not have contented itself withmerely introducing slight changes in the form of theprayers and in the way of life of the individual Jewand the whole community, if it had not met with suchviolent opposition at the start. Moreover, the changesthat hasidism underwent in its own internal develop-ment at this same time—the nineties of the eighteenthcentury—also helped to dispel the fear of the ‘hasidicthreat.’ By then, the doctrines of the first hasidicteachers about the nature of Judaism and the way oflife to be followed by the believer had already under-gone a contraction, the main emphasis now being laidon tsaddikism—the belief in the Tsaddik as ‘the truefoundation of the world,’ and in the material effective-ness of his prayer and blessing, and his power therebyto help the individual in time of need. In the psycho-logy of the ordinary, simple Jew this belief now be-came the principal doctrine of hasidism.This internal development in hasidism resulted inan increase in the numbers of the movement’s ad-herents. The popular belief in the sanctity and efficacyof the individual Tsaddik was such that, as soon asa Tsaddik (who was usually the son or disciple of an-other Tsaddik) took up residence in some place, anumber of the local inhabitants became hasidim. The102W. Z. RABINOWITSCHmain tenet of their hasidism was their belief inthe Tsaddik (or ‘Rebbe’), whom they regardedas a saint and who was for them a greater religiousauthority than the official spiritual leader of theircommunity, the local Rav, These are the fac-tors that explain the extent to which R. Asher ofStolin and R. Mordekhai of Lakhovich succeeded inspreading the hasidic doctrine in the nineties in Pole-sia. The growing strength of the hasidim went handin hand with the steady decline of their rivals, thekahal. Indeed, even in the stronghold of mithnagdism,in Vilna itself, the number of hasidim apparently in-creased in the years from 1790 onwards, to judgefrom the fact that in this period we find hasidim amongthe members of the kahal. In their struggle to freethemselves from the jurisdiction of the official kahal,the hasidim took advantage of the latter’s moral de-cline: the essentially religious character of this strugglewas thus almost completely overshadowed by secularissues, such as the embezzlements of public funds bythe leaders of the kahal, and the like. At first, thehasidim had attacked the arrogance of the rabbinicalscholars. Now, in the latter part of the struggle, theironslaught was directed against the despotic rule of thekahal. Here the hasidim were considerably helped bythe restrictions imposed on the independent authorityof the kahal, partly by the government of Polandduring that country’s last period of independence,and partly by the Russian government after the lastpartition of Poland. With their powers thus reduced,the leaders of the kahal tried to gain the support ofthe Russian authorities, and for this purpose employedpolitical arguments in their controversy with the ha-sidim. In this way, the struggle between the hasidimand the kahal, which had originally been essentiallyreligious, now took on an additional political and so-cial character.A very important part in the last stages of thisconflict was played, as already stated, by the leadersof the Vilna kahal, the Pinsk Av Beth-Din, R. Avig-dor, and R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi. For the first threeyears—i.e., from 1794 till the death of the Vilna Gaonin 1797—the main struggle took place in Lithuania.Then, in 1798, it was transferred to St. Petersburg,where it finally ended in 1801.In 1794, after the Karlin hasidim in P'insk haddefeated their bitter enemy, R. Avigdor, the Minskkahal decided—as we know from the community re-cords [pmkas)—to ban all prayer-meetings of the ha-sidic minyan?^ A year later, the provincial governorat Minsk, one Tutolmin, who was well versed in thedetails of this sectarian conflict and supported thehasidim, persuaded the Empress Catherine II to pro-mulgate a decree greatly reducing the powers of thekahal?"^ That same year, the communities of Grodnoand Vilna, realising the separatist aims of the hasidim,appealed to the Russian government to recognise theelected kahal as the sole legally authorised represent-ative of the Jewish population.^® Meanwhile, the ha-sidim had managed to circulate large numbers ofcopies of their writings, in particular Tsavaath ha-Ribash.They also spread abroad a story to the effect thatthe Vilna Gaon now regretted his hounding of thehasidim; while at the same time a young scholar, whogave himself out to be the Gaon^s son, travelled fromtown to town affirming the truth of this story. Theseacts of the hasidim still further incensed the mithnag-dim against them, and at a meeting of the leaders ofthe Lithuanian communities in Vilna (June, 1796),under the presidency of the Vilna Gaon, it was decidedto take more stringent measures against the hasidim.A letter was sent out, signed by the Gaon and reaffirm-ing his previous attitude to the hasidim. In this letterthe threat to Judaism from hasidism is once againstressed and the Jews are once more called on to rootout hasidism from their midst.®® Two special envoys,R. Hayyim and R. Saadyah, set out with this letterfor the communities of Lithuania and White Russia,in order to display it publicly to the Jewish populationthere. When the letter reached Minsk, the hasidim ru-moured it abroad that the Gaon*s signature was aforgery and that the letter was not his at all. TheMinsk community immediately appealed to Vilna forconfirmation of the Gaon^s signature, at the sametime complaining that the hasidim had greatly in-creased in numbers in the provinces of Vilna and Slo-nim. In response to this request, on the day after YomFor details of the part played by the communitiesof White Russia, in co-operation with those of Lithu-ania, in the struggle against hasidism in the ninetiesof the eighteenth century, see Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, p. 220.Hessen, Yevreyi v Rosaiyi, p. 157 ff.Akty Izdavayemyye Vilenskoyu Kommissiyeyu dlaRazbora Drevnikh Aktov, Vol. XXIX, no. 244, Vilna1902.Dubnow, *Kithvei Hithnagduth/ op. cit, p. 302,Letter No. 4, of the Vilna commimity.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN103Kippur 1796, the Gaon sent the provincial commu-nities of Lithuania, White Russia, Volhyuia and Po-dolia a letter denouncing the hasidim still more vio-lently. The letter was again carried by envoys. Thereason for the specially vigorous anti-hasidic activityof the Minsk community was that the hasidim hadbecome particularly numerous in this province, whichincluded Pinsk, Karlin, Stolin and Lakhovich. Twoweeks after the receipt of the Gaon's letter, the Minskcommunity published a proclamation to all the com-munities in the Minsk province^®®—and no doubt alsoto the community of Pinsk—demanding that strongaction be taken against the hasidim, and that theyshould not be allowed to travel to their 'Rebbes.'^®^This proclamation was publicly read out in the syn-agogues and batei midrash of Minsk. At the sametime, the Lithuanian Maggid and mithnaged, R. Yis-rael-Leibel, was delivering his anti-hasidic sermons inthe synagogues, and his Sefer Vikkuah was pub-lished with the approval of the Minsk Av Beth-Din(1798). As already stated, this book denounces R.Mordekhai of Lakhovich as a demagogic agitatorwhose aim was to lead good Jews astray. The hasidimresorted to burning the proclamations and driving outthe envoys. Thus, sectarian passions were once moreroused in Lithuania when, at the height of the tension(1797), the Vilna Gaon suddenly died.From this point onwards the struggle between thetwo sections of the Jewish population was waged withthe participation of the Russian authorities. The kahalrealised that its weapons—excommunications, procla-mations, and the like—^made too little impression tobe effective. At the same time, the hasidim for theirpart saw that their chief enemy was now the kahal,which derived its powers from the secular authorities.When, after the Gaon^s death, the third excommuni-cation of the ^Karliners’ [i.e., hasidim] was proclaimedin the Vilna synagogues to the accompaniment ofblasts on the s ho far, an order was immediately pub-lished by the governor of the province in Vilna, Frie-sel, forbidding any proclamation of a herem}^^ Ob-viously this prohibition was issued at the instigationof the hasidim and testifies to the decline in the powerOn ‘the provincial kahal, see Dubnow, ^KithveiHithnagduth/ op. cit, p. 301; Idem, Toledoth ha-Hasi-duth, p. 161.101 Dubnow, ^Kithvei Hithnagduth/ op. cit, pp. 299-302, Letter No. 3.102 Hessen, Istoriya Yevreyskogo Naroda v Rossiyi,Vol. I, p. 106, Leningrad 1925.of the kahal and the extent of the influence of thehasidim at that time. The Vilna coirununity now setup a special committee to continue the struggle. Anti-hasidic feelings rose to a new height of intensity, fol-lowing a rumour that the hasidim had gone wild withjoy after the death of the Vilna Gaon,In 1798, the leader of the 'Karliners’ in WhiteRussia, R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi—in the Russiandocuments, 'Zalman Borukhovich' [i.e., son of Barukh]and the Tsaddikim of the 'Karliner^ sect in Lithu-ania were indicted before the Supreme Court in St.Petersburg as revolutionaries. On the basis of thisindictment, the public prosecutor ordered 'that thewhole affair thoroughly investigated and that RabbiBorukhovich’s leading assistants be brought underheavy guard to St. Petersburg... Immediately afterthis, twenty-two of the ''Karliners^^ were imprisonedin Vilna and other districts. Seven of them^ who wereamong Rabbi Borukhovich’s chief aides, were left inprison here [sc. in Vilna] ... The seven Jews sent toSt. Petersburg... were stopped on the way at Rigaand returned [to Vilna] ... After an investigation ofthe Jewish sect of the Karliners, and after the ex-planations provided by R. Zalman Borukhovich, HisRoyal Highness the Tsar decreed ... since he did notfind in their acts [sc. of the "Karliners’^] anythingharmful to the State, that they all be set free.. . butthat a close watch be kept on their actions and thoseof their associates... After this, all the adherents ofthe sect still in prison were released.^^®*According to hasidic tradition, R. Asher of Stolinand R. Mordekhai of Lakhovich were among thoseimprisoned.^The day of their release, which happenedto be the fifth day of Hanukkah, became a dayof rejoicing for the Karlin and Lakhovich hasidimand was given the name of 'the fifth light.'^®® On thisday the hasidim used to gather in their shtiebel, eatlatkes [potato-pancakes], drink and sing, and recountthe miracle of the Rebbe’s release. Avraham-BaerFor the report ‘on the sect of the Karliners' sentby the Governor of the Lithuanian province to the At-torney-General, see Dubnow, Yevreyskaya Starina, Vol.HI, p. 257 ff.104 Heilman, Beth Rabbi, Pt. H, p. 54, n. 1, and thesources quoted in the following note.105 Yevreyskaya Entsiklopediya, Vol. XTV, p. 570,s.v.: Stolinskiye Tsaddiki; W. Z. Rabinowitsch, *19 Kis-lev ve-Hey Hanukkah/ Haolam, 26th year. No. 13, Je-rusalem 1937; I. Tishby, Tsevi Herman Shapira—ke^8ofer ha-Haskalah, Molad, Vol. IV, p. 575, n. 95, Jeru-salem 1972.104W. 2. RABINOWITSCHGottlober records this in his reminiscences, whichcontain interesting and typical details. He writes: ‘Anold man from Vilna, R. Zalman Miliater, told methat, when the Vilna Gaon departed this life... themithnagdim brought a false accusation against sevenof the leading hasidim, pillars of this community...who were then imprisoned and condemned to be de-ported to Siberia. When they were taken away fromVilna under military guard, the leaders of the Vilnacommunity added to this another, Jewish guard, tomake sure that the hasidim should not escape bybribing the soldiers. As they were passing through asmall town, they entered a Jewish house and askedfor something to eat. They were given terejah [ritu-ally unclean] food, since the Jews said to themselves:“They’re ‘Karliners’ (the name given by the Lithu-anian Jewish masses to the hasidim), aren’t they, sowhy should they eat ritually slaughtered [kasher]meat? ...” This incident shows that the quarrel be-tween the two groups had become so bitter that theywere almost split into two separate peoples. Thanksto representations made to the authorities, the sevenprisoners were returned [to Vilna] from Riga; andthe fifth light is still a day of rejoicing for Lithuanianhasidim.The institution of a special festive dayto mark the occasion testifies to the historical truthof the imprisonment of the Karlin and LakhovichTsaddikim,After the release of the ‘Karliner’ leaders, the Rus-sian government decreed (December 15th, 1798) that‘the Karlin sect is not dangerous and may continue toexist as previously.Encouraged, naturally enough,by this victory, the hasidim proceeded to accuse the106 Priedkin, A. B. Gottlober un Sayn Epokhe, p.75. See also: Yizkor~Bukh fun Rakishok un Umgegend,p. 59, Johannesburg 1952; Y. Lifschits, Zikhron Yaa-kov, Pt. I, p. 15, Kovno-Slobodka 1924.In the course of time the reason for the festival wasforgotten. Thus, for example, in the year 1932 the lastRebbe of Karlin, R. Elimelekh, in my presence askedhis aged caretaker, who knew every detail of the cus-toms followed by the Karlin Tsaddikinij to explain therejoicing of ‘the fifth light,’ and though the caretakerhad witnessed this celebration for the past seventyyears, he was unable to give an answer. Moreover, theTsuddik R. Yohanan of Karlin denied the historicity ofthe connection, though he had heard about it: Haus-man, Divrei Aharon, p. 207.107 Dubnow, Yevreyskaya Btarina, Vol. Ill, p. 273,document 21.heads of the Vilna kahal of embezzling public funds.^®®As a result, the heads of the kahal were imprisonedin Vilna, the boxes containing the kahal documentswere sealed, and a date was set for new elections(February, 1799). Under pressure from the Russianauthorities, eight hasidim were elected to the new,seventeen-member kahal. The hasidim thus achievedequal rights in Vilna, the mithnaged stronghold.At the same time as in Vilna and Minsk thestruggle against the hasidim was being conducted bythe kahal, in P'insk R. Avigdor, as we learn from thewording of his request quoted above, was left to fighta lone battle against them. The beginning of thisstruggle in Pinsk and its environs is described by R.Avigdor in his letter of appeal. He was no doubthelped in carrying on the struggle by the actions ofthe Vilna and Minsk communities, especially as Pinskwas spiritually close to Vilna and administrativelylinked to the main provincial community of Minsk.The proclamation of the Vilna Gaon (1796) mustalso have reached Pinsk, as must the Gaon^s two spe-cial envoys, R. Hayyim and R. Saadyah; and thethird herem was also proclaimed there. In the pinkasof the Minsk community for the year 1798, we finda ban on ritual slaughtering after the manner of thehasidim (with ‘sharpened slaughtering knives’). Everyanimal and bird slaughtered in the hasidic mannerwas decreed to be terefah, and anyone that transgress-ed this ban was declared to be in herem. Similar de-crees are found in the pinkasim of other towns in Li-thuania and White Russia.It may be presumed108 Hessen, Istoriya Yevreyskogo Naroda v Rossiyi,Vol. I, p. 109; cf. M. Teitelbaum, Ha-Rav mi-Ladi, p.87. The struggle in the Vilna community has beencritically investigated by Yisrael Klausner, Vilna hi-Tekufath ha^Gaon, pp. 20-45, Jerusalem 1942. In May,1798, the hasidim in the small town of Vidz, to thenorth of Vilna, led by their shohet [ritual slaughterer],submitted to the authorities a written denunciationagainst the Vilna kahal (Klausner, op. cit., p. 31). Thisincident shows that in north-western Lithuania therewere small towns in which hasidism had established it-self. The denunciation greatly enraged R. Shneur-Zal-man. In one of his letters he writes: ‘The Vidz denun-ciation literally made me shudder’ (Hilman, IggerothBaal ha-Tanya, p. 207), because its authors were almostcertainly Hdbad hasidim.109 Y. Brafman, Kniga Kahala, quoted by Dubnowin the monthly Voskhod, 1892, No. 11, p. 7.A note that I found in the pinkas of the Pinsk fl’et?-rah Kaddisha [burial society] states that the society’sHASIDISM IN HNSK AND KARLIN105that Pinsk, too, was similarly torn by sectarian strifein those years.In the Stoliii genizah there is a letter from R.Asher of Stolin to a certain R. Yosef of Pinsk whichcontains an echo of the tense situation prevailing inPinsk in those years and testifies to R. Avigdor’s sec-tarian fervour against the hasidim. R. Asher writesas follows:‘My dear friend, R. Yosef,I was enraged to hear that this man hadtold his followers to bring him a hasid’s head. Al-though this is nothing new to me, still, if I am unableto make peace as we agreed, do you all form a singlegroup and let all the doers of inquity be dispersed.I warn you to let nothing be changed and not to lethim carry out his evil design. Strengthen the weak-kneed and feeble-handed, and may the Lord upholdyou with the strength of faith. Truth is strong andeverlasting; therefore be not concerned or afraid orcast down, and the Lord will make peace as seemsgood to Him, for we have fought this battle only forthe Lord’s sake.From your affectionate friend who praysfor your welfare,Asher of Stolin.Greetings to you all in the name of the Almighty.’R. Asher does not explicitly name ‘this man (who)had told his followers to bring him a hasid’s head.’This is in keeping with his regular practice, in his let-ters dealing with controversial matters, of not men-tioning names. In this letter here, the Karlin hasidimin Pinsk are advised to dissociate themselves from therest of the community and to establish their own en-tity: ‘If I am unable to make peace as we agreed, doyou all form a single group’—^an instruction that wasactually carried out, as is evident from R. Avigdor’sletter of appeal (the election of Hershel Kolodner,etc.). Although R. Asher’s letter bears no date, itwas obviously written in the last decade of the eigh-teenth century.^^®previous pinkos was burnt in the great fire of 1799.Apparently the town pinkos was also burnt at the sametime, and thus was lost material of the first import-ance for our knowledge of the sectarian struggle ofthose days. See: S. M. Rabinowitsch, ^Al Pinsk, Korlinve-Yoshveihen/ op. cit., p. 13.At the time, the bitterness of the dispute led tothe use of physical violence by both sides. R. Yisrael-Leibel writes in his 8efer ho-Vikkuoh. As they did...to the great Rov of the holy community of Volpe—theyThe subsequent developments in R. Avigdor’s fightagainst the hasidim, in Pinsk and its environs, aredescribed in his detailed letter of appeal which deservesto be treated as a court confession. The Karlin hasidim,like their brethren in Vilna, found a way to the Rus-sian authorities, in this case to the provincial governorin Minsk, and were able to influence him by theirrepresentations. In the report of the Pinsk municipalleaders, we read that R. Avigdor was unduly fond ofthe bottle. That the hasidim were responsible for thisstatement is clear from the fact that R. Avigdor’sintemperance is also mentioned by R. Shneur-Zalmanin the reply sent by him to the Tsar Alexander I(May, 1801). We further find references to this weak-ness of R. Avigdor’s in the hasidic writings.^^^ How-ever, even when the influence of the Vilna communitywas greatly weakened after the first release from pri-son of R. Shneur-Zalman (1798), R. Avigdor still re-fused to give up the struggle. Seeing that both thelocal authorities in Pinsk and the provincial governorat Minsk took the side of the hasidim, he appealedover their heads to the highest government institutionsin St. Petersburg.In 1800, after consultation with the Vilna kahal,^^^he travelled to St. Petersburg and presented his peti-tion in person. After a long, drawn-out correspondencebetween the public prosecutor in St. Petersburg andthe provincial authorities in Vilna and Minsk, thegovernment decided that the ‘Karliner sect’ did notconstitute a political danger. With regard to R. Avig-dor’s demand for the repayment of the debt owing him,the public prosecutor decided, in the Tsar’s name, toinstruct the provincial governors to investigate thematter. The Minsk governor handed the investigationover to the local authorities. What eventually happenedto the financial demands made by R. Avigdor wedo not know. All that is certain is that, in his secondstripped off his clothes and forced him to enter thetown stark naked.' (Dubnow, Toledoth ho^Uosiduth,p. 258.) It should be noted that in Karlin there wasa synagogue called The Volpe synagogue.' ‘The Rovof Volpe’ is also mentioned by S. M. Rabinowitsch (op.cit., p. 15). Moreover, people in Karlin used to relatethat the hasidim there hounded the *Rov from Volpe.'It may be that Karlin was also the scene of the attackson the Rov of Volpe mentioned by R. Yisrael-Leibel inhis Sefer ho-Vikkudh.111 Dubnow, Yevreyskoyo Storino, Vol. m, p. 278;Shivhei ho-Rov R. Shneur-Zolmon, published by Dru-ker, p. 13, Lemberg (no year of publication).112 Hessen, Yevreyi v Rossiyi, p. 170 ff.106W. Z. RABINOWITSCHpetition which he presented in April, 1801, after R.Shneur-Zalman’s second release from prison, he writesthat he has still not received the money.^^®While R. Avigdor was running from governmentoffice to government office in St. Petersburg, mainly inconnection with his financial demands, R. Shneur-Zalman was suddenly brought to the same city andimprisoned there. His imprisonment was this timeconnected with the report on the state of RussianJewry submitted at that time to the government bythe poet and statesman, Dyerzhavin.^^^ The order forthe imprisonment of R. Shneur-Zalman was receivedby the provincial governor of White Russia, afterDyerzhavin had visited the governor in connection withan investigation of the causes of the famine in the pro-vince, Before this, there had been an exchange of let-ters about the hasidim between the provincial govern-ors in Lithuania and Minsk. During his visit to WhiteRussia, Dyerzhavin had made the acquaintance of R.Shneur-Zalman. Four days after Dyerzhavin submit-ted his report, R. Shneur-Zalman was thrown intoprison. In St. Petersburg, R. Avigdor helped thejudges by drawing up in writing questions and chargesto be used in the investigation of R. Shneur-Zalman,to which the latter replied also in writing. The wholematter was then handed over by the 'Secret Office’ tothe third department of the Senate. A fortnightlater, R. Shneur-Zalman was released from prison, butordered to remain in St. Petersburg.Both parties to the dispute submitted petitionsand declarations which contained details about thefirst imprisonment of R. Shneur-Zalman in 1798. R.Avigdor, in his petitions, demands that all the other‘Karliner’ leaders should also be arrested and broughtto St. Petersburg,^a demand which was not granted.The documents show that the hasidim of Lakhovich,whose influence had meanwhile spread to the ^prin-cipal community’ of Lithuania, Slutsk, were beingviolently harried by the mithnagdim, and also thatthe hasidim as a whole enjoyed the support of theprovincial authorities in Minsk. It is characteristicthat R. Avigdor quotes the evidence of Jews fromVilna and Slutsk in support of his written charges,but not the evidence of his own fellow-townsmen113 Dubnow, Yevreyshaya Starina, Vol. Ill, pp. 253-261; and Documents 9, 10, 11-13, 24.11^ Hessen, Yevreyi v Rossiyi, pp. 176-180.113 Dubnow, Yevreyshaya Stariiia, Vol. Ill, p. 271,Document 20.from Pinsk. As a result of the arguments and otherweapons employed by R. Avigdor in this final stage,his struggle against the hasidim lost its originallyselfless religious character and degenerated into aprivate war for the satisfaction of personal demands(such as repayment of debts), carried on by meansof denunciations to the Russian authorities, even thoughR. Avigdor still endeavoured to base his chargeson the tenets of Judaism. Before the Senate hadhad time to study the documents in the dispute, apalace revolution took place in St. Petersburg (theassassination of the Tsar Paul by his ministers, March1801). R. Shneur-Zalman was immediately releasedand permitted to return home; and thus ended thestruggle between him and R. Avigdor.Amongst all the bitter enemies of hasidism, R.Avigdor occupies a special place in the hasidic writingsand stories. He is referred to simply as 'Avigdor/with the addition of such appellations as "the wickedone,’ 'the informer,’ 'may his name and memory beblotted out,’ and the like; and it is related of himthat he was reduced to abject poverty and finallycame to beg alms of R. Shneur-Zalman, and also thathis sons became hasidim. This tradition about theconversion of R. Avigdor’s sons to hasidism is confirm-ed by one of his descendants, who writes as follows;'The Israelit family... were ... on the father’s side,descended from R. Avigdor of Pinsk, the well-knownadversary of R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi... From thefirst beginnings of Habad hasidism this family was astronghold of mithnagdism. However, my grandfather,the grandson of R. Avigdor of Pinsk whose name heactually bore, made a breach, as it were, in this for-tress, for he became a fervent hasid. In this he wasfollowed by my father ... whose house was steepedin Torah and hasidism.’^i® What happened to R.Avigdor in the last years of his life is not known. Hisson was a dayyan in Pinsk.^^*^110 Heilman, Beth Rabbi, Pt. I, p. 34, n. 2 and p. 68;Teitelbaum, Ha-Rav mi-Ladi, p. 23, n. 3; Shivhei ha-Rav, pp. 3, 12 et al.; N. Israelit, ^Mishpahath Israelit/Pinkas Kletsk, p. 51, Tel Aviv 1959.117 Entsiklopediyah Yisraelith, Vol. I, s.v.: Avigdorben Yosef-Hayyim, Berlin 1929. From a letter writtenby one of the hasidim to the son of R. Shneur-Zalmanin 1806, in which the writer violently abuses R. Avig-dor, we may conclude that R. Avigdor was still alive inthat year. The source of this letter—H. A. Bikhovski,Ginzei Nistaroth, Or Rav, p. 7, Jerusalem 1924—isknown not to be entirely reliable.The writer Zalman Shneur has included an imaginat-HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN107In all the documents, both the official governmentmemoranda and the petitions of R. Avigdor, the ha-sidim are referred to as ^Karliners’; and the samename is used by the hasidim themselves in their letters.R. Avigdor, in one of his letters, explains the appehlation as follows: ‘Those who flock after him [sc. R.Shneur-Zalman] are called Karliners because, after thedeath of the two writers mentioned above [the Beshtand the Maggtd of Mezerich], Aharon and Shelomo[i.e., R. Aharon the Great and R. Shelomo of Karlin]of the community of Karlin in the province of Minskwere the first to follow in their footsteps.’^^® R. Shneur-Zalman, on the other hand, uses the term ‘hasidim^and remarks ‘that he [sc. R. Avigdor] calls themKarliners only out of hatred.^^^® The representativeof the Vilna community writes: ‘because of their wild-ness the hasidim are called Karliners.All thesestatements show that the appellation ‘Karliners’ wasan insulting term of abuse, and it was used in thissense down to the fifties of the nineteenth century.^During the years 1794-1801 the numbers of thehasidim increased, thanks to the legal status that theyenjoyed both in Pinsk itself and also in Polesia. Per-haps their numbers were now swelled by all those whohad previously been afraid to proclaim their adherenceto the movement openly. Small groups of Karlin ha-sidim now came into existence not only in centralPolesia, but also in other towns of Lithuania. Thus,for example, in Vilna there was a Karlin prayer-house[‘shttebel,’ ‘shulkhen’], and even a Lakhovich ‘shtie-bel.’ The Lakhovich hasidim, who appear to havebeen numerous, maintained contact with their Rebbe,R. Mordekhai, through his son-in-law, R. Yitshak theson of R. Wolf, who used to visit them regularly andgive them moral support in their struggle to maintaintheir position.In the conflict between the mithnagdim and thehasidim,the mass of ordinary Jews came down firmlyon the side of the hasidim, and the Tsarist regime gaveive literary reconstruction of the personalities of theVilna Gaon and R. Shneur-Zalman, and of R. Avigdor’sdenunciation, in his story Ha-Gaon ve-ha-Rav, Tel Aviv1958.118 Dubnow, Yevreyskaya Starina, Vol. Ill, p. 266,Document 15.11® Dubnow, op. cit., p. 273, Document 21.120 Hessen, Istoriya Yevreyskogo Naroda v Rossiyi,Pt. I, p. Ill, n. 19.121 Friedkin, Gottlober un 8ayn Epokhe, p. 75. V.supr.legal confirmation to the popular verdict: ‘If in anytown the dispute becomes so bitter that one group re-fuses to pray with the other in the same synagogue,then either has the right to build a synagogue of itsown and to elect its own rabbis. But both groups shallform one community.’ [‘Polozheniye’ 1804].^^^E. Rabbi Asher the First (1793-1826)After their victory in the last decade of the eigh-teenth century the Karlin hasidim were able to followtheir own customs, openly and without fear of moles-122 p. s. Marek, ^Vnutrenyaya Borba v Yevreystve vXVIII Veke/ Yevreyskaya Btarina, Vol. XII, p. 163,Leningrad 1928. On the existence of a Karlin and La-khovitch minyan at that time in Vilna, see Dubnow,Toledoth ha-Hasiduthj p. 223; Klausner, op. cit., p. 24ff. On the hasidim in Vidz see above, n. 108. Even afterthe Russian government in St. Petersburg had releasedR. Shneur-Zalman from prison, the mithnagdim in Vil-na still continued their fight against the hasidim andwent on applying the name ‘Karliner’ to any and everyhasid. Thus, in the regulation of ‘the beth midrash ofthe pious Gaon, Rabbenu Eliyahu/ of the 24th Adar,1801, we find it explicitly stated that ‘great care shallbe taken to ensure that, among the above-mentionedstudents in the beth midrash, there shall not be asingle one of the new sect of the so-called Karliners’(quoted by S. Y. Fuen, Kiryah Neemanah, p. 275, Vilna1860). The same attitude to the hasidim as prevailedin ‘the beth midrash of the Gaon* in Vilna was alsofound at this time in the talmudic study groups in thesmall towns, which were controlled by the mithnagdim.In the pinkas of ‘the holy circle for the study of TaUmud and Mishnah* in the small town of Radoshkovich(close to Minsk), the original manuscript of which isin the National Library in Jerusalem (4® 636), there isa resolution of the 26th Tishri, 1800, prohibiting theadmission of hasidim to this group. (I. Halpem, ^Havu*roth la-Torah ve-la^Mitsvoth ve-ha-Tenuah ha~Hasidithbe-Hithpashtuthah/ Zion, 22nd year, pp. 194-213, Jeru-salem 1957). Instructively characteristic is the gradualchange for the better reflected by the pinkas of thisgroup in the attitude to the hasidim in the first yearsof the nineteenth century. Up to 1804 we still find theresolution of 1800 in full force. But already in 1805the resolution is no longer quoted in full, but is simplyincluded in ‘the minutes made in the above pinkas otdecisions taken up to this day.’ The same formula ap-pears in the regulations for 1806 and 1807. However,in 1808 this resolution was completely annulled, since‘at this time the majority of the community is unableto conform to this resolution and it may lead to un-seemly conduct and violent quarrels.’ The majority ofthe community evidently by now contained so manyhasidim that it was no longer possible to keep them outof the study circle.108W. Z. RABINOWITSCHtation. But the bitter animosity between them and themithnaged majority all around them was not com-pletely extinguished, and from time to time it flaredup again into communal and personal strife.Throughout the nineteenth century Karlin hasid-ism preserved its character virtually unchanged. Thenew elements introduced by hasidism into the beliefsand worships of Judaism crystallised, in time, into afixed pattern of dogma. The leader of the hasidim, inwhom they had unbounded faith, was the Tsaddik orRebbe. His opinion and authority were absolutelybinding on all members of the sect. These Tsaddikimestablished family dynasties, with the father’s powerand sanctity passing to the son. The Tsaddik knewevery single one of his followers personally and wasacquainted with their private affairs and worries; hewas always ready with an encouraging word; he sup-ported them in their griefs and shared in their joys,and at all times he was their guide in piety and wor-ship, The Tsaddik^s paternal attitude to his hasidim,together with the individual hasid’s faith in the sanct-ity and power of his Tsaddiky had a marked effect onthe hasid’s whole spiritual character, setting him apartfrom the Lithuanian rabbinical environment in whichhe lived. The focal point of the Karlin hasid’s—as ofany other hasid’s—life was his Rebbe, because HheRebbe, too, is thinking of him all the time.’ This in-timate relationship with the Rebbe had a similar effecton the relations of the hasidim with each other. TheKarlin hasid was like all the other hasidim in that helived his life within the closed circle of his hasidicenvironment. But, as a result of the special develop-ment and stress that it gave to certain basic hasidictenets, Karlin hasidism took on a form that disting-uished it from the rest of the hasidic movement.During the first quarter of the nineteenth centurythe Karlin hasidim were led by R. Asher of Stolin,the son of R. Aharon the Great who has already beenmentioned. Under R. Asher’s leadership, the numberof the Karlin hasidim seems to have increased, espe-cially in Polesia and Volhynia, thanks to the favour-able geographical position occupied by Stolin on theborders of the province of Volhynia. R. Asher’s father,R. Aharon the Great, had gone to the people; nowthe people came to R. Asher, but not always in orderto get from R. Asher what R. Aharon the Great hadwanted to give them.Hasidic tradition relates that^ during the emerg-ency of the Napoleonic wars, the Karlin hasidim founda safe place of refuge in R. Asher’s house. Among the‘holy writings’ discovered in the Stolin genizah weretwo of R. Asher’s pinkasim [private notes]. In oneof these, comprising mainly records of family matters,there is a will drawn up by R. Asher from which itis clear that he possessed considerable wealth in mo-ney and landed property. Yet—and this should bestressed—the dynasty of Karlin Tsaddikim were notambitious for material wealth, nor did they aspire togive their ‘court’ the external magnificence which wasso sought after by some of the Tsaddikim in Volhyniaand the Ukraine. On the contrary, it was the customof the Karlin Tsaddikim to take money from theirwealthy hasidim and distribute it amongst their poorerfollowers.R. Asher was in the habit, on Sabbaths and Fes-tivals, of expounding a hasidic interpretation of theweekly portion of the Law. A collection of these ha-sidic sermons, together with ‘Rules of Right Conduct,’‘Exhortations,’ and several of R. Asher’s letters, waspublished by the Karlin hasidim, and are included inthe volume Beth Aharon}^^ In the preface to thiswork, the publishers write as follows: ‘... Excellentsermons... delivered... by our Teacher and Master,R. Aharon himself [sc. R. Aharon the Second, the sonof R. Asher the First] ... accurately and truly re-corded ... We have added a separate section for theholy writings... of our Teacher R. Asher [the First]... and several articles are as written in his holyhand. Also some holy letters, and the daily programmeof our holy Rebbes .. . who delivered it from theirholy hand to the community of Yeshurun [i.e., the123 Tsavvaah mi-Kethoveth Yad Morenu... J2 .Aha-ron [ha-Gadol] mi-Karlin... ve-Hanhagoth Yesharoth...mi-Beno R. Asher, Chernovits 1849, 1855; Beth Aharon...R. Aharon... mi-Karlin u-Miltha... Morenu Asher u-mi-Pi... R. Aharon ha-Gadol... mi-Karlin. Gam...meeth Beno ... R. Asher... mi-Stolin, Brody 1875. Herethe Hanhagoth Yesharoth [Guides to Good Conduct](pp. 2, 3) of R. Asher the First are printed with slighttextual alterations, as also his Azharoth [Exhortations](pp. 3-5), Derashoth [Sermons] (pp. 17-41), Letters(pp. 293, 297, 315) and Dihburim Nehmadim [Delight-ful Sayings] reported in his name (pp. 285-287). SinceBeth Aharon also contains the Sermons and Letters ofR. Aharon the Second, the hook actually comprises thewhole spiritual legacy of the Karlin dynasty. A. Haus-man, in his books Divrei Aharon, pp. 5—20 (Jerusalem1962) and Birkath Aharon, pp. 17-50 (Jerusalem 1970),cites ‘Sayings' which the Karlin hasidim attribute toR. Asher the First and used to relate in his name. Cf.,n. 161.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN109Jews] that thronged the Rebbes^ threshold ... And theholy writings of our Master and Teacher [R. Aharonthe Second] ... and of his father [R. Asher the First]... which were collected together . .. and annotatedin the holy hand of our revered Teacher and Master[R. Aharon the Second] of blessed memory, variousannotations on various themes ... We have thought fitto add other excellent matters, written down by thefollowers of our Teacher and Master [R. Aharon theSecond] as a record of his holy words which they heardfrom his holy mouth at various times, when theywere in the sanctity of his house. Although some ofthese matters are similar to the sermons already men-tioned which were written by our Teacher and Mas-ter ... we have nevertheless, out of reverence for hissanctity, printed every one of them without any alter-ations ...’ From these prefatory remarks, and alsofrom the introductions added by the hasidim themselvesto every article and from their occasional commentsinserted in the text, it may be inferred that the hasidimtook pains to give the name of the author of everymanuscript, although we cannot be sure that they al-ways succeeded. The writings of R. Asher the First—as stated by the hasidim themselves in the Treface’—were edited by his son R. Aharon.About the character and opinions of R. Asher wecan learn from the ^Rules of Right Conduct’ {Han-hagoth Yesharoth] which he gave to his followers andwhich were printed together with the will of his father,R. Aharon the Great, during the lifetime of his son andsuccessor, R. Aharon the Second (Chernovits 1849 and1855). R. Asher charges his hasidim as follows: ^Everyone of you must sanctify himself, that the Lord maydwell within him, as it is written: “And you shallmake me a shrine that I may dwell there,” etc. (Exo-dus XXV, 8) ... And every one of you shall divide hisdays and years between the study of the Bible, theMishnah, and the Gemara and Aggadah^ this beingthe bounden duty of every Jew . .. Every one mustdevote himself to the study of the Gemara and Po-sekim and must learn according to his need; he mustnot let himself be unoccupied, for in moments of idle-ness it is better that he should take up the holy Pro-phets and learn morality and piety from them...Let every one that has the mind and intention to learnand understand the Gemara and the Posekim be verycareful. Let him not be like those that learn—^Heavenforbid!—only for their own greater glory, but let him,with his keen mind, fully comprehend all that helearns. Let him not go on from one matter to anotheruntil he has fully understood the first, and let himgo over it again three or four times until he knows itby heart... A little studying done with his wholeheart will be of benefit to him alike in sharpening hiswits^ improving his memory, and increasing his pi-ety ...’ ^Let him take care to have a good, faithfuland trustworthy friend to whom he can tell all hisinnermost thoughts for at least half an hour everyday...’ ‘Let every one take care to give a tithe ofwhat he earns, and let him not think this a trivial mat-ter, as expounded in the Gemara and Midrash andPosekim .. .’The other writings attributed to R. Asher theFirst—‘several articles in his own holy hand’—^whichwere printed at a later date (Beth Aharon, Brody1875) also give us an insight into his conception ofhasidism. In one of these, which the hasidim attestto have been ‘copied from the original manuscript ofthe same holy Rabbi [R. Asher the First],’ we readthe following instructions to the hasidim: ‘When anyone of you has to speak about the affairs of this world,let his thought be that he is going down from a highersphere, like a man that is going out from his houseand intends to return. Just as such a man, whilewalking, is thinking when he will return to his house,so let the hasid always think of the higher world,where is his real home, of the Creator Blessed BeHe, even when he is talking of the affairs of thisworld. Let his thoughts return at once to cleave firstof all to the Creator Blessed Be He.’ ^Let not a manbe too strict in examining everything that he does, forthis is the intention of the evil impulse [ha-yetser ha-ra]—to make him fear that he is not doing this thingas he should, in order to plunge him into melancholy.And melancholy, as we know, is a great hindrance tothe proper worship of the Creator. Even if a manhas transgressed let him not be so overcome by melan-choly as to stop his work. Let him simply regret thetransgression, and then once more rejoice in the Creawtor. Since he is genuinely contrite... he should riot bemelancholy^ but should consider that the Creator,who searches the heart and reins, knows that his wishis to do only what is best.’ For ‘the Holy One BlessedBe He does not upbraid His creatures... for every-thing is judged according to human nature, according tothe place and the time, and according to the measure[of each man’s] faith and piety and intelligence .. .and purity of heart and strength of mind are enough110W. Z. RABINOWITSCHfor you to be able to carry out the commandment:“Know Him in all your ways.’^ How can you “knowHim”? In joy.. . and then you will attain true wis-dom ... Let everyone worship the Creator joyfullyat all times and rejoice in his lot, the lot given himby God on High.’ With regard to the mithnagdim,R. Asher lays down the following ^great principle:When people abuse the hasid for his form of prayeror for other matters, he shall not answer them evenin a conciliatory tone, so as not to start a quarreland give rise to pride, for pride makes man forget theCreator Blessed Be He. And our Sages have said:“Silence makes a man humble.” ’Very typical and instructive—both for R. Asher’sestimate of the importance and purpose of thestudy of the Law and also for his fatherly attitude tohis followers—is the letter that he wrote to one ofhis close associates, which is also included in the volumeBeth Aharon, In one part of this letter, R. Asherwrites:‘... Your son-in-law (long may he live!) told methat your honour is neglecting your trade ... and notdoing any business, but wishes just to sit at home...You must know, my dear friend, that this is not theright way. It is plainly written in the Torah: “Thoushalt eat the fruit of thy labours,” etc. And in theGemara: “He that enjoys the fruit of his labours isgreater than the God-fearing man.” Believe me, mydear friend^ that one loan or one small coin given ascharity, or any of the other practical observances,especially entertaining guests ... is better than severalweeks, perhaps even years, of studying the Torah.For the end of study is action... as you can learnfrom the questions asked: Did you do business honest-ly and did you study the Torah regularly?Which shows that whoever does business honest-ly is not obliged only to study the Torah regularly...and the way is thus open to businessmen who wishto turn aside from evil and do good: as I wrote, morethan by several weeks of study. With God’s help ithas been granted me to persuade several people, whowished to do as you do, to carry on with their bu-siness; and they, thank God, are grateful to me, bothin this world and the next. The main thing is thatyou should not be negligent in any matter of business.For you must know that, when you neglect your busi-ness, your study suffers, too. Of this, too, it is written:“Thou shalt not eat the bread of idleness..Godwilling, when you follow my advice, I shall write toyou at greater length. Your task is to act, and theLord will bring the work to a good end... I havetold my brother-in-law (long may he live!) to lookafter you and watch over your health; to see to it thatyou eat properly and sleep properly, and that youget the sleep you require for the health of your body,head and limbs. Please do not treat this matter light-ly, especially as you are by nature thin and delicate.Your study of the Torah will, God willing, be improvedby your care.’Some time later R. Asher moved to Karlin, theplace to which, fifty years before, his father had withsuch enthusiasm and devotion brought the doctrine ofhasidism from Mezerich. The exact year of R. Asher’sreturn to Karlin is not known, but it could not havebeen before 1810, since in that year he was still livingin Stolin, where he was visited by R. Mordekhai ofLakhovich, who also died there.^^^ Thus Karlin oncemore became the centre of the Karlin hasidim.R. Asher’s importance in the hasidic world and hisrelations with other contemporary Tsaddikitn are in-dicated by two documents found in the Stolin genizah:a letter from R. Asher to the famed Tsaddik of thePolish hasidim, R. Yisrael of Kozhenits (Hhe Maggidof Kozhenits’; both the original and a copy of thisletter were found); and a public proclamation writtenby R. Asher in support of Jews living in Palestine.Although neither of the documents is dated, it is clearthat they were both written at the beginning of thenineteenth century.^^^ Below are excerpts from theletter sent by R. Asher the First of Stolin to R. Yis^-rael of Kozhenits:‘With the help of the Holy Name, on the secondday of the week.. . here in the community of Stolin.‘Greetings, greetings... to his reverence... theRabbi... the man of God ... the renowned hasid ...Yisrael (long may he live!) together with ... his wifeand children (long may they live!) and all his follow-ers... to all of them greetings and peace upon Israel.124 Kleinman, Mazkereth Shem ha-Gedolim, p. 108.The grave of R. Mordekhai of Lakhovich is in Stolin:Divrei Shalom by R. Shalom of Koidanov, p. 14, Vilna1882.125 Parts of the two documents are quoted in theoriginal in Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, pp. 481-483.Beth Aharon (p. 297) contains a small excerpt fromthe letter to R. Yisrael of Kozhenits, and also the Pro-clamation (p. 315), printed with slight textual alter-ations and mistakenly attributed to R. Aharon theSecond.HASIDISM IN HNSK AND KARLIN111Traise be to God, we are alive and well, I andmy pious wife .. . Feige-Bathyah, and my little son,Aharon, and my daughter, P'erl, and her husband andhis children, and my wife’s son .. . Moshe-Baer ...and his wife and children ... The Lord be praised . . .we are all... here alive and well, and may we begranted the blessing of prosperity .. . life and peace .. .that it may be vouchsafed me to behold his holy re-verence’s countenance... in life, joy, and peace.‘My dearly beloved friend .. . whom I rememberat all times. .. and whom I entreat... to have meengraved on his pure and holy heart... and to acceptmy offering [i.e., gift] which I gladly send to him,that it may please him to recall me, my son, and mywife. Even though I am far away... from his re-verence, yet is my soul bound to his soul... In almostevery prayer, and especially on our holy Sabbaths .. .I am bound to him ... with bonds of love ... and inparticular ... his holy words. .. delivered to me byR. Barukh of Zhelikhov who requested me in his holyname... to remain silent and calm and not to inter-vene in the dispute .. .‘... God will remember that, when I was in thecommunity of Zhelikhov, I had several adventuresand with the Lord’s help I found the middle path.To be sure, here, too, [in Stolin], there were severalsuch incidents . .. but this is not my way. .. Heavenprotect me from matters of this kind and their like[i.e., quarrels], and I shall not go back on what Ihave said. It may have happened once in a year thatI was obliged to speak in public ... for when ... aman truly and sincerely desires to receive moral guid-ance, it is my duty to prevent him from committinga transgression, as my heart and soul prompt me. Butapart from this ... I shall not speak ... for severalprivate reasons.‘. .. My very dear friend ... be sure ... thatmy faith is no mere formal observance (Heaven for-bid !) ... My heart cries to the Lord ... I have learntfrom the holy ones of the Most High, and especiallyfrom his reverence’s holy lips, how to keep our faith . . .Only he .. . who is in the habit of exaggerating. ..can say, ‘^Accept my opinion and my manner of worship; this is the way in which they shall all walk.” ..But we have received all the ways of the Lord, lovingkindness and truth, from our sovereign David, Kingof Israel... In short, the wise man in this time will besilent, etc.^ .. I know that the holy Rabbi (blessed be he andblessed be his name! ...) weeps out his soul in sec-ret... and his heart cries to the Lord for this...Neither do I say. Accept my opinion; but only...that Israel’s faith in Torah, prayer, and mitsvothshould be strengthened, as when the stood at the footof Mount Sinai and said “We shall do and obey.”‘... Who is the man that presumes to intervenein the dispute and to delay (Heaven forbid!) the re-conciliation? Let my lord believe me that, at the timewhen I wrote, I could not control myself, so greatwas my grief ... My lord has the wisdom and know-ledge ... to understand... the root of the matter.Therefore let him do what seems right to him. I trustin his graciousness and goodness to find me innocentand thereby behold the goodness of my heart... Thusfar have I poured out my heart. ..Tn short, were I to describe to his reverence indetail several matters ... that I saw with my owneyes and heard with my own ears, and that I cantestify to ... my lord would be astounded by the reportand would certainly^ as I think, publicly demand thatthey abandon this way. I need not mention them byname ... There are thousands upon thousands of them,almost a whole State, that speak in the streets onlyabout the mystic secrets of the Law. .. They havecast truth and faith to the ground and falsely slanderthe holy ones of the Most High [i.e., the Tsaddikim]. . . saying: “Everything with them is as naught...they spurn the observance of the mitsvoth and despisethe plain meaning of the Torah** ... If I were able... to describe ... how the shiddukh [marriage agree-ment] was made with the holy Rabbi and Gaon...that they might have a specious cause for an other-wise unjustifiable quarrel.... They achieved whatthey desired, but they did not act truthfully...^May the Lord preserve us from evil and strangethoughts! Far be it from me and from my father’shouse to intervene in the dispute. I have never pre-sumed ... to say that I, too, am one of the greatones of our time. I do not stand in the presence ofthe great; nay, I pray the Lord ... at all times andevery hour that I may know my place, and that itmay be granted me to be the youngest... andhumblest of the disciples, and to be truly close ... tothe holy ones of our time... I trust in my Lord’sgraciousness and goodness ... and in the honesty ofmy intentions in this, and that all will end well.‘From me who write to his reverence ... about myheart’s friendship . ., and whose soul... longs to be ...112W. Z. RABINOWITSCHin his courts and to behold the delight... of hisglorious holiness, in life and peace. May he rememberme for good ... at all times and at every hour ...His friend for ever ..The letter is full of allusions, names being hardlymentioned at all: T need not mention them by name.’But it is clear that the main point concerns The greatcontroversy.’ The key to understanding some of theevents hinted at in the letter can be provided by cer-tain details from the contemporary history of hasidismand also from R. Asher’s own private life. When R.Asher writes sorrowfully about what he endured inZhelikhov, he is no doubt referring to the disputebetween himself and R. Levi-Yitshak of Berdichev.^The holy Rabbi, blessed be he and blessed be hisname,’ mentioned in the letter is presumably the Tsad-dik R. Barukh of Mezhibozh, whose pupil R. Asherhad been for a short time. R. Asher complains ofThousands upon thousands... almost a whole State,that speak in the streets only about the mystic secretsof the Law ... They have cast truth and faith to theground, and falsely slander the holy ones of the MostHigh,’ the reference here, apparently, being to theHabad hasidim of R. Shneur-Zalman. It is well knownthat at this time a violent dispute had broken outbetween the Tsaddikim. R. Avraham of Kalisk (thenin Palestine), R. Barukh of Mezhibozh, R. Mordekhaiof Lakhovich and R. Asher of Stolin all strongly op-posed R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi, who was supportedby R. Levi-Yitshak of Berdichev.^^® The cause of the126 V. supr. R. Barukh of Zhelikhov, who is men-tioned in this letter, is elsewhere described as adisciple of R. Asher; Hausman, Divrei Aharon, p. 17;on pp. 6 and 17, R. Shalom of Horodok is named asa disciple of R. Asher. V. also Hausman, Birkhath Aha-ron, p. 54.127 V. supr.128 Heilman, Beth Rabbi, Pt. I, p. 83 ff. Comparethis letter of R. Asher’s with the letter from R. Av-rcdiam of Kalisk to R. Shneur-Zalman. A. Y. Braver,*Al ha-Mahloketh bein R. Shneur-Zalman mi-Ladi ve-R. Avraham Hacohen mi-Kalisk/ Kiryath Sefer, Vol. I,p. 144 If., Jerusalem 1924. The bitterness between theLithuania Tsaddikim and R. Shneur-Zalman goes backto the time of R. Shelomo of Karlin. It continued rightdown to the first quarter of the nineteenth century, ascan be seen from the fact that, in his Proclamation OnBehalf of Erets Yisrael, dated 1821, R. Noah, the sonof R. Mordekhai of Lakhovich, specifically mentionsR. Shelomo of Karlin, R. Barukh of Mezhibozh and hisfather R. Mordekhai, ‘who were in the habit of sup-porting the poor of Erets Yisrael,^ while ignoring thedispute was, as can be inferred from the letters writtenby R. Asherand by R. Avraham of Kalisk,^®® notonly doctrinal, but also partly personal, especially inthe case of R. Barukh of Mezhibozh, on account ofR. Shneur-Zalman’s great influence. R. Asher, in thisletter, after remarking on the spiritual difference be-tween Karlin and Habad hasidism, promises not totake any part in the dispute and appeals for moralsupport to his teacher, R. Yisrael of Kozhenits. Theletter is written throughout in a humble and submis-sive tone, indicating that the writer felt that he wasunder attack. It is evident from this letter that R.Asher at this period had as yet nothing of the innerconfidence and proud status of his father, R. Aharonthe Great.The letter was most probably written atsome time between 1802, the year of the birth of Thelittle son of Aharon,’ and 1807, the year of the deathof Perl’s husband, R. Aharon, who is mentioned inthe letter with the addition of the words ^may he live!’The text of R. Asher the First’s public appeal onbehalf of the Holy Land runs as follows:‘... Be silent and hear, O Israel! . .. Blessed bethe Lord that has sanctified us with the sanctity ofthe Land of Israel... For this, sages and prophetshave instructed us to set aside a place for our prayerthrice daily for our Land and ... our holy Temple ...Verily, His mercies have not failed us till now.. .Throughout our borders .. . those that perform Hisword in the Holy Land ... are strengthened by greatbenefactions and fulfil their holy charge. . intercedingfor us and our brethren that dwell outside it. Now Ihave seen that there is none among you who willrouse you from your deep slumber, that you may de-fend ourselves .. . and find a place in the Lord’s in-heritance ... Hence I have resolved ... to makeknown to you my request and entreaty: My dearlybeloved Jewish brethren, awaken your hearts to feelpity and compassion for the poor of our Land, theLand of Life, man and woman, child and suckling.Strengthen and support, I pray you ... the cities ofour God ... and strengthen your hearts, all you thatwait for the Lord ... Then they will rejoice in us andactivities of R. Shneur-Zalman in the same cause.V. supr., and W. Z. Rabinowitsch, op. cit., p. 157.129 cf., infr.. The Proclamation of R. Asher On Be-half of Erets Yisrael.130 Braver, op. cit., ibid.131 Cf. supr., the postscripts made by R. Aharon theGreat in the Nesvizh pinkos.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN113in our gift. . . and their good deeds shall never fail us.And you, sons of the Living God ... do you help eachother. Let each one say to his brother, “Be strongand of good courage in the service of the Lord!’^ Letthem strengthen the hands of those engaged in thework... by bringing the money to the House of theLord, that their contribution may last for ever . .. Weare further obliged to make it known to our dearlybeloved Jewish brethren . ., since in every town andvillage there are dissenters ... who also desire the im-portant office for themselves and their own benefit,who call evil good and . .. wilfully weaken the handsof those that are performing this mitsvah ... This onecomes with a claim of priority: Why was he not giventhe performance of this mitsvah^ since he would havecarried it out more properly? ... Beware of men likethese, whose names are already known ... Know fullwell that the Rabbi and Gaon, the Righteous Priest,our Teacher and Master from the Land of Israel, haswritten about these men that they should know theyare putting their own lives in danger . .. Moreover Ishall make the facts known to all the honest Tsaddikimand hasidim ... that all should know who they are .. .Again and again I have uttered the warning of ourholy Law and the warning of all the Tsaddikim withwhom my soul is bound up ... Think not that this isa matter of no import, for it has been explicitly sti-pulated that all the holy money shall be handed overto me. God willing, we shall bring them receipts fromthe Land of Life [i.e., the Holy Land], them and theirwives and children ... May He bless you with abund-ance of strength and peace! Peace upon Israel! ...From me, who write and sign on behalf of our breth-ren and on behalf of the Land [of Israel] and ofthose that dwell therein... May it be vouchsafedthem to go up to Zion rejoicing. .. and may the lightof our righteous Messiah shine forth . ..‘Asher,the son of our Master R. Aharon of blessedmemory.’This proclamation undoubtedly contains a referenceto the quarrel between R. Avraham of Kalisk, whowas at that time living in Palestine, and R. Shneur-Zalman, who was authorised to collect money for theJewish community in Palestine.^A number of otherTsaddikim, who had taken part in the fund-raising,were obliged to settle the dispute in favour of one orother of these two Tsaddikim. The pressure was par-ticularly strong on the Lithuanian Tsaddikim, since132 Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth, pp. 335-338.they lived in close proximity to R. Shneur-Zalman.R. Asher’s proclamation proves that he regarded R.Avraham of Kalisk as the sole authorised collector:‘The Rabbi and Gaon, the Righteous Priest, ourTeacher and Master from the Land of Israel.’ Of R.Avraham’s rivals he writes with great bitterness, warn-ing his own followers to ‘beware of men like these,’ andannouncing—doubtless on behalf of R. Avraham ofKalisk—that he, R. Asher, has been appointed tosupervise the collection of money for the land of Is-rael.Found amongst ‘the holy writings’ in the Sto-lin genizah were receipts for various sums of moneysent by R. Asher to Palestine. The proclamation waswritten between 1801, when the dispute between R.Avraham of Kalisk and R. Shneur-Zalman was at itsheight,and 1810, the year of R. Avraham’s death.'®*^In contrast to the humble and submissive tonewhich makes itself felt in the letter to R, Yisrael ofKozhenits and in the proclamation on behalf of theJewish community in Palestine, a very different noteis heard in R. Asher the First’s letter to certainJews who were desecrating the Sabbath in pursuanceof their business. This letter, which is printed in BethAharon, was also found in the Stolin genizah bearingthe address of certain salt merchants of Kremenets inVolhynia, some of whom used ‘to eat at his table.’ HereR. Asher appears in the role of stern castigator anddoes not shrink from upbraiding and rebuking theRabbanim, ‘the religious teachers of Israel,’ who ‘arepaid by the community... to teach the Lord’s peopleHis ways ... and should stand in the breach... andwarn the children of Israel to keep well away fromwhat is forbidden ... Then why now ... do they put...their hands to their mouths, and why are they thussilent? If they are small in their own eyes, let themremember that they are the leaders of the children ofIsrael.’ He goes on to demand of them that ‘wherevertheir authority rules, they should impose ... enormousfines on this offence ... and above all that they shouldexhort the mass of the people... to act with rever-ence for the teachers of the Law.’This letter supplements what we have learnt about133 In other sources, however, it is stated that R.Avraham of Kalisk’s emissary, R. Meir of Bykhov,appointed R. Mordekhai of Lakhovitch as head of thefund-collectors on behalf of Erets Yisrael. A. Yaari,Sheluhei Erets Yisrael, p. 625, Jerusalem 1951; Hilman,Iggeroth Baal ha-Tanya, pp. 177, 182.134 Yaari, op. cit., p. 624.135 Dubnow, Toledoth ha^Hasiduth, p. 337.114W. Z. RABINOWITSCHthe personality of R. Asher the First from his ^Rulesof Right Conduct’ and ‘Exhortations’ and from hisother letters quoted above. It shows that, in the courseof time R. Asher gained authority and recognition asa responsible leader of the Jewish masses, even thoughhe himself admits that at first he refrained from up-braiding the mithnagdim, for fear that they wouldnot listen to him. ‘When I heard this ... I said tomyself that I had better be silent and refrain fromwords of censure.’ It was only, writes R. Asher furtheron in his letter, ‘when I discovered that the men whoraised their hands were themselves of those... thateat at my table. .. that I thought I might have thepower to protest. Perhaps it is my task to warn themthat they should hearken to my voice. I have cometo perform my duty. For that I will raise my voice.’In contrast to what we know of the early days of ha-sidism, when the founder of the new movement soughtto protect the simple Jew from the harshness of theRabbanim, R. Asher now demands of the Rabbanimthat they should ‘impose enormous fines’ on the de-secrators of the Sabbath. A further piece of inform-ation provided by this letter is that, in those days,non-Jews were economically dependent on Jewishmerchants who used to exploit this fact to compel‘them [the Gentiles] to desecrate their holy day, justas they [the Jews] desecrate their own holy day.’ R.Asher protests vehemently against this attitude of theJews to the Gentiles. The expression ‘of those ... thateat at my table,’ used here by R. Asher to denote hisown hasidim, is very characteristic, and corroboratesthe tradition of the Karlin hasidim about the existenceof a ‘table’ in Stolin and Karlin in the time of R.Asher the First. The letter also provides confirmatoryevidence that, already in R. Asher’s day, there wereKarlin hasidim in the town of Kremenets, which issituated in the southern part of Volhynia. The letteris undated, but must have been written after thestruggle with the mithnagdim had ended and R. Asherwas firmly established in his ‘court’—most probablyin the twenties of the nineteenth century.Among the small number of writings left by R.Asher the First, there is an incomplete collection ofexpositions of the Readings of the Law for Sabbathsand Festivals, which were published in Beth Aharon.In form and content, R. Asher’s expositions are si-milar to those of most of the hasidic teachers of thattime, being built around words and verses from thebiblical text and interspersed with quotations from theMidrash and the Zohar, interpreted according to ha-sidic and kabbalistic concepts. R. Asher several timesquotes the exegesis of R. Shelomo of Karlin, intro-ducing the quotations with the words: ‘And I heardfrom the lips of my holy Teacher, R. Shelomo, mayhis soul rest in bliss!’ This form of words tends toconfirm that the expositions were actually writtenby R. Asher himself. On the other hand, in anotherplace we read: ‘When R. Asher returned home fromvisiting the holy and revered Rabbi of Mezhibozh, herelated in his name’; or again, ‘he gave precise de-tails,’ using the third person. Some idea of R. Asher’sconception of hasidism, his way of worship, and hishumanity can be obtained from several of the sayingsattributed to him, like those quoted by R. Aharonthe Second: ‘I once heard my revered Father, Teacherand Rabbi say, “Know whence [Heb. me-ayin] youhave come—that means. Know that you have comefrom nothing” [Heb. me-ayin]. And again: “A manmust count every day, every moment and all the daysof the yeai”; “Happy the man that fears always—that means, Fears Him Who is always there”;“Knowledge is of Me—that means, what is of Me isknowledge, and what is not of Me is not Knowledge”;“The true mark of hasidism is the love of one’s fellow-men”; “Men think that the Holy one Blessed Be Hedwells in glory in the heavens above, in the loftiestheights, but no—the Holy One Blessed Be He dwellson the earth below, in the lowest places of the earth,and everyone can reach Him, even the smallest andmost insignificant Jew can reach Him”; “For Thouhearest the prayer of every mouth—even if it is onlyfrom the mouth.” ’The hasidim relate that R. Asher was once askedby a hasid: ‘Can I really repent, when I have com-mitted a sin of which it is written in the books thatrepentance is of no avail to annul it?’ R. Asher replied:‘What has this to do with you? Your business is toperform your duty. If you fear that you have for-feited your portion in the world to come, rememberwhat our Sages of blessed memory have said—Onehour spent in true contrition and in good works in thisworld is better than all the life of the world to come.’R. Asher’s opinion of the Tsaddik*s function is in-dicated by the following story. R. Asher expressedhis displeasure with those hasidim that would speakof what was good in their deeds and keep silent aboutwhat was bad. To these he used to say: ‘Look at thedifference between the early hasidim and their latter-HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN115day followers! When today’s hasidim welcome theirRebbe they show him the good and conceal from himthe bad, whereas the early hasidim used to concealthe good and tell the bad. That is what I used to dowhen I visited my teacher R. Shelomo of Karlin. Iused to hide the good from him. Is he in God’s place?Does he dispense reward and punishment? But thebad I used to reveal to him. As it is written: ^Tf anyman be afflicted with leprosy, he shall be brought tothe priest and the priest shall see it.” ’ (Lev. xiii, 9.)Amongst the ‘holy writings’ found at Stolin werethe following letters from and to R. Asher the First:a letter of encouragement from R. Asher (quotedabove) to a certain R. Yosef of Pinsk about the per-secution of R. Asher’s followers by ‘this man’ [R.Avigdor of Pinsk] a detailed letter to one of hisown followers, written just before the ‘P'enitentialDays’ [ha-Yamim ha-Noraim], explaining the value andimportance of the hasidic-style prayers on Rosh Ha-shanah and stressing, not the element of ‘judgment’ inthese Penitential Days, but rather the joy and con-fidence expressed in them;^^"^ a letter (dated the dayafter Sukkoth, 1801) from R. Yisrael of Kozhenits toR. Asher after the death of the latter’s wife, in whichthe writer expresses a high regard for the widow ofR. Aharon ‘the Silent’ of Zhelikhov [or for his daugh-ter?]; a letter of New Year Greetings to R. Asher fromthe Tsaddik R. Yehoshua-Heshel of Apta; variousletters from R. Asher to his son, R. Aharon, aboutjourneys and family affairs; a list of R. Asher’s books,and of his lucky charms and other proved means ofwarding off illnesses. Also found in the Stolin genizahwere the following letters belonging to R. Asher’s pe-riod: the will of the Tsaddik R. Mordekhai of Kre-menets, the son of R. Yehiel-Mikhal of Zlochov, whosedaughter married R. Asher’s son; a letter from R.Avraham of Kalisk to R. Nahum of Chernobyl abouta contribution of money for Erets Yisrael; a letter(dated 1796) from the Tsaddik R. Yehudah-Leib ofSasov to his followers a letter from R. Mordekhaiof Chernobyl to R. Shemaryahu of Olevsk about theritual slaughterer’s licence granted to the shohet Yaa-kov Koppel and his son, who were the cause of com-munal dissension in the town, and a second letter(1810) from R. Yehoshua-Heshel of Apta, who was136 w. Z. Rabinowitsch, ^Min ha-Genizah ha-Stoli-naiWi Zion, 5th year, p. 244; cf. supr.13'^ Beth Aharon, by R. Aharon of Karlin, p. 294.138 Rabinowitsch, Lithuanian Hasidism, p. 156.at that time in Mezhibozh, also about the ritualslaughterers of Olevsk; a letter from R. Barukh ofMezhibozh (dated Sunday, Portion of the Week Va-Yakhel, 1810) to a certain R. Yaakov-Shimshon aboutthe journey of a family to Rashkov; a letter from theTsaddik R. David Halevi of Stepan to the Jews ofthe town Rokitno about their behaviour; and a letterfrom R. Pinhas of Korets and R. Yehiel-Mikhal ofZlochov. The search of the Stolin genizah brought tolight no letters from R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi.One of the ‘holy writings’ found in the genizahwas, then, the will of the Tsaddik R. Mordekhai ofKremenets, the son of R. Yehiel-Mikhal of Zlochovand, as stated, a relative by marriage of R. Asher.Part of this will is quoted below, to show the spiritualcharacter of this Tsaddik who was the father-in-law ofR. Aharon the Second of Karlin.*Last Will and Testament, on the fifth day of the week,in the month of Tammuz, {5)580[=1820],Now my sons, be strong in the Law of the Lordand in pious awe [yirah] of Him, and in prayer.This shall be the order of your praying: Accustomyourselves to rise early and do not spend time on yourablutions... but forthwith say all the blessings andthe hat sot h prayer [in memory of the destruction ofthe Temple], followed by passages from the Psalms.Avoid all speaking before prayer, except what is ab-solutely necessary. Then, stand up to pray in rever-ence and awe, stressing every single word; and putaside all worldly thoughts while praying, for the timeof prayer is when we are most tempted to indulge invain worldly thoughts, and therefore you must be verystrong against this temptation and request the Lord’shelp to resist it. If you wish to pray before the Ark[i.e., to lead the prayers in the Synagogue], so muchthe better, for most certainly I would have you dothis; but let it be only for the Lord alone, and notfor the worshipper’s own pleasure. .. Straight afterthe prayer be sure to study... And above all let itbe done with all your heart and soul... If you goin the true way, it will be granted you to understandthe profound meaning of prayer.Order of Study...Study Mikra [the Bible], Mishnah, Gemara,and the Posekim and Musar [moral] literature daily.Study a section of the Aggadah before sleeping; andon no account lie down to sleep with your head full116W. Z. RABINOWITSCHof idle matters, but only with thoughts of penitence ...Thm you will go in the true way and attain to thewisdom of the Kabbalah. After midnight is the timefor the Kabbalah, and you must on no account breakoff your study in the middle. The essential thing isthat it be done with reverence and awe, with humilityand self-abasement, and that each one should withdrawcompletely into himself while studying and confessand entreat the Divine Name to help him in attainingto the innermost meaning of the Law and to devotion[devekuth] to the Creator. This I have attempted todo with God’s help, and you, too, will surely be aidedby Heaven. I admonish you to obey me, as sons arein duty bound to obey their father, for your own goodin this world and the next.Rules for Right ConductKeep far away from anger, pride, honour, and dis-sension. If (Heaven forbid!) there should be any dis-sension in the town where you dwell, be among thepeace-makers and do not take either side in the dis-pute. All the more so shall you beware of dissensionin your own house, and you shall take great care thatpeace and love prevail between you, as becomes bro-thers. In every matter of conduct you shall consulteach other. Beware of idling and watching the marketsand the streets, for the evil impulse blinds man’s eyesand says that this is a small matter. But in realityjt separates the soul from the true essence of life.Accustom yourself always to speak gently with every-one and to answer softly, and not coarsely (Heavenforbid!), even with the least of men. By this you willmake yourselves beloved of Him Above and popularwith those below. And the Divine Name will certainlybe with you.Solemn Injunction to Honour Your MotherTake very great care indeed to honour your mo-ther, in body and in spirit and in all her needs, and toconsult and obey her, in everything speaking to herrespectfully and most politely. Let not even a singleday pass without your going to her and speaking toher. Only if you are not in your homes are you exrcused. All this that I enjoin you to do is very little ...Solemn Injunction to My Daughters^in-LawYou, my daughters-in-law, do I solemnly enjoin totreat your husbands with due respect. Do not upsetyour husbands in any matter, but always speak tothem affectionately. I most solemnly enjoin you to re-frain from bad language, above all (Heaven forbid!)to your husbands and children. I absolutely forbidthis. If you obey me, you will be granted every happi-ness in this world and in the next. Know that yourhusbands are men of noble descent in Israel and it istherefore your duty to show them all manner of res-pect, and by so doing you will be bringing honour toyourselves.’R. Asher the First, The old man of Stolin’ as theKarlin hasidim affectionately called him, died on the26th Tishri, 1826, at the age of 67.^^® The tomb ofR. Asher, with a ^perpetual light’ [ner tamid] alwaysburning in it, stood in the Karlin cemetery next tothe modest stone over the grave of his father, R. Aha-ron the Great. Into this tomb the caretaker of thelast Rebbe, R. Elimelekh, who lived in Karlin, wouldinsert the Requests’ written by the hasidim who usedto visit the grave in time of trouble.F. R. Aharon the Second (1826—1872)R. Asher’s successor was his son, R. Aharon [Per-lov] the Second (so called to distinguish him fromhis grandfather, R. Aharon the Great), who was born,according to a family tradition, on the New Moon ofSivan, 1802.^^® R. Aharon was the recognised leaderof the Karlin hasidim for nearly fifty years. The in-formation that we possess about his life and timecomes partly from hasidic sources and partly fromthe circles of mithnagdim and maskilim. A gifted or-ganiser, R. Aharon applied himself to strengtheningthe bonds between himself and his followers. To thisend, he used to pay them frequent visits in their townsand welcome them most warmly in his Tourt’ in Kar-lin. He also had a striking natural simplicity and senseof humour, and regularly made jokes in the Russianvernacular even while teaching his hasidim at hisTable’. He mixed freely with people of all kinds, andhis confident and imposing presence was admired evenin non-hasidic circles.R. Aharon the Second’s spiritual legacy, which isincluded in the volume Beth Aharon, comprises thefollowing works: ‘Daily Conduct and Exhortations’;a large, almost complete, collection of expositions^39 Beth Aharon, p. 2; Shapiro, Mishnath Hakhamim,p. 39.Shapiro, op. cit., p. 39. The family name of theKarlin dynasty—Perlov—is derived from ‘Perl,' thename of R. Aharon the Great's mother.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN117of the Portions of the Law for Sabbaths and Festi-vals; ^Selected Sayings' in his name; letters writtenby R. Aharon to his followers on the eves of Festivals,especially on the eve of Passover; letters to his son,R, Asher; and ^Inspirational Sermons' to his follow-ers, in Yiddish.i^iThe ‘Daily Conduct and exhortations' containsrules ‘that he wrote ... in his own holy hand’: ‘Al-though it is not my custom to write matters of thiskind, since the earliest authorities, the holy ones ofthe Most High [sc. the Tsaddikitn], have alreadywritten on the ordering of daily conduct. .. yet Ihave done so out of affection for our followers whohave come... from afar, in the hope that... theirhearts will drawn nigh to listen attentively to theirstudies.' In the same volume there are also rules ‘thathe discussed with our followers'; i.e., that were notactually written by R. Aharon, but handed down bythe hasidim in his name. R. Aharon testifies: ‘Theyare my true words, as recorded in books and by writ-ers.' A comparison of these pronouncements with thoseof his father and with the ‘Exhortations' of otherearlier Tsaddikim shows that there is hardly anythingnew in R. Aharon's words. Nevertheless, together withhis biblical interpretations and letters, they enable usto form a picture of Karlin hasidism in his time. R.Aharon stresses the qualities of ‘awe and joyfulness,'of truth-seeking and purity of heart, and of ‘studythat issues in conduct.’ ‘Let those that are busy fixa regular time for religious study. And of those thathave leisure it is said: “The study of the Law is theirtrade." The main thing is that some good qualityBeth Aharon, Brody 1875. The volume containsthe following works by R. Aharon the Second: ‘DailyConduct and Exhortations’ (pp. 6—10), Sermons of theWeekly Portion of the Law and for Festivals (pp. 42-285), ‘Collected Sayings’ (pp. 287-290), Words of In-spiration and Encouragement ‘written down as utteredby his holy mouth,’ in Yiddish (pp. 290-291), Lettersto his son and his followers (pp. 297-312, 316), ‘Wordsof Our Teachers,’ in Yiddish (p. 313).In Divrei Aharon (pp. 21-80), Hausman publishedtwenty-four letters from R. Aharon the Second to hisfollowers. Written chiefly for the various Festivals,these letters reflect R. AJiaron’s opinions on such ques-tions as change of dress, and the like. Hausman’s bookcontains various ‘Sayings’ attributed by the hasidim toR. Aharon the Second, and also corrections and addi-tions to the volume Beth Aharon ‘from old manuscriptswhich were written before the holy book Beth Aharonwas published in the year 1875’ (p. 60). See also hisbook Birkhath Aharon, pp. 79-127. Cf. infr. n. 161.should be derived from the studying... Let themlearn the Mishnah, the Gemara with the Tosafoth,the works of Maharsho [an acronym of the name R.Shemuel Edels] and the Posekitn, each according tohis ability, whether much or little.' ‘There is a manthat sits down to study on a full stomach without anysoul-searching. After his studying, he is very proudof himself... and thinks: Who will the King delightin more than in me? ... But by what is study mea-sured by God? The Torah is given to study and per-(o^m ... If anyone prays every day ... “to study andto teach, to keep and to do and to perform," andthen after his prayer does the opposite, this is a com-plete lie.' A man should endeavour ‘to be absolutelyhonest, inwardly and outwardly,' ^close to the truth,'for ‘by the truth we can attain to the highest degree';‘above all... let his thoughts and words be thesame... and let him not speak much about thevanities of the world and the new discoveries of thetime, for this is a great source of idleness... Aboveall, every prayer and every study should not be justa routine religious act, but should be deliberately un-dertaken to bring the man closer to the will of God,according to his status and understanding ... Afterthe prayer, he should study the Bible, and in busytimes at least Hok le-Israel, and sections of the Mish-nah every day. The Holy One Blessed Be He countsnot pages, but hours.'In the rules for ‘Daily Conduct' which his hasidimhanded down in his name, he said: ‘A Jew must bevery dear to himself and must believe in himself, forall that he does is thereby much improved. We arenot speaking of upper worlds, but only of his ownworld... Just let him not rise above his level nor fallbelow his level... Let him not look up above him-self ... nor down below himself... Every man mustimprove... his own station ... Every Jew can attainto all the hidden treasure and is indeed obliged to at-tain to it... and will be purified and cleansed andwhitened till he attains to the goodness and radianceof the Holy One Blessed Be He.' Like his grandfatherR. Aharon the Great, R. Aharon the Second used tosay: ‘The greatest of all the vices is sadness and me-lancholy.' ‘For melancholy is the cause of all the othervices.' ‘Sadness results from... pride.' ‘The sign ofa broken heart is gladness.'These principles and ideas are reiterated by R.Aharon the Second in the ‘Holy Letters' that he wroteto his son, R. Asher, and to his followers. Altogether,lisW. Z, RABlNOWrrsCHR. Aharon’s writings and homilies had a considerableinfluence on the character and conduct of the Karlinhasidim. In particular, it was through him that Karlinhasidism came to attach such great importance—^per-haps greater than any other section of the hasidicmovement—to joyfulness. R Aharon the Great, ac-cording to hasidic tradition, regarded joyfulness assimply the avoidance of sadness. Whereas R.Aharon the Second used to stress the positive as-pect of joyfulness as the active and fructifying prin-ciple in life. Thus, he would sum up the allegory ofR. Elimelekh of Lizhensk in a single sentence: Thereis light in the world, only it has been hidden awayby the Holy One Blessed Be He, so that every Jew isobliged to seek this light, and all Jews, ‘even thesmallest of the small and the lowest of the low’ canfind it.The f)eriod of R. Aharon the Second’s ‘leadership’coincided with the reign of terror under the Tsar Ni-colas I, with its persecutions, anti-Jewish decrees, ‘kid-nappings’ and the like. The joyfulness that R. Aharonlaboured to implant in the hearts of his followers un-doubtedly helped them to bear the trials and tribul-ations of those difficult days. For a long time after-wards popular stories were told about the courage dis-played, both in private and public, by R. Aharon’shasidim in their time of trouble. It was thanks toR. Aharon’s encouraging influence that the numbersof the Karlin hasidim increased still further in histime, over and above the increase that had occurredin the days of R. Asher the First. This was the hey-day of Karlin hasidism. On Festivals and on Peniten-tial Days the hasidim would leave their wives andfamilies and make the pilgrimage to their Rebbe inKarlin. On Shavuoth and Sitnhath Torah as many asthree to four thousand—^according to an eye-witnessreport—^would come thronging to his residence. ‘Hewho has not seen Simhath Torah in the court of R.Aharon’—^so used the hasidic elders to say—^‘has neverseen a real celebration of Simhath Torah* Here is thescene as described by an eye-witness: R. Aharonwould be sitting clothed all in white, as was his cus-tom on Sabbaths and Festivals, at the head of thelong table that stood in the large courtyard next tohis prayer-house. Tens of canopies stretched above thecourt hardly sufficed as shelter for the crowds of hasi-dim that came to their Rebbe for Swnhath Torah.When, at the tnaariv [evening] service, R. Aharonhimself led the prayers, the worshippers were carriedaway by spiritual ecstasy, and the ‘circuits’ of theScrolls were performed in a frenzy of jubilation thatrose ever higher, circuit by circuit, song by song, anddance by dance, as the wine flowed freely. Thus trans-ported, the hasidim would spend the whole night sing-ing and dancing in the courtyard and the nearbystreets. Out of this fervent rejoicing were born manyof the Karlin melodies that subsequently became fam-ous in hasidic circles and even throughout Jewry.Nor was this the case only at Simhath Torah. EveryFestival had its own melodies. Outstanding amongstthese were the tunes of the Passover Seder night ofwhich, according to the hasidim, R. Aharon used tosay: ^In my Passover melodies, there is not one crumbof leaven.’ In addition to songs and dances, R. Aharonintroduced instrumental music and had two orchestras—one of them made up of his followers from Volhy-nia—which used to play melavveh malkah, on the in-termediate days of Sukkoth and similar occasions.During these visits to the Rebbe’s ‘court,’ the hasidwould forget the bitter, dreary, care-ridden reality ofhis daily life and find a refuge for his tired body andweary spirit. Freed for a while of his cares by thegeneral rejoicing, he would be uplifted into a state ofself-forgetfulness. This spiritual exaltation and tenseexpectancy reached their climax on Rosh Hashanahbefore the blowing of the shofar, when R. Aharon,having ‘purified himself’ in the mikveh and carryingthree or four shofars thrust into the silver girdle en-circling his white kittel, would make his way throughthe throng of worshippers to the pulpit, where, afterfervently reciting the forty-seventh Psalm [‘To thesons of Korah’j, he would perform the commandmentof ‘hearing the sound of the shofar*—‘hearing i§ in theheart,’ as he preached in one of his sermons on RoshHashanah. On one of his shofars were engraved thewords: ‘God has gone up with a trumpet blast.’This intensely shared life of the Rebbe and hishasidim was something alien in the prevailingly mith-naged environment of Pinsk. The element of a per-sonal cult in hasidism—the hasid’s reverence for hisTsaddik—was completely foreign to the ‘scholars’ ofthis ‘principal community.’ Moreover, the mithnagdimstill at that time held to their view that hasidism dis-couraged the study of the Talmud and thereby hadan adverse effect on Lithuanian talmudic scholarship.Thus, for example, the then Av Beth-Din of Pinsk,R. Elazar-Moshe Hurwitz, is reported to have adopteda hostile attitude to hasidism and even to R. AharonHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN119himself.^^^ And once, on the fourth intermediate dayof Sukkoth, when R. Aharon and his followers hadbeen rejoicing after their fashion, singing and dancingin the streets of Karlin, one of the leading local mith-naged families—Lourie—who lived in the neighbour-hood, enraged by having their peace disturbed fordays and nights on end, used their influence to havethe Russian authorities order R. Aharon to leave Kar-lin. He withdrew to his old place of refuge—Stolin.This event shows that sectarian bitterness had not yetcompletely died away even at this late date, exactlya hundred years after the first minyan of the Karlinhasidim was established in this town, in an atmosphereof hostile pressure and actual persecution.The writer and poet, Y. L. Gordon, who, as a youngteacher in Pinsk—in the Lourie household—becameclosely acquainted with the life led by the Karlin ha-sidim, has given us, in the story Olam ke-Minhago,a highly critical and even repellent picture of R. Aha-ron the Second and his hasidic milieu.Despite the142 Toyzend Yor Pinsk, ed. Hof man, p. 267 ff., Hadmin Havraya, ^Hithgalluth ha-Yenuka bi-StoUn/ Haslia-har, Vol. VI, p. 33 ff., Vienna 1875; the Rabbi fromP. [i.e., Pinsk] referred to by the author of this articlewas, at that time, R. Elazar-Moshe Hurwitz, of whomPerets Smolenskin writes in such glowing terms: Mos-sessohn, ^Masa be~Russia/ Hashahar, Vol. VI, p. 357.1^3 Y. L. Gordon, Olam ke-Minhago, the second sto-ry—Aharith Simhah Tugah, Vilna 1873. In contrast toGordon’s description of the lack of respect shown toR. Aharon by the Russian authorities, there is theevidence of one of the Karlin elders, R. Mordekhai Ker-man, himself a mithnaged and maskil, who was an eye-witness of R. Aharon's expulsion. In describing thisevent, he related that, when the Pinsk Minister ofPolice summoned R .Aharon to his office, he sent aspecial coach to fetch him, but R. Aharon refused totravel in it, for fear that there might be a shaatnez[a forbidden mixture of wool and linen] in the up-holstery. R. Mordekhai Kerman further relates that,when R. Aharon refused to desecrate the Festival—it was the day of Hoshana Rdbbah—by writing, he wasnot compelled to sign an undertaking to leave thetown. Y. L. Gordon’s story is quoted by the writerH. Chemerinski in his memoirs Ayarathi Motele, p. 176,Tel Aviv 1951.The expulsion of R. Aharon the Second from Karlinis also mentioned in hasidic literature: Meoroth ha-GedoUm, ed. by R. Aharon Tseilingold, Pt. Ill, pp. 30,34, Bilgoray (no date of publication).About his story Aharith Simhah Tugah, <^rdonwrites as follows in one of his letters to his pupil Aha-ron Lourie of Pinsk (Y. L. Gordon, Iggeroth, Vol. I,pp. 121, 185, Warsaw 1895): Xet me know... howpurely fictional and personal elements in this descrip-tion, it nevertheless contains references to certain his-torical facts, such as the quarrel between the hasidimand the Lourie family, and the expulsion of R. Aharonfrom Karlin by order of the Russian police. The fearof the hasidim, which is stressed in the story, inducedthe author to give his characters fictitious names:R. Aharon appears as R. Leibele, his son R. Asher theSecond as R. Herschele, Hayyah Lourie is called Yo-kheved, and Karlin is changed to Krimvilishek. Thewhole story is a most important historical document,as showing what the leading poet of the Haskalahmovement thought of hasidism.The exact year of R. Aharon^s forced move fromKarlin to Stolin is not known. Y. L. Gordon gives [onpages 107 and 154 of the above-mentioned story] thefollowing as the date of R. Aharon^s expulsion: ^Oc-tober 1st, the 21st of Tishri, the day of Hoshana Kab-bah, the fourth day of the week.’ But the year is in-tentionally omitted: *... in the year ... (the numberbeing deleted).’ Now, a glance at the calendar showsthat, throughout the relevant period, these dates neveryour revered grandmother, Ha3ryah, is... I have seve-ral stories ready for publication... among them onecalled Aharith Simhah Tugah. The heroes of thisstory, which is based on actual events in the life ofthe hasidim ... are your revered grandmother... andfather. I have, of course, been careful not to mentiontheir names, but all those who know them will recog-nise them, for they are a ‘seed blessed of the Lord.’When you read my story, you will easily recognisethe identity of the nasty people referred to.’ See alsoGordon, Iggeroth, Vol. I, p. 95, Letter of 1864; cf., W.Z. Rabinowitsch, The ^Rothschilds* of Pinsk and Karlin,Pt. I of this Volume, English Section, p. 81, Tel Aviv,1973.In an article, * Gad-Asher Levin* (no author’s name),in the Pinsker Stot Luah, 1904, p. 41, note, Vilna 1903-1904, we find the following: ‘Ha3ryah Louri6 was, inher day, a well-known character... All her life, sheactively opposed the hasidim and carried on a personalfeud with the Tsaddik, R. Aharon of Karlin.’ On R.Shaul Karliner see: A. Lourie, 'Di Tsavoe fun a PinskerBaal-Bayith fun Onheyb 19ten Yorhundert,* YIVO Ble-ter, Vol. XIII, pp. 390-428, Vilna 1938, and Toy-zend Yor Pinsk, p. 87, note, where the broadsheet, *EinOnshin Ela Mazhirin* [‘No Punishment, but a Warn-ing’]—V. infr.—is also quoted. 'This broadsheet wasoriginally published by Y. Gottlieb, Pinsker Wort, No.75. I have not actually seen this article. Excerpts fromreminiscences about R. Aharon the Second and histime can be found in Mordekhai Kerman’s memoirsMeine Zikhreines (Hundert Yor Pinsk), published asstencil, without place or year of duplication.120W. Z. RABINOWITSCHall fell on the same day. That means that their choiceis either the stor3rteller's mistake, or a deliberate in-accuracy on his part. Another piece of evidence is aletter, written by R. Aharon the Second to his son-in-law R. Avraham-Yaakov, the son of R. Yisrael ofSadagora, ‘on the fifth day of the week, on the 17thof the month of Av, in the year [5]626 [ = 1866]’,which is extant in the original hand in the family ar-chives. From this letter it transpires that, in the yearmentioned, R. Aharon was living in Stolin. In a letterto Aharon, the son of Moshe Lourie in Pinsk, datedthe 7th of Av [5]624 [ = 1864], Y. L. Gordon writes:‘The town where the Rebbe is living is close to you.(But is he still in Stolin? Or has he chosen anotherroyal city for his residence? Is R. Aharele [R. Aharon]still reigning, or has his son R. Asherl [R. Asher theSecond] already succeeded him on the throne?).’ Fromthis it may be deduced that R. Aharon the Secondwas already living in Stolin in the year 1864.That the mutual hatred between the mithnagdimand the hasidim was still very much alive in the nine-teenth century is evident from two further facts. Oneof the finest, most devoted, and most influential ofKarlin Jewry’s public figures, R. Shaul Levin (thefather of the above-mentioned Hayyah Lourie), whowas known as R. Shaul Karliner, specifically forbadehis sons and heirs, in his will (he died in 1834), tohave anything to do with the hasidim.In connection with the bequests to charity madeby R. Shaul Karliner in this will, we read as follows:‘A clear inventory of all my property and effects ...shall be drawn up and recorded ... and signed by theheirs, together with my wife ... and the Rav who shallbe the communal Av Beth-Din at that time. If theRav at that time is a member of the sect of thehasidim, then, with the consent of my wife and sons,another Rav shall be added to the signatories [i.e., in-stead of the Rav], the hasid, or some upright and honestperson...’ In a similar vein, R. Shaul Karliner givesthe following instructions to those of his next of kinto whom he entrusted the management of the charitiesto be paid out of his estate: ‘.. . Everything shallat all times be conducted and managed on the prin-ciple of relatives first, provided that they are uprightand respectable men, and not of the sect of the hasi-dim ... Even of the relatives it is laid down that theyshall not be of the above-mentioned sect, and if theyare [members of the sect] they shall be disqualified.Only those that are truly God-fearing shall be takencare of, but none of them [sc. the hasidim] ... Allthe inventory shall be clearly and exactly written [onevery anniversary of the death] in a notebook andshall be signed also by whoever shall then be the Ravor Moreh-Tsedek, but not if he is a member of thesect of the hasidim, so that the matter may be finallyand permanently arranged and settled.’These excerpts from the will show the depth of thehatred and anger felt against the hasidim, even onhis death-bed, by the leader of the Karlin communityin the thirties of the nineteenth century. His opinionof the hasidim is expressed in his explicit instructionthat the money for charity bequeathed by him shallbe devoted Ho some upright and honest person ... tothose that are truly God-fearing... so that the mat-ter may be finally and permanently arranged andsettled.’ All these qualities are denied the hasidim byR. Shaul Karliner. The extent of the influence of thehasidim in Karlin in those days can be inferred fromR. Shaul’s fear that one of them might be chosen asthe Rav of Karlin. Evidently, the conditions in thecommunity were then such as to make this possible.In fact, however, no hasid became the Rav of theKarlin or P'insk communities at any time during thenineteenth century .On the other side, the Karlin hasidim as late as1870-1871 published a broadsheet headed ‘No Punish-ment, but A Warning,’ full of abuse and threats ag-ainst the mithnagdim.Like his father before him, R. Aharon the Secondgave his support to the hasidic settlers in Palestine,who were then going through hard times. When anemissary came from Palestine to collect money ontheir behalf, R. Aharon wrote the following letter (un-dated in the original) to his hasidim‘To our beloved followers.. . may they all be re-warded! I write ... in praise of our Land, the Landof Life, the place to which our prayers are directed ...the Holy of Holies... Let our brethren the Childrenof Israel unite ... with a single heart and with wor-ship that comes from the heart—that is, by prayer ...Who am I... to go on and on in praise of such ex-alted matters? ... However, my spirit gives me nopeace, because of... the oppression of the times. Forit is now several years that the Lord has called upa famine on the Land, and thousands of precious soulsand their children are going hungry with none to offerBeth Aharon, p. 316.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN121them bread. Moreover, I have seen that letters writtenwith passionate fervour by all the great ones of Israelto arouse the hearts of our brethren the Children ofIsrael have borne fruit and succeeded. Therefore amI writing now to my loyal followers [to tell them]that my friend the learned and venerable Rabbi...Avraham-Yosef... the grandson of the holy Rabbiand Gaan of Volochisk ... the son-in-law of my kins-man, my dear friend the renowned hasid ... R. Naf-tali-Tsevi... the grandson of the holy Baal ShemTov, has been sent from the Holy Land to collectfresh funds to keep alive our brethren dwelling inthe centre of holiness [i.e., in the Holy Land]. I amtherefore writing this letter to urge all our followers ...to welcome its bearer, my friend the Rabbi, warmlyand to arouse your hearts to participate ... generous-ly ... to uphold their dwelling in the Holy Land...From me, who love you and send you affectionategreetings and desire your good, and your affection,your unity, and your attachment to the Source ofLife ..In the second, also undated, letter found in theStolin genizah from R. Aharon the Second to his hasi-dim, we read as follows:‘May the Lord give life and blessing... to ourbrethren the Children of Israel wherever they be .. .long life and peace to them, their households andtheir offspring... for ever.T have taken up my pen... to write words fromthe heart to the heart... that you should freely andgenerously make your contributions out of love forthe Holy Land . .. the Land for which the Lord caresand which is mentioned in all the prayers ... of thecommunity of Israel... The Divine Name has vouch-safed us the fulfilment of the desire of our holy fore-fathers, that there should be some of our loyal sup-porters in the Land of Life [i.e., the Holy Land] ...With the Lord’s help they have found a resting placefor a group of our followers who devote themselvesto the study of Torah and to prayer, where the feet ofthe holy Tsaddikim trod ... a permanent place forprayer from the holy ... Tsaddik .. . Menahem . ..whose pious hands established the holy place. Withthe Lord’s help our followers have succeeded in pur-chasing the holy place that was granted to no otherman. Thus far has the Divine Name aided our breth-ren, the Children of Israel, but they still require fur-ther assistance, especially our own followers ... Youshould, therefore, aid and support them generously,so that by their purchase they should have theirshare in the Holy Land... I am confident that ourbrethren, the Children of Israel will pay heed to thesemy words ... May we be granted in abundance.. .all that our hearts desire, for good and for blessing . ..from the Lord of Peace .. .‘The words of Aharon, the son of R. Asher.’From a comparison of these two letters it is evid-ent that, in the period between the dates when theywere written, a group of Karlin hasidim establishedthemselves in the Holy Land and bought the prayer-house in Tiberias which had previously been purchas-ed by R. Mendel of Vitebsk.^^® Also found in theStolin genizah were deeds of sale relating to housesbought by R. Aharon in Tiberias and Jerusalem, aswell as a letter from the recipients of the halukkahto R. Aharon, appointing him as the ‘chief generaladministrator’ of all the funds sent to Palestine, andhis son, R. Asher the Second, as his assistant.Altogether, the Land of Israel [Erets Yisrael]occupied an important place in Karlin hasidism; andconversely, Karlin hasidim played a significant rolein the history of hasidism in the Land of Israel. Theson of R. Aharon the Great, R. Yaakov, settled withhis family and his father-in-law, R. Avraham of Kar-lin, in Palestine and died there.^^® R. Asher the Firstwrote the public proclamation—quoted above—in sup-port of Jewish settlers in Palestine. And amongst thepapers found in the Stolin genizah there were, as al-ready stated, receipts for sums of money sent by R.Asher to Palestine. In the credentials carried by anemissary sent by the Jews of Tiberias, in 1846, tocollect money for P'alestine—R. Moshe Yafe—we findincluded amongst the signatures of ‘the leaders of the146 R. Aharon’s letter, which was written after thepurchase of the prayer-house belonging to R. Mendelof Vitebsk (according to a hasidic source, after thePassover Festival of 1872), was published, with slightalterations, by Shapiro in Mishnath Hahhamim, p. 40;Cf., Hausman, Divrei Aharon, p. 74.14® Grossman, Shem u-Sheerith, p. 89; Kleinbaum,Shema Shelomo, Pt. II, p. 26. The immigration ofR. Avraham of Karlin and his companions to Palestinewas evidently regarded as an event of considerablemoment: it was mentioned—as Hilman points out—(Iggeroth Baal ha-Tanya, p. 145, n. 9)—thirty yearslater by Avigdor of Pinsk, in one of the documentssubmitted by him to the Russian government in St.Petersburg.122W. Z. RABINOWITSCH. ■ uhui't . *1 ;,:.' J3 0^} «%^4'^ItA fiht *^^Ai»l#*fLetter from R. Aharon the Second of Karlinto his son R. Asher the Secondholy community of God-fearing Ashkenazi Jews...of the community of Volhynia...’ that of a certain‘Moshe-Dov, the son of the Rabbi and Teacher Aha-ron of blessed memory from Stolin.^ This Moshe-Dovwas the step-brother of R. Aharon the Second.^^^Further evidence of the specially close connection be-tween Karlin hasidism and Palestine is provided bythe deeds of sale relating to houses in the name ofR. Aharon the Second in Jerusalem and Tiberias(which were found, as stated, in the Stolin genizah);and also by the letter written by R. Aharon afterthe purchase of the house and plot of land belongingto R. Mendel of Vitebsk by the Karlin hasidim inTiberias. Detailed information about the exact datewhen this group established itself and about the earlydays of its existence is lacking. What is certain isthat it was not until the second half of the nineteenthcentury, with the break-up of the various hasidic com-munities in Palestine into separate dynasties, that thespecial Karlin group arose with its own shtiebelakh[hasidic prayer-houses] in Tiberias, Safed, and Jerusa-lem. It is worth stressing that, as far as is known toYaari, Sheluhei Erets Yisraeh P* 788. Cf., theletter, quoted above, from R. Asher to R. Yisrael ofKozhenits, in which the name of R. Moshe-Dov is men-tioned. This R. Moshe-Dov was the son of R. Aharon‘the silent* of Zhelikhov (Grossman, Sheerith li-Shee-rith, pp. 13, 20, supplement to Bhem u-SJieerith, noplace or year of publication). According to hasidictradition, it was R. Moshe-Dov that originally institutedthe Karlin minyanim in the Holy Land. Together withthe signature of R. Moshe-Dov on the letter from theJews of Tiberias, we also find the signature of the ‘Naf-tali Tsevi of the holy city of Tiberias’ who is mentionedby R. Aharon the Second in the letter quoted above,on behalf of the emissary from Palestine.us, the fund-raising emissaries from Palestine whocame originally from Pinsk and its environs (R.Hayyim the son of the Gaon of Karlin, R. Barukhthe son of R. Shemuel, R. Avraham Dayyan Wolfsohn,R. Avraham the son of R. Tsevi Eisenstein of Drohi-chin, R. Shemuel-Muni Zilberman were all peru-shim (i.e., mithnagdim) and disciples of the Gaon ofVilna, and not Karlin hasidim. We likewise find menborn in Pinsk at the head of the mithnaged commu-nity (the Pinsk Av Beth-Din, R. Hayyim Cohen, andR. Yeshayah the son of R. Yissakhar-Baer [Bar-daki])Apart from the letters referred to above, the fol-lowing documents from the time of R. Aharon theSecond were also found in the Stolin genizak: (1) aletter from R. Yisrael of Sadagora (dated Rosh Ho-desk Tevethy 1852?) in which the writer complainsthat he has no money to give the emissaries from EretsYisrael and therefore requests R. Aharon to try toraise the sum required from among his hasidim; (2)a second short, friendly letter from R. Yisrael ofRuzhin (dated the 19th Elul, 1848) in which thewriter congratulates R. Aharon and promises to prayon his behalf daily; (3) the regulations of a Misknah-reading society in the small town of Yanovo, nearPinsk (dated the 10th Nisan, 1830), signed by R.Aharon: the members undertake to study passagesfrom the Mishnah in memory of a Jew named Lapi-doth, who had donated a Scroll of the Law to thissociety; (4) the reply of R. Shemuel-Avraham Sha-1^8 Yaari, Sheluhei Erets Yisrael, pp. 779, 780, 786,798; see Ben-Ezra, ^Rabhi Avraham Eisenstein,^ Dro-hichin, ed. D. B. Warshowski, p. 118 ff., Chicago 1958.Yaari, op. cit., p. 769.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN123o  iMitfi j.v fTW» C'■" J: '  ■ ' ior^' fifkf »'A? u'/pdp»f^ '„ .... - . fid''f*m ^■/ 4/fi' /^»// ^ W -00lfm* j-fd f\i,jI •■^ •T/’#! ; ^|;41 •'^ ff^ ^ »f*•’If’ (^iii ^•‘'•^ •’^' '■■/LETTER ALetter from R. Aharon the Second of Karlin to his familypiro of Slavuta [the owner of the well-known printingpress] to the invitation to R. Aharon’s wedding; (5)a short prayer composed by R. Aharon, of which themembers of the ‘court’ did not permit copies to bemade; (6) a letter from R. Aharon to his followersabout their regular payments to the ‘court’ funds. Inone of his letters there is an interesting request of histo his family that they should not fast on TaanithEsther,The three letters from R. Aharon the Second re-produced here contain his views on doctors (letter A),and also genealogical details of the Karlin-Ruzhin-Chernobyl dyasties (letters B,Letter A,‘To my dear daughter . . . Miryam (may she begranted long life!)... and to my dear daughter150 R. Yisrael’s letter from Sadagora is dated—an-other piece of information that I owe to the lateDavid-Tsevi Bakhlinski—Rosh Hodesh Teveth, 1852.However, this is evidently an error, since R. Yisrael ofRuzhin died on the 3rd Heshvan, 1850. These three let-ters were handed down from father to son and arenow in the possession of the Rebbe R. Yitshak-MeirHeshel, the son of the Tsaddik R. Yisrael of Mezhi-bozh, the son-in-law of Miryam, daughter of R. Aha-ron the Second of Karlin. They are published here byhis kind permission. The following are the sources usedfor the other genealogical details: Y. Alfasi, Sefer ha-Admorim, pp. 12, 26, Tel Aviv 1961; Grossman, ShemPerl. .. and to her young daughter Nehamah Gittl...and her dear daughter .. . Sarah Rivkah.Thank God, I am alive and well. I received yourletter written on the night of the last Sabbath, andI was pleased by your journey to the place of medi-cinical waters. May God grant that they bring youa complete cure and good health and many brightyears of life IMy daughter and her sons (may you be grantedlong life!) pray handle medicines with moderation anddo not disobey the doctors’ orders, for they are expertin the drinking of waters, and in the amount of walkingrequired after that, and also in eating and drinkingand sleeping during the drinking of waters ... andcarry out their instructions to the letter. May theHoly One Blessed Be He help you and give you com-plete healing and good health, for His goodness iseverlasting!From your father ... who prays for your welfareand eagerly waits to hear from you... about the bene-ficial effect of treatment...Aharon of Karlinu-Sheerithy pp. 37, 40—41, 61—63; Hausman, DivreiAharon, pp. 247—249, and Birkath Aharon, pp. 66,126; Horodezki, op. cit., Pt. Ill, pp. 120, 122—123, 153,n. 20; Y. Levinstein, Dor va-Dor ve-Dorshav, p. 102,Warsaw, no date of publication; A. D. Tverski, Seferha-Yahas Chernobyl ve-Ruzhin, pp. 70, 120, 167—169,Lublin 1938.124W. 2. RABINOWITSCHThe second day of the week, 21st Tammuz, herein Ho tin. God willing, tomorrow or on the fourthday (?) we shall travel from here to Lepan, and Ishall bring greetings and encouragement to all myhousehold... If there are perchance letters from myhome, please send them to me as soon as possible toSadagora, to the address of my very dear granddaugh-ter ... Hadassah Feige ...’Miryatn, the eldest daughter of R. Aharon theSecond of Karlin, who is mentioned in this letter, wasthe wife of the Tsaddik R. Avraham-Yaakov of Sada-gora, the son of the well-known Tsaddik R. Yisraelof Ruzhin. She died on the first day of Sukkoth 1880.According to a reliable hasidic source, she and her hus-band were married in Karlin, on 17th Sivan 1837.R. Avraham-Yaakov succeeded his father in Sadagoraand followed his father^s example of wealthy living,of paying great attention to the outward splendoursof his ^court’, and of stressing the importance in thehasidic movement of belief in the Tsaddik, He diedin 1883.Their daughter Perl, who is also mentioned in theletter, was married to her cousin, R, Nahum-Dov ofSadagora, the son of her father’s brother R. Shalom-Yosef the eldest son of R. Yisrael of Ruzhin, After ashort period as the Rebbe of Ruzhin, he lived therest of his life with his family in the ^court’ of hisfather-in-law, R. Avraham-Yaakov, in Sadagora. Here,with a good taste and understanding perhaps influ-enced by his having lived in Leipzig in his youth, heestablished a large, well-stocked library, which evencontained some first printings. According to a hasidicsource, R. Nahum-Dov was born in 1843, and died in1883 in Vienna.Sarah-Rivkah, mentioned in the body of the letter,and Hadassah-Feige, mentioned in the postscript, weredaughters of Miryam and R. Avraham-Yaakov of Sa-dagora, the daughter and son-in-law of R. Aharon theSecond. Sarah-Rivkah was the first wife of the TsaddikR. Yisrael of Mezhibozh, a descendant of the TsaddikR. Avraham-Yehoushua Heshel of Apta. Their wed-ding is the subject of the two letters from R. Aharonthe Second printed below. Hadassah-Feige was thewife of the Tsaddik R, Aviezri Zelig Shapira of Dro-hobich, the son of the Tsaddik R. Hayyim-Meir Ye-hiel of Mogelnitsa, the grandson of the well-knownPolish Tsaddik, R. Yisrael of Kozhenits. They andtheir descendants are mentioned below in the thirdletter of R. Aharon the Second.The identity of the young girl Alte NehamahGittl, mentioned in the letter, is not clear. In no ha-sidic source is there any reference to the fact thatMiryam and R. Avraham-Yaakov of Sadagora had adaughter by this name. On the other hand, it is knownthat their daughter Perl, the wife of R. Nahum-Dovof Sadagora, had a daughter named Gittele, the wifeof the Tsaddik, R, Moshe-Leib of Pashkan, the sonof the Tsaddik R. Yitshak of Buhush, who was alsothe son of R. Shalom-Yosef of Ruzhin. Hadassah-Feige, the eldest daughter of Miryam and R. Avraham-Yaakov, also had a daughter named Gittele, who wasthe wife of the Tsaddik R, Yisrael of Husyatin andis mentioned below in the third letter. Assuming thatthe first identification is correct, and that the refer-ence here is to Perl’s daughter Gittele, since the nameGittl appears in the letter together with the namePerl, it may be concluded that this letter was writtenin the sixties of the 19th century: in the latter partof the fifties, Perl’s future husband, the above^-men-tioned R. Nahum-Dov, returned to Ruzhin from Leip-zig, at the age of 12, after his father’s death there in1851, and subsequently settled in Sadagora; and theletter was written after the birth of the daughter, Alte-Nehamah-Gittl, mentioned in it.Hotin, where R. Aharon the Second wrote thisletter, was a district capital in Bessarabia in which thedescendants of the Chernobyl dynasty had a *court’right down to the time of the Nazi Holocaust. This isalso where the wedding took place of the son of Mir-yam (the daughter of R. Aharon the Second) and ofR. Avraham-Yaakov of Sadagora, R. Yitshak, thefounder of the Boyan dynasty.Lepkan—^Lipkany—was a small town in the above-mentioned district of Hotin. R. Aharon the Secondwrote this letter on his way to this town.Letter B.‘Thank God, I am alive and well, I and yourmother ... From my dear son... I received a tele-gram from Tsiskave and, thank God, he is alive andwell... and also my granddaughter Hannah . .. andher dear husband ... our Teacher and Master Morde-khai... are, thank God, alive and well, and my deardaughter .. . Tsipporah Feige ... From her dear hus-band ... David... I have received letters and theyand their sons, my dear grandchildren... are, thankGod, alive and completely well. May it be granted usto reecive only good news from you and to send onlygood news to you. I was touched by the letter of myHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN125LETTER BLetter from R. Aharon the Second to his daughter Aliryam and to his son-in-lawR. Avraham-Yaakov of Sadagora, July 1866son-in-law... [R. Avraham-Yaakov of Sadagora] andof my dear daughter [Miryam] ... which was writtenon the 13th (?) Tammuz, inviting me to the weddingof your daughter, the dear bride Sarah Rivkah ... toher young man, and may we have satisfaction fromthem. Now... I made great preparations. .. andhired horses and carts to travel to you to bring goodfortune for the wedding, and yesterday I set out...But when I saw the bad state of the road from theheavy rains, I calculated that, with my [limited]strength and the great distance there and back, Ishould not have sufficient time, for it is near to theHoly Days (may they bring us blessing!). Today,therefore, I returned home alive and well and, God^willing, in these days I shall write to you at lengthto wish you mazzal tov and to send you a present.But please, my dearly loved children... do not bein any way distressed (God forbid!) by my not beingable to come, for there is no other reason for this,but only what I have truly told you. I have also re-ceived the letter of my daughter, which was writtenon the first day of the Portion of the Week Mattoth.Please, my dearly loved children ... and all yourhousehold... let me admonish you not to be sad andanxious (God forbid!) ... for He with His many mer-cies and great kindnesses will compassionately watchover us and over all our Jewish brethren, and pre-serve us at all times from any trouble and sorrow andfrom any harm (God forbid!), and protect us, andspread over us the tabernacle of His peace and thefullness of His goodness which will lengthen our daysand ensure us years of life and well-being... To allour brethren peace from the Lord of Peace, and fromme, your father ... who prays on your behalf for everyblessing and expectantly waits to hear good news fromyou and to rejoice in seeing you happy... and forblessing from the Source of blessings, life and peace .. .Aharon the son of our Teacher and Master Asher (therighteous man of blessed memory).Enclosed is a letter from your mother (may she begranted long life!)’.The Hannah mentioned in this letter was thedaughter of the Tsaddik R. Asher the Second of Sto-lin, the son of R. Aharon the Second. In 1859 shemarried the Tsaddik R. Mordekhai of Kuzmir, theson of R. Avraham of Trisk, the son of R. Mordekhaiof Chernobyl. R. Mordekhai of Kuzmir died in 1917.This couple had no children.Tsipporah-Feige, the younger daughter of R. Aha"ron the Second, who died in 1909, married in 1852the Tsaddik R. David of Zlatopol, the son of R. Yo-hanan of Rahmistrivka (Rotmistrovka) who was alsoa son of R. Mordekhai of Chernobyl. R. David diedin 1914. Their daughter, Berakhah-Sheindly married in1883 her cousin, the son and heir of R. Asher theSecond, the Tsaddik R. Yisrael ^the ChiW of StoUn,who died on the second day of Rosk Hashanah 1921.She perished in the Holocaust in Stolin on 29th Elul1942.This letter is R. Aharon the Second’s reply to theinvitation from his daughter, Miryam, and his son-in-law, R. Avraham-Yaakov of Sadagora, to the weddingof their daughter Sarah-Rivkah, who was mentionedin the first letter. She was, as already noted, the firstwife of the Tsaddik R. Yisrael of Mezhibozh. Thisletter gives some idea of the conditions of travellingin those days. The letter bears no date. But in thethird letter (below), which was written on Thursday,126W. Z. RABINOWITSCHI I. I\ I^ ,.e.(, ^r.M Kn; ^ ^ ^f I '’ d*' r»3^ ^ ^ ^ ^t'/l' '^/o •i/iA^.. .(,/ e/JlflTi ^^,.011 /o TiO/AT^#/.o’ c^\pif x/Kinrf r *' -..fc” " <r ^ — . f^>uW}Letter CLetter from R. Aharon the Second to his daughter Miryam and to his son-in-law R. Avraham-Yaakov ofSadagora, 29.7.186617th Av [29th July] 1866 and which deals with thesame topic—the difficulty of travelling to the wedding,R. Aharon refers to this present letter as follows:have already told you, in my letter of last week,that I set out on the journey, but then returned tomy home.’’ Hence, the present letter was written be-tween the Sth and 11th Av, 1866.Letter C.With God’s help, on the fifth day of the week...[17th] Av . ., [29th July 1866], here in the Holy Con-gregation of Stolin... To my dearly loved son-in-law ... the renowned hasid, our Teacher and Master,Avraham-Yaakov .. . and to his wife, my daughter ...Miryam... and to their sons, my dear grandchild-ren ... their dear daughter ... Hadassah Feige ... andto her husband... our Teacher and Master, Avi-Ezri-Zelig. .. and to their daughter NehamahGittl... and their son, Hayyim Meir Yehiel... andto their son, my grandchild .. . our Teacher and Mas-ter, Shelomo ... to his household (may it be blessed!),to their daughter... Perl... to her husband, ourTeacher and Master Menahem Nahum Dov ... totheir son ... our Teacher and Master Yitshak ... tohis household ... To their daughter, the dear, sweetand beautiful bride, Sarah Rivkah ... may good for-tune attend her marriage! To their son ... Yisrael.. .to their daughter, the comely and pious bride, Ruha-mah Bathsheva,.. May they all live long, contented,joyful and peaceful lives... in peace and every good!Thank God, we are alive and well, your motherand I... I have received letters from my dear sonand (praise be to His Name) he is alive and well.. .and also my granddaughter ... Hannah . .. and herhusband... the son of the holy man, our Teacher andMaster Mordekhai. Also from my dear daughter...Tsipporah Feige... and from her husband... ourTeacher and Master, David... I have received let-ters and (praise be to His Name) they and theirHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN127children, my dear grandchildren ... are alive and well.May it be granted us to receive only good news fromyou and to send you only good news. Thanks and praiseto His Blessed Name for His goodness and favour tous in keeping us alive and preserving us until this timeof the marriage of their child, my granddaughter, thebride Sarah Rivkah ... to her young man, the ex-cellent bridegroom .. . Yisrael Shalom Yosef ... Youmay be sure that it was my fervent wish and desireto travel to you and rejoice with you, as always; andI have already informed you, in my letter of last week,that I set out on the journey, but then returned to myhome ... for the reason given there—that there wasnot sufficient time, so close to the Holy Days, for me,with my [limited] strength, to go there and back, andbecause of the heavy rains. Therefore I am speciallysending my dear and excellent friend, the hasid, ourTeacher and Master, Yomtov Simhah. .. the bearerof this letter, to you ... and I have instructed himto speak my blessings for me... And this is my mar-riage blessing. May the marriage of your daughter,the bride ... to her dear bridegroom... take place ata good and fortunate hour, may their union prosper,and may they be blessed... with a generation of up-right and righteous offspring.. . with many long yearsof life and peace, with all the blessings uttered by ...our holy forefathers... I hope for the gracious fav-ours of the Blessed Name .. . and His many mercies,that He should grant us good fortune, together withall our Jewish brethren, and long life ... that we mayall... rejoice in the sons and daughters and grand-children that you have and that will be born to you,for length of days and great happiness. I pray you,my beloved children ... to rejoice as if I were in yourmidst, and my blessing ... will come to you fromhere,.. When you write to me truly that you arehappy, you will literally revive my soul.. . The restof my blessings and good wishes will be delivered bymy friend, the above-mentioned bearer of this letter.And now my loved ones, my children and my grand-daughter^ the dear bride, and her dear groom ... glad-ly accept the gifts that I am sending—from myselfand from my household... a pair of large candle-sticks, and from our followers [sc. the hasidim] a pairof smaller candlesticks and a fine wire-thread basket.May you have light and joy, when you use them onSabbaths and Holy Days. And may you, my belovedchildren ... and grandchildren ... and their husbandsand grandchildren ... be granted every good and bles-sing and deliverance by the Lord of Peace ... Withevery good wish... from me, your ever-loving fatherwho prays for your ... well-being, Aharon the son ofour Teacher and Master Asher (the righteous man ofblessed memory).The letter of our dear daughter ... written on thefifth day. .. arrived safely and gave us great gratifi-cation.After writing the above letter, we were happy toreceive your telegram sent on the third day of lastweek, 19th Av, As regards my consent to the postpon-ing of the huppah by several days, in the month ofEluly I can tell you that such was my wish from thestart. And that was one of the things that I instructedour friend, the bearer of this letter, to tell you [whenhe brings you] ... our congratulations and goodwishes.Enclosed herewith is a letter from your mother...and my granddaughter and my son^s son-in-law.^The following descendants of R. Aharon the Se-cond of Karlin, in addition to those mentioned in thetwo previous letters, are referred to in this third let-ter: Nehamah Gittly the daughter of Hadassah-Feigeand R. Avi-Ezri-Zelig Shapira of Drohobich. She wasthe wife of the Tsaddik R. Yisrael of Husyatin, who,as already noted, was the son of R. Mordekhai-Shera-ga of Husyatin, the son of R. Yisrael of Ruzhin. Afrter the First World War, R. Yisrael of Husyatinmade his aliyah to Erets Yisrael, where he died in1948. R. Hayyim-'Meir-Yehiely their son, who is men-tioned in this letter, was, like his father, the Rebbeof Drohobich. He died in 1924.R. Shclomo, the grandson of R. Aharon the Se-cond, mentioned in this letter, married RaheULeahythe daughter of the Tsaddik, R* Tsevi Meshareth ofRymanov, and later Feige, the daughter of R. Davidof Berdichev. In the tragic affair of the son of R. Yis-rael of Ruzhin, R. Dov-Baer of Leovo, who becamea free-thinking maskil, the hasidim of Sadagora ac-cused R. Shelomo of allocating, by his own decisionand against the judgment of his father, R. Avraham-Yaakov, a burial place for R. Dov, who was hisuncle, in a separate corner of the ohel [burial plot]of the head of the family, R. Yisrael of Ruzhin, andnot next to the latter’s grave. The Sadagora hasidimused to say that R. Shelomo died the same year aspunishment for this act.R. Yit shaky the son of Miryam and R. Avraham-Yaakov, was, as already stated, the founder of the128W. Z. RABINOWITSCHBoyan dynasty, one of the important and influentialbranches of the Ruzhin family. His wife, Malkahy wasthe daughter of the Tsaddik R. Yohanan of Rahmis-trivka, the son of the Maggid R. Mordekhai of Cher-nobyl. R. Yitshak died in 1917.His brother, R. Yisrael, who is also mentioned inthe letter, succeeded his father, R. Avraham-Yaakov,as Tsaddik in Sadagora and was the leader of theSadagora hasidim till his death in 1906. His first wifewas the daughter of his cousin, R. Yitshak of Buhush,the son of R. Shalom-Yosef, his father’s brother.The Ruhamah Bathsheva mentioned in the letterwas the wife of her cousin, R, Yisrael of Chortkov,the son of the well-known Tsaddik, R. David-Mosheof Chortkov, who, like R. Avraham-Yaakov, was alsoa son of R. Yisrael of Ruzhin. R. Yisrael of Chortkovdied in 1933.This letter was written—as stated at the head ofthe letter—on 17th Av [July 29th] 1866.The hasidim of R. Avraham-Yaakov of Sadagora,the successor of R. Yisrael of Ruzhin in Sadagora,were followers of his two sons: R. Yitshak of Boyanand R. Yisrael of Sadagora, both of them the grand-sons of R. Aharon the Second of Karlin.These genealogical details prove that, among thedescendants of R. Aharon the Second of Karlin men-tioned in these three letters, there was not a singleone that formed a marriage alliance with someonewho was not ^Hhe son or daughter of holy men”, i.e.,was not also from a family of Tsaddikim, This wasin keeping with the well-known practice prevailing inthe families of the Tsaddikim of inter-marrying topreserve their distinguished lineage. This tradition—as is also shown by the genealogical details containedin these letters—resulted in marriages between closerelatives, e.g. between cousins and the like, such asare genetically undesirable.The close bonds of friendship established betweenthe Karlin and Kozhenits dynasties in the time of R.Asher the First were maintained in R. Aharon theSecond’s day, too. This is evident from the followingletter found in the Stolin genizah—^undated in the ori-original—from R. Aharon the Second to the Kozhenitshasidim:Warm greetings to the beloved of the Lord ...who frequent... the threshold ... and his descend-ants ...Were 1 to try to relate in detail... the love...that my Father and Teacher implanted deep in myheart. . . there would not be space enough, for henever ceased praising [R. Yisrael]. Thanks be toGod ... that after him [R. Yisrael of Kozhenits] therecame forth a scion of his stock ... a delightful child,whom... I raised and brought up at my table [i.e.,in my house] ... a clever and knowledgeable boy.. .filled with the spirit of wisdom ... who ... has nowreached the age of marriage... Therefore, let myfriends . .. who have followed in their holy path [i.e.,that of the Kozhenits Tsaddikim] from generation togeneration, let them awake and rouse themselves, andlet them help one another to contribute gold fromtheir pockets generously, according to their means andbeyond their means ... For ... the delightful boy isa fine person ... and with God’s help everyone willfind his own satisfaction in him. I trust that the lead-ers of the generation, too .. . will hasten to fulfil mywishes ... to awaken the hearts of those that followthem [i.e., their hasidim] and to raise as much moneyas possible. May the merits of their holy forefathersaid them and assist them... in all their affairs withsuccess and blessing ... in all that they do and in allthat their hearts desire.. . These are the words oftheir loved one who prays for their welfare andgood....Aharon the son of R. Asher .. .’^.. A delightful child whom ... I raised andbrought up at my table.. . who ... has now reachedthe age of marriage’ for whose marriage R. Aharonthe Second requests the hasidim of Kozhenits ‘to con-tribute gold from their pockets generously, accordingto their means and beyond their means,’ was one ofthe descendants of R. Yisrael of Kozhenits, R. Yerah-miel-Moshe. This R. Yerahmiel-Moshe was educatedin Stolin, in the house of his step-father, R. Asher theSecond, and subsequently became the Tsaddik of Ko-zhenits.In R. Aharon the Second’s days, the influence ofthe Haskalah [‘Enlightenment’] in Western Europe,began to penetrate into Lithuania, bringing with itliberal social ideas. Hasidism now faced a new chal-lenge. It now came under attack from the maskilim,just as a hundred years previously it had been at-tacked by the Rahhanim, and it displayed the samestubborn power of resistance in meeting this secondonslaught as it had in meeting the first. Eventually,this conflict did great damage to Karlin hasidism andled to its decline, but not until after the death ofR. Aharon the Second.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN129The teachings of R. Aharon the Second includedin Beth Aharon are described as follows in the intro-duction to that volume: ‘Excellent sermons ... whatwas uttered explicitly... by the lips ... of R. Aharon[the Second] ... faithfully recorded true words, oneout of a thousand of his holy sayings.. . The writingsof our Master and Teacher of blessed memory [R.Aharon the Second] . .. were collected together andannotated in his own hand, various annotations onvarious subjects. Whenever he referred to these holywritings, he called them Beth Aharon... Also, wehave seen fit to include other excellent matters whichwe found written down in the hand of our Teacher’sfollowers, who wrote them down for themselves as arecord of his holy words that they heard from his holymouth at various times when they were in his holy re-sidence.’^®^ In the volume Beth Aharon, which waspublished three years after R. Aharon the Second’sdeath, we find many such expressions as the following:‘He began to speak,’ ‘the Rebbe said,’ ‘the Rebbespoke a great deal about this,’ ‘the Rebbe raised aquestion,’ ‘the Rebbe repeated,’ ‘he reported his Fa-ther as saying,’ ‘he related on the authority of theholy Rebbe, R. Shelomo Karliner,’ ‘afterwards hespoke a great deal himself and said,’ ‘he ended witha blessing,’ ‘he was asked,’ ‘he said in the name ofthe holy Rebbe from Mezhibozh [R. Barukh],’ ‘theholy Rebbe of blessed memory asked a difficult ques-tion,’ ‘in the year 1872, on the holy Sabbath, Portionof the Law Be-Haalothkha, before he was laid to rest... he said.’ These repeatedly stressed expressions con-firm that most of the contents of the book were in-deed written ‘by his followers ... who wrote themdown for themselves.. . that they heard from hismouth.’On the other hand, we also find such expressions asthe following: ‘As I heard from my revered father,’‘in my youth I asked my revered father,’ ‘accordingto the parable related to my revered grandfather, theholy Tsaddik [R. Aharon the Great] of Karlin,’ ‘as I151 From the ‘talk’ of the Karlin hasidim: Once, af-ter a session at the ‘table,’ R. Aharon the Second sawone of his followers pick up a page of notes that hehad dropped. On being informed, in answer to hisquestion, that this particular hasid was in the habit ofwriting down his ‘words on the Torah/ so that theycould be published in a book, R. Aharon asked him:‘Are you making sure that my hasidim have a goodsoporific?’ Similar stories are told of R. Mendel ofKotsk.heard in the name of the Tsaddik, our Teacher andMaster, R. Sh.[elomo] of Karlin,’ ‘I have heard itsaid in the name of our Teacher and Master R. M.[or-dekhai] of blessed memory from Neshkizh,’ ‘we spoke,’‘we said,’ and the like. These expressions are evidencethat some of ‘the holy writings ... were ... annotatedin his holy hand.’ In his sermons, R. Aharon the Se-cond frequently quotes from his father and also fromR. Shelomo of Karlin, whom he refers to as ‘the holyTsaddik of Karlin.’ He also mentions his grandfather,R. Aharon the Great, whom he calls ‘R. Aharon Kar-liner.’ He likewise quotes from the homilies and pa-rables of other Tsaddikim, such as R. Barukh [ofMezhibozh], R. Elimelekh [of Lizhensk], the Tsaddikof Kozhenits [R. Yisrael], the Tsaddik of Polonnoye[R. Yaakov-Yosef], R. Yisrael of Ruzhin, R. Nahumof Chernobyl, R. Levi-Yitshak of Berdichev, R. Mor-dekhai of Neskhizh, the Rebbe of Lublin [R. Yaakov-Yitshak], R. Zusya of Anipol, R. Mendel of Bar, TheRebbe of Apta [the Tsaddik R. Avraham-Yehoshua-Heshel: ‘as I heard from the Tsaddik of Apta’]. An-other source used by R. Aharon is ‘the siddur [prayer-book] of R. Yaakov-Koppel.’ Sometimes he attributesthe same idea both to his father and to R. Shelomoof Karlin; and certain ideas which he attributes tohis father are the same as those attributed by thehasidim, in their ‘Collected Sayings,’ to R. Asher theFirst. In R. Aharon’s sermons, there is not muchcasuistry. Instead, there are many explanations andparables, sometimes even in Yiddish, which made thebook more accessible to the simple uneducated hasid.From references in the text, it is clear that these ha-sidic homilies were delivered over a period of manyyears, from 1841 to ‘the holy Sabbath ... before hewas laid to rest’ (1872).On the way in which a Jew should pray, R. Aha-ron speaks as follows: ‘In worshipping... the Al-mighty, one should not keep on repeating the sameprayer mechanically, but should add and add again.Every prayer must have fresh vitality infused into it.’‘The uniting of the worlds is achieved primarily byprayer.’ ‘Even the man of least worth is not permittedto despair.. . “For is not my word like fire?” Just asfire lights up the darkness, so will the Holy Namegive him light... in all his trials.’ ‘Everyone musttake care to bring himself closer to the Source of Lifewhen he prays, and, of course, when he studies andwhen he performs any of the commandments.’ ‘Everyword that a man utters should bring him closer to the130W. Z. RABINOWITSCHSource of Life.’ One should stand up to pray onlyin a joyful frame of mind. ^Whenever a prayer isuttered something is born... And when is somethingborn? .. . When the prayer is uttered joyfully. Butprayer uttered (Heaven forbid!) in sadness bears nofruit. When God has aroused a man’s spirit and soulto pray joyfully, then he exalts all the previous pray-ers.’ ^Every word spoken by man in the presence ofthe Almighty Blessed Be He, must be spoken clearly,vigorously, and joyfully... This is the meaning of“Thou shalt make a window for the ark” [Heb.:tevah)—that you should bring light to the writtenletter’ [Heb.: tevah]. Not only when praying shoulda man be happy, but whatever he does should be donejoyfully, for ^by joyfulness he will be able to removehimself from everything evil and to bring himselfcloser to the good.’ ^One must beware of sadness andmelancholy, as of all the other sins and vices.’ Theessential thing is to perform every commandment joy-fully, not sadly.’ The consonants of the Hebrew wordfor ^thought’ [mahashavah] form the word for ^joy-fully’ [besimhah]; hence ^repentance . .. comes pri-marily from joyfulness and delight; and delight andjoyfulness come primarily from repentance.’Apart from prayer, there is still another way thatbrings the Jew closer to his God—the way of Torah(the study of the Law). ^Not only in prayer, but alsoin our study of the Law, we must continually, everyday, find fresh, renewed vitality. “Give us our portionin Thy Law” ... this means: give every single oneof us the share in the Law that is his... One manfinds spiritual vigour in the study of a single verse,another in the Gemara, a third in the Zohar, Eachone must seek for and find his own spiritual vigourand sanctity in the Torah* At the same time, R. Aha-ron stresses the part played by the ordinary Jew increating this sanctity: The People of Israel... bringholiness to everything ... Here is the proof: a Scrollof the Law written by a heretic is unfit for use...even though the letters are exactly the same as thosewritten by a Jew. For the truth is that what mattersis the sanctity, drawn from the living power of theCreator, that the Jew infuses into the letters.’ R. Aha-ron is reported to have summed up the relationshipbetween the study of the Law and prayer in the fol-lowing dictum: The study of the Law is an obligation,prayer a need.Not only prayer and the study of the Law, butevery act that a man performs is a form of Divineworship. ‘Not only in the study of the Torah and inprayer, but also in things that a man does of his ownfree will, such as eating, drinking, sleeping, walking,sexual intercourse, and the like, and in all other humanactivities, everyone must take care not to remove him-self (Heaven forbid!) from the Almighty, Blessed BeHe, but only to bring himself closer thereby to HisHoly Name.‘Whenever a man does good deeds he is sowinga seed in Heaven that will bear fruit... If a mandoes not sow the seed, he will not reap the harvest.Hence, in spiritual matters a man is obliged to sowmitsvoth and good deeds, and thus bring it about thatthe Holy Name should shower down upon him Hisgreat light and every spiritual and physical blessingin this world, and that there should be complete com-munion .. . The flesh is purified until it becomes allspirit.’Prayer, study, and good deeds were given to manfor one purpose only—to enable him to attain to theliving power of the Creator. ^Everything that is donein the world ... contains within it the living powerof the Creator,’ ^and when all creatures are exaltedspiritually by us, our righteous Messiah will come.’When a Jew is born, he is born with his good portion,with all the faculties required for him to be equippedto receive his good portion. And what is this portion?“For the Lord’s portion is His people”—the livingpower of the Divinity... the vital force which Heimplanted in His people Israel, was all taken from onhigh, that is, from His Holiness, Blessed Be HisName! For, as is known, man is a portion of theMost High.’ ^Every Jew can attain to the living powerof the Holy Name. Even the smallest of all, and theleast of all, and the lowest of all.’ What, then, pre-vents them? When a man knows that he is nothingand that there is nothing in him, then, whenever hewishes it, the living force of the Creator can pervadehis whole being.. . But when he thinks himself some-thing, then there is no room for the living power ofthe Creator to spread in him.’The purpose for which everything was created isthe attainment of perfection, and Ve, the people ofIsrael, were created for the complete perfection thatis to be attained ... speedily in our days. The worldshall be purified and restored to perfection; all thingsshall be one, and there shall be peace in the world.’‘Everyone must know that the whole universe andevery human being are like a lamp and vessel thatHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN131receive the living power and light of the Holy OneBlessed Be He/ But Hhe light of the Holy One BlessedBe He cannot go together with anything physicalin this lower world of ours. Hence, His intention .. .in creating this world was to make the two worlds one,that man should be freed from his physical trammelsand everything should be raised up to His will. .. butthen came the sins of the generation of the Flood andthe generation of the Tower of Babel and the men ofSodom. There followed two thousand years of chaos,when the Divine Presence withdrew to the SeventhHeaven and this lower world was separated from thehigher world and the Divine Providence almost aban-doned man ... But afterwards, when the two thousandyears of Torah commenced and God^s light began toshine in this world, when the patriarchs together withall the righteous ones and Moses our Teacher broughtback the Divine Glory to earth, and everything waspurified and raised up to the Holy One Blessed BeHe—then the two worlds were made equal. For thisis the essence of His will... that every physicalthing in this world should be elevated to the spirituallevel.’ Tor, in truth, the spiritual is far removed fromthe physical, and the physical is far removed from thespiritual. Only when Israel cleave to the Holy OneBlessed Be He by keeping His Law and worshippingHim and obliterating themselves, only then do theybring His Holiness and light down to this world andonly then can they ascend to the higher sphere... inbody.’ Tor the worlds were created solely for the pur-pose that each of them should be filled with the lightof the Holy One Blessed Be He and be constantlyrenewed. Thereby is this world kept in being.’R. Aharon attributes to the Tsaddik the exaltedrole of radiating some of the Tidden light’ on theworld. The first light that was hidden away, wassealed up in the Tsaddikim ... not for the world tocome, but for the Tsaddikim that were to arise inevery generation, that they should attain to the lightby their good deeds.’ ‘By their actions, the Tsaddikimraise up all things to the heights, where they becomea torch ... a great light for all this world.’ ‘All theTsaddikim attained to the hidden light by their spi-ritual self-sacrifice .. . until they became men of greatrighteousness.’ ‘It would seem natural to wonder(since the Lord hid the light away), Why did Hecreate it at all? .. . So that afterwards every manshould search for the hidden light.’ To this end, every-one must bind himself in his prayers to the Tsad-dikim, who are bound to the holy patriarchs.’P'rayer, study, and good deeds hasten the day ofredemption. ‘Every day, nay every hour, a man mustbring the world nearer to the coming of the Messiah:as we have already said on the verse “All the daysof your life”—this includes [lit.: brings in] the daysof the Messiah, so that everyone must... by his deedsbring the world nearer to the coming of the Messiah:Moreover, ‘every Jew is also in himself a kind ofMessiah,’ for ‘every Jew is obliged to think and knowthat he is unique in the world, and that no other per-son like him has yet existed in the world. For if therehad already been anyone like him in this world, therewould have been no need for him to exist... Everysingle person is something new in the world and mustin this world perfect his character... and his Jewishknowledge which are an integral part of his being,until all the worlds shall be perfected by the wholecommunity of Israel, and . .. the righteous redeemershall come.’R. Aharon the Second used to say: Truth, eventhe slightest trace of truth, is impossible without spi-ritual devotion. And ‘R. Yisrael of Ruzhin once said:“R. Aharon the Great of Karlin was the truth of theworld; R. Asher, his son, walked all his life in thefootsteps of the truth; and as for R. Aharon, hisgrandson, if he knew that a crumb of truth was hid-den under the floor, he would pull up the floor withhis fingers.” ’kpnN n’3^ irroyn V' VPK raVa wai ncnj -ait • rfrcn « a^ap Tiuva nn\m ’an6’VJO • o’'pe riKJi pivi nn; • p'\ai cic • na^HTcn • CBi't&i avi wail ir'iia nua • 'tkip’ prin’ciKj'oiD • ’evi K3*» • n-iKCM accK • taiao 'n pnp • Kaon'.iSVpivi fViK n •'■'•VI ■'*'0 ttP pp^Tp Tua • "j .ry rro • 'rawipprpa KP-iw 3a< • Ki'p’ \n*>p\3’K KP^ei • I'Vtkpowa *£0 cjnj' uyap npK o’Ta'no KU'vei k3'vo^ • cvu pti pispla'jKPjppK •KP’Tsun'cn • KTon kpxu • coTicnpnjxiavi••TP?'?,-31X1 X'N 'P'a mapa k:3ii Krc-n\ain Kjna K-Q'.xana \rwrpune r^*? pck tSii* rv€ V-t-pa mVyo UTfi*«o -wcii *tT t'rojrc' S’Vn• i:rc^ p'j t*y * WS.‘'i • UP .-SB C’s'Jt: snai :) •. tfnp c’p'Js rn • c''>FC 3^ • c-s 13 »*.•£? ppi' •• •?: -Am n? •vn P’l v>cn« •vrti aci*I p'p * rr rcri'rfz |nnrnrr cp ''2S? rwTnunro r.Yrry tti -.sft r«Bv:sNnr I'n- ^irer *r; -rcjnrr* c.-:? V8 iQt*mnn «>•rjrrn-on tm «ai f«r.‘vi« m* ITT? r* x.r-yii KS79 *9rxr? rrrrvart-'iTitle-page of the Volume “Beth Aharon"Brody 1875132W. Z. RABINOWITSCHp„ ,.iu.f^^ f ■ ^ A/-' '^'‘^1 fv' fi s7>!-77S‘'^7 xiifiij'h's‘'‘h*hv'',’!Af "‘' ■ #1^ A... iH^-Letter of R. Asher the Second to his followers1872 or 1873R. Aharon the Second remained all the rest of hislife in Stolin. He died on the 17th Sivan, 1872/®^while passing through the small town of Mlynov, nearDubno, in Volhynia, and was buried there. Thereafter,he was given by his followers the additional names of‘the man of Mlynov’ or ‘the holy grandfather.’ Sincethe teachings of R. Aharon the Second comprise themajor part of the volume Beth Aharon^ he himself isoften referred to by the hasidim by the name of thisbook, according to the Jewish practice of naming writ-ers after their works.^®^152 Beth Aharon, p. 6.153 As has already been remarked, the exact author-ship of each of the sections of Beth Aharon is un-certain. In Mishnath Hakhamim by R. Avraham-Eli-melekh Shapiro (Jerusalem 1934), there is a collectionof ‘Words of our Rabbis’ from the ms. of the KarlinTsaddikim. In the introduction to this volume we read:*I received the ms. as a gift... from my revered fa-ther-in-law ... our Teacher and Rabbi, R. Yerahmiel-Moshe... of Kozhenits, who grew up and was educatedin Stolin in the household... of R. Aharon... theauthor of Beth Aharon... In the ms. it is written thatmost of the articles are... by our Teacher R* Aharonthe Great... and also some by... our Teacher, R. Aha-G. Ha-Yenuka [The Child] (1873—1921)R. Aharon the Second’s successor was his son, R.Asher the Second. The situation then prevailing in the‘court’ at Stolin may be gathered from a letter, signedron [the Second] ... the author of Beth Aharon...But there is no indication which these “some” are.’R. Shapiro’s book comprises explanatory comments onBiblical verses and rabbinical sayings, together withhasidic material similar in content and spirit to thatfound in Beth Aharon. At the end of the book, theauthor prints a story about R. Aharon the Great fromthe time when he was living in the house of hisTeacher in Mezerich, together with two letters fromR. Aharon the Second to his followers in Palestine,and chronological details with an important bearingon the history of the Karlin Tsaddikim.Yeshayahu Tishby published the satirical anti-hasidicwork of Tsevi Herman Shapira, Massekheth Hasidim—Tract on the Hasidim (‘Tsevi Herman Shapira—ke-Sofer ha-Haskalah^, Molad, Vol. IV, No. 23, pp. 556-579 and No. 24, pp. 696—712, Tel Aviv 1972.) Afterthorough analysis and discussion, Tishby expresses Uieopinion that R. Aharon the Second of Karlin servedas Shapira’s model of Tsaddik as portrayed in the‘tract’, and that many qualities attributed by Shapirato the Tsaddik were those of R. Aharon.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN133by R. Asher the Second and written in the hand ofone of his followers, which was sent by R. Asher tohis hasidim after his father’s death.‘With the help of the Blessed Namel‘Life and blessing... to my beloved ones ... ourloyal followers ... May they be blessed ... with everygood, they and their wives and their children anddescendants. .. with a good and long life. . . Our be-loved followers know the painful burden of debts le t... by our Master, my revered Father ... and theyall know how great were [my father’s] sufferings onthis account in his lifetime.., how he was pained tothe very depths of his being... and how the voice ofthe creditors was heard every day... Now, therefore,I am sending our dearly beloved friend ... the bearerof this letter, to all... our followers to collect theircontributions ... according to the list that he showsthem. Let them take good note of the greatness of theneed. Moreover, I request that my office in such agreat matter as this should not be changed... andeveryone that trod the threshold of the holy residenceof... my Father.., should be quick to carry outthese my words, to honour him and to give his holyspirit rest in Paradise; and also to remove the greatsorrow that is caused by this. Let them all rise upas one man to pay the sum required... generouslyand gladly. Let them help... and encourage one an-other to pay their contribution speedily to our friend,the bearer of this letter... according to the list.Heaven forbid that they should be late, or shouldput off... their response, but let them bring it them-selves. Let them contribute through the bearer of thisletter, and let them give generously. For he that givesgenerously will receive an additional blessing. It is notto be believed that there will be even one of our fol-lowers that will shut his ears... and not feel boundto perform this great duty, nor remember his rever-ence for his Teacher ... Even as the love of him wasdeeply implanted in their hearts in his lifetime so nowit is their bounden duty to be quick in showing res-pect for his memory... Everything will be ... undermy supervision ... I trust... that they will hearkento my words for their own good ... and that the Hid-den Light may pour down every blessing upon them... to bring blessing upon their houses in peace...and in long life ... and that their names may be cons-tantly mentioned on our lips... Wherever they turnmay they prosper... that all may be well with themalways...’In his practical interpretation of hasidic doctrineR. Asher the Second occupies a special place amongthe Karlin Tsaddikim. He was very greatly influencedby mystical doctrines and laid greater stress than hispredecessors on the importance of immersion in themikveh [the ritual bath] which ^washes away the un-cleanness of the body and instead infuses it with holi-ne3s.’ There are many reports of how he would remainimmersed in the mtkveh for hours on end, to the un-comprehending astonishment of the local mithnagedpopulation. The few passages of biblical expositionattributed to him in Beth Aharon all deal with ‘puri-fication by immersion in the mikveh! In the ‘Rulesfor Daily Conduct’ quoted in his name in the samevolume, R. Asher bases the whole order of the day’swork on the one principle of joyful ‘inner worship,’as against ‘sadness and grief (Heaven forbid!),’ onreligious awe, love, and humility, which ‘purifies andperfects all the human qualities.’ Again, ‘attachmentto the Tsaddikim is very efficacious, to prevent anyerror in soul-searching’; and ‘levity is the exact op-posite of hasidism.’^®^R. Asher the Second’s period of ‘leadership’ as theStolin Rebbe was of short duration. He died only ayear after R. Aharon the Second, on the 15th Av,1873, in the small town of Drohobich (Galicia), andwas buried there. Hence the additional names givenhim by the Karlin hasidim: ‘the man of Drohobich,’or ‘the young Rebbe,’ to distinguish him from ‘theold man of Stolin,’ R. Asher the First, and from Hheholy grandfather,’ R. Aharon the Second.^®®The death of R. Asher the Second caused a crisisin the ranks of Karlin hasidism, since he left no adultsuccessor. His only son, Yisrael, was then about fouryears old (hasidic tradition has it that he was bornon 10th KisleVy 1868), and thus not only the child,but all the Karlin hasidim, too, lost a father.In this critical time, the Karlin hasidim resolved tomeet the danger by standing firm in their loyalty to154 Beth Aharon, Brody 1875, R. Asher the Secondis the author of the following material printed in thisvolume: ‘Daily Conduct’ (p. 10), and ‘Sayings’ quotedin his name (pp. 161, 198, 289, 314).In Divrei Aharon (pp. 81-88), Hausman publishedseveral letters from and to R. Asher the Second inwhich there are some historical details. See also thesame author in his book Birkath Aharon, pp. 129-136.155 In order to perpetuate the names of their Tsad-dikim, the Karlin hasidim used to call their children‘Aharon’ or ‘Asher.’134W. Z. RABINOWITSCHthe Karlin dynasty, and therefore proclaimed theYenuka [Child] Yisrael to be their Rebbe. This pro-clamation of a small child as a Rebbe aroused com-ment in the Jewish press, particularly in a satiricalarticle entitled Hithgalluth ha-Yenuka bi-Stolin [TheRevelation of the Child in Stolin].^®® This satire ispresented in the form of a long letter, written sup-posedly by a hasid in the characteristic hasidic style,in which the writer goes into ecstasies about the ‘mi-racles’ and ‘marvels’ of the Karlin Tsaddikim, includ-ing those performed by the Yenuka,When R. Yisrael grew up, he not only made aname for himself by his intellectual ability and prac-tical vigour, but he also won the deep affection of hisfollowers by the warm paternal interest that he tookin every one of them. They loved him for the impar-tial way in which he used to preach and reprimandas he thought necessary, without making any distinc-tion between rich and poor, between someone froma good family and a simple Jew. His sense of realitiesand his experience in worldly affairs enabled him tohelp his followers with good advice in time of trouble.R. Yisrael was also very tolerant and mixed freelywith people from all strata of the population, thuswinning the respect even of his opponents. With hisknowledge of Russian and German he had close con-nections with the secular authorities, and used to in-tercede with them on behalf both of the whole com-munity and of its individual members. The hasidimrelate that once, when a troop of soldiers descendedupon Stolin with the intention of carrying out a po-grom, R. Yisrael invited the commander to a meal;and when the latter told him that he had not cometo Stolin to eat but for ‘other matters,’ and asked R.Yisrael who his children were since he did not wish toharm them, R. Yisrael replied: ‘All the Jews of Sto-lin are my children.’ The story ends with the words:‘So there was no pogrom in Stolin.’^®*^True to the tradition of his father and grandfatherbefore him, R. Yisrael held open ‘court’ in Stolin forthe Karlin hasidim, especially on Sabbaths and Fes-tivals. R.Yisrael was not in the habit of expounding156 Had min Havraya, * Hithgalluth ha-Yenuka hi-Stolin/ Ha-Shahar, Vol. VI, pp. 25-44. The author ofthis satire was the writer and maskil Yahalal [Yehu-dah-Leib Levin], as he himself states in his book Zik-karon ha-Sefer, p. 45, Zhitomir, 1910.157 A. Ben-Ezra, Ha-Yenuka’ mi-Btolin, p. 16, NewYork 1951.the Torah, and yet on the Penitential Days Stolin—^soeye-witnesses relate—was crowded with hasidim whowould come from far and near, from Kiev and Warsawand from as far away as Odessa, and a few even fromPalestine. On Simhath Torah and on the Seder Nightof Passover, the tunes of R. Aharon the Second, sungwith joyful fervour, would resound through the smalltown till late into the night. Unlike the other Karlinhasidim, R. Yisrael used himself to pray silently.However, he conducted the melavveh malkah to mu-sical accompaniment. He and his three sons togethermade up a quartet which occasionally performed va^rious pieces of secular music, in addition to liturgicaltunes. For R. Yisrael, playing music was one of theforms of Divine worship, which was therefore ‘to bepreceded by washing the hands.’^®®The influence of the Haskalah movement, whichhad first begun to be felt in R. Aharon the Second’sPicture of R. Yisrael ‘The Child' of Stolin158 Ben-Ezra, op. cit., p. 11. R. Yisrael kept com-posers of songs in his ‘court.’ The best known of thesewas R. Yaakov of Telekhan (a small town close toPinsk), whose melodies attained such popularity in ha-sidic circles that they were sung for two generationsby the hasidim of Karlin, Lakhovich, and Koidanov.The next best-known composer of Karlin melodies wasR. Yossele Talner. A second edition of Beth Aharonwas published in R. Yisrael’s time (Petrokov 1914). Itis identical with the first edition (Brody 1875).HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN135days, grew stronger in R. YisraeFs time. The national-ist and socialist movements at the turn of the cen-tury, together with the secularisation of Jewish edu-cation, alienated the younger generation of Jews fromhasidism. Indeed, R. YisraeFs own followers used torelate that he himself spoke sadly of Karlin hasidismas a phase that was drawing to a close.R. Yisrael set down some of the main points ofhis ‘credo^ in two testaments, one addressed to hisfamily and the other to his followers.^®®In the testament to his family R. Yisrael writes asfollows:When my spirit departs, no time shall be spenton ceremonial tributes of respect. If my end comeswhile I am travelling, my body shall not be carriedto my home, unless the place be only a few hours^distance from Mlynov [the burial place of R. Aharonthe Second], Karlin [the burial place of R. Aharonthe Great and R. Asher the First], or Drohobich [theburial place of R. Asher the Second]. If it be thelocal custom to set up an ohel [structure over thegrave], mine shall not be a large one but only medium-sized. If it be the custom to set up a tombstone, onlymy name and my father’s name shall be inscribed onit, without any titles... [For winding-sheet] theyshall take my kittel [a white garment worn by Jewson the Penitential Days and on the Seder Night],and the other cerements shall be made from the gar-ments of my fathers... In the first year, in all thetowns where there are followers of mine, they shallstudy Ein Yaakov [a volume containing the talmudicAggadah], and if there is a Talmud study circle, theyshall complete one tractate in my memory. And in thecircles in which I am registered as a member, careshall be taken to divide up the Talmud in such a waythat in the course of ten years the whole Talmudshall have been studied in my memory.T herewith earnestly request my sons to do theirutmost to educate their own sons (and to use all theirinfluence with others, too) in traditional Judaism andhasidism after the old manner without any compro-mises. The main thing is the study of the Talmud...159 The text printed here is that of a copy of thetwo testaments which belonged to a Stolin hasid inPinsk closely associated with R. Yisrael of Stolin. Boththe testaments were published by Ben-Ezra, op. cit.,pp. 19-24. There are slight differences in the thirdedition of Beth Aharon, p. 314 (Brooklyn 1952), andalso in the fourth edition, p. 315 (Jerusalem 1965).which makes all that know it conduct themselver. bet-ter. When the children grow up, let them be taughtwriting and language, things that are naturally neces-sary, and let them not be like the fools of the presentday whose whole education is derived from journalsand stories. Their parents shall take care that theirteacher be an elderly man of known probity. Theyshall also give good heed to the education of theirdaughters, for on that depends the corner-stone ofJudaism—the family; and they shall endeavour to findthem husbands soon after they reach marriageable age.‘I counsel my sons not to meddle in communal af-fairs or in any worldly matters, especially not in moneycases or matters concerning the secular authorities.For in the course of my long life I have never seenanyone that emerged from all this unscathed and un-humiliated, except in such matters as the study of theTalmud and the use of the mikveh. The greatest prin-ciple of all is not to flatter anyone in the world, forthis sometimes leads to the opposite result, as ourSages remarked: '‘Every flatterer eventually falls intothe power of the one whom he flatters.” Hence, thisshall be the sign to my followers to which of my sonsto turn [i.e., which of them to choose as my succes-sor]: the one that shall admit no flatterers, show nospecial favour to any man, make no special effort towin followers, and not become involved with thesecular authorities.’Then follow the detailed instructions about thedivision of the property as a whole:'My Scrolls of the Law shall be divided up betweenmy sons, but the holy Scroll of my grandfather ofblessed memory shall remain in Stolin as long as mybeth midrash stands and those that worship in it prayin the hasidic manner. Afterwards they shall come tosome agreement among themselves, according to thedecision of pious Jews.’'This will was written in the hand of our holy Reb-be, in the presence of the undersigned... on the se-cond day of the week, the 2nd of Teveth, [S]681[1920], in Stolin.’Signature of two witnesses.The following is the text of R. Yisrael’s last in-junctions to his followers:'...The second day of the week... the 12th ofTammuz, [5]681 [ = 1921], Stolin.'For the sake of my brethren and companions Ishall utter... words that come from the heart to ourloyal followers ... that these words should be inscribed136W. Z. RABINOWITSCHThe Grave of R. Yisrael ‘The Child’ of Stolinin Frankfurt-on-Mainon the tablets of their heart... in the true hasidicmanner... Let every single one of them be truthful andsincere; let him never speak hypocritically, but let hisoutward manner truly reflect his inner thoughts. Lethim obey the injunction of the verse: ^‘Know Him inall thy ways'' [Prov, 3, 6]. Let every one of themguard his tongue from evil and his lips from utteringdeceit, and let him utterly eschew lying and arrogance.As it is written: ‘‘The arrogant man is an abominationto the Lord" [Prov. 16, 5] ... I pray that the Lordmay graciously grant us length of days and years, withall good and pleasant things. True, the net is spreadout over all living things; and since all men aremortal, I exhort our followers (may they live long!)that, in a hundred years from now, there should be nodissension between them arising from the sect of flat-terers and hypocrites, for no flatterer shall come intothe Lord's presence, but that they should all formone united band. This shall be a true sign for them:that one of my sons... in whom there shall be allthese qualities, who shall not be a flatterer or hypo-crite, and shall eschew lies, and shall not belong to ...a company (here, between the lines, the followingwords have been added in his own holy hand: a com-pany of the Zionists and especially of the Mizrahi)but who shall be one of those that fear the Lord, whoshall not have his sons and daughters taught inschools, not even in Hebrew schools, nor make anyeffort to have himself chosen Rebbe—he shall be their[sc. my followers'] leader and head. (From this pointthe testament is written in his own holy hand): WhenI could no longer see clearly enough to write in myown hand, I ordered my family to write at my dic-tation. In witness whereof I sign my nameYisrael the son ... of R. Asher .. .'Signature of two witnesses.R. Yisrael died at the age of 52 on the second dayof Rosh Hashanahy 1921, far away from his nativetown, in a convalescent home in Homburg, Germany.He was buried in Frankfurt-on-Main, and is there-fore to this day referred to by the Karlin hasidim as‘the man of Frankfurt.Amongst the hasidim atR. Yisrael’s cool attitude to the Zionist move-ment is illustrated by the following story, which wastold me by Dr. Moshe Lutski the curator of Hebrewmss. in the library of Columbia University, New York,originally from the smaU town of Kozhan-Horodok (notfar from Pinsk). As a young man. Dr. Lutski askedR. Yisrael’s advice about where he should go to studyTorah. R. Yisrael replied: Tf you want to study hasid-ism, go to one of the Lubavich yeshivoth; and if youwant to go to a mithnaged yeshivahj go to the yeshivahof Hafets Hayyim in Radin. But if you go to Radin,don’t stop in Lida' (a hint that he should not enterthe well-known yeshivah of Rabbi Reines, the founderof the ‘Mizrahi’ party). As against this, amongst the‘holy writings’ found in the Stolin genizah there weredeeds of sale relating to houses bought by R. Israelin the Holy Land; and he also used to send a specialemissary to collect funds for the ‘Karlin koleV in Pales-tine (Ben-Ezra, op. cit., p. 24, n. 20).161 The collection of letters of the Karlin Tsaddikimpublished by Hausman in his works Divrei Aharon(Jerusalem 1964) and Birkath Aharon (Jerusalem1970), constitute a valuable supplement to the bookof Karlin hasidism, Beth Aharon (v. supr., nn. 123,141, 154, and infr., n. 172). Hausman’s volume con-tains (pp. 89-124) thirty-six letters from the TsaddikR. Yisrael and sayings attributed to him. This materialreflects the close personal relations existing betweenR. Yisrael and his followers, as well as his concernfor the welfare of the Karlin hasidim in Palestine—^inJeimsalem, Safed, Haifa, and above all in Tiberias—and for the prayer-house of R. Mendel of Vitebsk, whichhasidism in PINSK and KARLIN137l^g6^ and even among the mithnagdim, he is knownas Hhe Yenuka of Stolin/H. The Final Tragedy and the Present Situation(1921—1974)After the death of R. Yisrael of Stolin (Rosh Ha-skanah, 1921), the Karlin hasidim gathered togetherin Stolin. R. Yisrael had six sons. After considerableargumenti®2 ^ decided that one of them, R. Mo-she, should remain as Rebbe in Stolin; a second son,R. Avraham-Elimelekh, should take up residence asRebbe in Karlin; a third, R. Yohanan, should settlein Lutsk (Volhynia); while, a fourth, R. Yaakov, re-ceived a call from the Karlin hasidim who had emi-grated to America. However, the association betweenhasid and Rebbe was not determined by place of re-sidence, but—and this was characteristic of the ha-sidic movement—by the personal attachment of theindividual hasid to the Rebbe^ ^according to the deep-est needs of his soul.’ Hence, there were Karlin ha-sidim in Stolin, and Stolin hasidim in Karlin. In thisway, Karlin hasidism lost some of its homogeneityand unity. Thus, for example, of the two hasidichouses of prayer in P'insk, one belonged to the Stolinhasidim (the followers of R. Moshe), and the otherto the Karlin hasidim (the followers of R. Elimelekh).The same phenomenon recurred much later—in thethirties of the present century—^in Tel Aviv; while R.the Karlin hasidim had purchased in the time of R.Aharon the Second (v. supr.). R. Yisrael’s lettersare thoroughly hasidic in spirit, with special stressbeing laid on the importance of the study of the Tal-mud, He opposed the establishment of a Jewish schoolof a different type from the traditional heder; and hewrites with pride of the values of Judaism. He is alsoreported to have expressed his opposition to the Zionistmovement.To this large collection of letters Hausman has ap-pended a painstakingly complete and almost legalistic-ally precise list of Karlin hasidic customs (Divrei Aha-ron, pp. 210-240), and also a genealogical table of theKarlin Tsaddikim and the ramifications of their fami-lies (op. cit, pp. 242-253), based on a critical studyof the sources.For details of the life of R. Yisrael of Stolin and adescription of how he lives on in the memory andimagination of his followers and their descendants,see: Stolin, Sefer Zikkaron, ed. A. Avatihi and Y.Ben-Zakai, the section Hasidism, Tel Aviv 1952; andthe pamphlet Or Zarua, by the same editors, Tel Aviv1952.Y. Benjamini, ^Hilluf Mishmaroth be-Hatsar ha-Rebhe/ Stolin, Sefer Zikkaron, p. 176.Yohanan in Lutsk and R. Yaakov in America usedboth names—Stolin and Karlin—of themselves. An-other son of R. Yisrael’s, R. Asher, lived in Stolin.A talented musician, his gifts won the acclaim ofmusical authorities, and he went to study at the con-servatory in Berlin.A special place among the sons of R. Yisrael wasreserved for R. Aharon (R. Aharele). Despite therequests of many of the hasidim, R. Aharon refused tobecome a Rebbe. A completely unworldly man, hesettled in Warsaw (where, too, there were Karlin ha-sidim) and lived a life of austerity, devoting himselfto helping the sick, the jjoor and the wretched. Hisselflessness was known and admired not only in hasidiccircles. He died a martyr’s death in Warsaw during theNazi Holocaust (apparently in 1942). The stories toldof his martyrdom have a legendary ring which bearseloquent testimony to the nobility of his spirit andthe loftiness and purity of his self-sacrificing saintli-ness. His character has also been commemorated inverse.^®^R, Moshe of Stolin, a qualified Rav and a man ofgeneral education, made a name for himself by hispractical energy. He also showed sympathy for theidea of Jewish nationalism. He visited Palestine twice(in 1933 and 1937), and expressed himself in favourof the partition of the country between Jews andArabs—the question of the moment then—in orderto make the free immigration of Jews immediately(1938) possible.He had a way with young peopleand concerned himself for their education, founding(in 1922) a yeshivah in Stolin. This was a new phe-nomenon in the history of Karlin hasidism. The yeshi-vah was called Beth Yisrael and the main subjecttaught was Gemara, the aim being to achieve a syn-thesis of Lithuanian talmudic scholarship with thespirit of Karlin hasidism. The yeshivah quickly be-came a centre of religious learning for the whole dis-S. Shalom, ^Dodi Reh Aharele^, Shirim, p. 349,Tel Aviv 1949; H. Zeidman, ‘R. Aharon Perlov be-GetoVarshah/ Stolin, Sefer Zikkaron, p. 209; Y. Ben Za-kai, ^Ha-Kether she-Nuppats/ Or Zarua, ed. A. Avatihiand Y. Ben-Zakai, p. 45; Dr. S. Shazakh, ^SimhathR. Aharele/ in Hatsofeh (daily paper), Tel Aviv,14.10.1951; Y. Feingold, ^Gilgulo shel Niggun* in Davar(daily paper), Tel Aviv, 28.12.1945—the writer givesthe date of R. Aharon’s death: 25.7.1942. M. Unger,Ha-Admorim she-Nispu ba-Shoah, pp. 206-209, Jeru-salem 1969.In a private communication.138W. Z. RABINOWITSCHtrict, with as many as a hundred pupils. R. Moshehimself bore the burden of running the institution,which continued in existence until the Nazi Holocaust.R. Moshe’s last years were tragic indeed. In 1939,when Stolin was occupied by the Russians, the Sovietauthorities evicted him from his house.^®® He usedto wander like a shadow about the streets of Stolin,beloved of his fellow-Jews whose sufferings he shared,until he was killed three years later, together with allthe Jews of Stolin, when the town was destroyed bythe Nazis (29th Elul, 1942). Of his last days we havethe following account by an eye-witness: ^The lasttime I saw the Rebbe and his family... was the daybefore the great deportation... The ghetto wasplunged in dreadful darkness ... Everyone felt thatthe end was approaching ... The angel of death hover-ed over Stolin... We (my husband and I) went tothe Rebbe’s house. It was after midnight. In the Reb-be’s house all was dark. In the hall we found theRebbe’s wife and her daughter-in-law, Perele, andheart-rending cries rose from the courtyard... Weentered the Rebbe’s room through an open doorway.There in the darkness we made out the shadows ofmen sitting at the table, wrapped in talithoth [prayer-shawls] and swaying rhythmically to and fro. I couldjust recognise the Rebbe R. Moishele and his eldestson, Nahum-Shelomo ... Now, the Rebbe went up tothe prayer-desk and his whispered words reached ourears (my husband caught several expressions and ex-plained to me afterwards that they were part of thevidduy [confession of sins]). Suddenly, the Rebberaised both his arms and called out with great emortion: ^‘Our Father, Our King, have mercy upon usand upon our children!” He then broke out into bit-ter sobbing... On the morning of the eve of RoshHashanah, 1942, when all the Jews of Stolin werecollected in the market-place to be sent to the slaugh-ter, peering at the terrible spectacle from our hiding-place through a crack in the wall, we did not see theRebbe and his family there... When I visited Stolinin 1945, I asked the local Gentiles what had happenedto the Rebbe. They, and also the Ukrainian police-165 M. Kopelovich, ^Ha-Yeshivah/ Stolin^. Sefer Zik-karon,.^. 88.166 B. Kempinski-Lieberman, ‘Yamav ha-Aharonimshel ha-Rebhe Moshele Perlov/ Stolin, Sefer Zikkaron,p. 226. Further research is required into the opinionthat R. Moshe of Stolin was in Pinsk during the Nazioccupation (see Boneh, Pinsk, Vol. II, p. 332).men who had been there on that grim day in themarket-place, told me that they had not seen theRebbe among those sent to their death. Some of themreported that, according to one story, the Rebbe andhis brother, R. Asherke, and also their brother-in-law,R. Yaakovele, had hidden themselves with their fa-milies in the bath-house in the Rebbe’s courtyard.Three days after the slaughter, a fire mysteriouslybroke out there and all of them were burnt alive. Thefaithful shepherd followed his flock: the beloved andthe lovely, in life and in death they were not divid-ed.’i^^Thus was the Stolin centre of Karlin hasidismravaged and destroyed.R. Elimelekh’s taking up residence in Karlin ledto the revival of the hasidic community there, thoughits influence did not extend beyond the limits of itsown narrow circle. On the days of Rosh Hashanah,when the shofar was being sounded or when R. Eli-melekh was being escorted to tashlikh [the ceremonialpurification from sin], and on Simhath Torah, whenthe hasidim used to dance in hakkajoth [^circuits’]with the Scrolls of the Law until late into the night,almost till dawn, after spending the whole of theeighth day of Sukkoth in song and dance in the Reb-be’s sukkah [booth]—on those days it was still pos-sible to see in Karlin something of past hasidic gloriesand to hear an echo of former days.^®®Amongst R. Elimelekh’s guests in Karlin on theJewish Festivals were hasidim from P'olesia, Volhynia,Poland and Erets YIsrael, R. Elimelekh also took aninterest in political and cultural problems connectedwith Jewish life. Thus, for example, he was well versedin modern literature about hasidism (Buber andsimilar writers), and treated both the writers andtheir works with respect. Like R. Moshe in Stolin, R.Elimelekh, too, founded a yeshivah—in the neighbour-ing town of Luninyets (between Pinsk and Stolin)—and raised the necessary funds for its maintenance. Incontrast to the heavily philosophical spirit of the mu-sar [morality] movement prevailing in the mithnagedyeshivah in Karlin, near to the Rebbe’s house, his ownyeshivah was dominated by the spirit of Karlin hasid-ism, with its joyous affirmation of life. This contrastbrought out the essentially hasidic character of the ye-167 Kempinski-Lieberman, ibid. M. Unger, Ha-Admo-rim she-Nispu ba-Shoah, pp. 206-209.168 I have myself witnessed these hasidic celebra-tions.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN139shivah, though its primary purpose, like that of itsmithnaged counterpart, was the teaching of the Tal-mud, R. Elimelekh won the special esteem of veteranhasidim, and the elders of the Jerusalem community—both in the Old City and in Meah Shearim—as wellas inhabitants of Tiberias and Safed, were among hisfollowers.Between 1922 and 1939, R. Elimelekh paid severalvisits to his followers in Palestine. On one such visitto Jerusalem, he inaugurated there—as commemoratedby a special tablet—the Karlin yeshivah bearing thename Beth Aharon ve~Yisrael. R. Elimelekh kept upa regular and frequent correspondence with his Pales-tinian followers, for whom his visits to the Holy Landwere occasions of festive rejoicing.^®^ R. Elimelekhvisited Palestine for the last time in the summer of1939, shortly before the Second World War. Return-ing to Karlin, he met a martyr’s death there in theNazi Holocaust. Here are eye-witness reports of hislast years: ^On a grey morning in Elul^ 1940 [at thetime of the Bolshevik occupation of Pinsk], I happen-ed to visit the house of the Rebbe [of Karlin], ofblessed memory. The Rebbe was not at home. He hadnot yet returned from morning prayers in the bethmidrash. When I entered the house a most distressingpicture of poverty met my eyes, wherever I turned.Particularly stark was the total absence of any kindof furniture in the room, apart from a long, narrow,uncovered table which had once been used for the fes-tive hasidic gatherings on Sabbaths and Festivals, es-pecially for the ‘Third meal” and the melavveh mal-kah, when the hasidim used to sit after the meal sing-ing zemiroth and other tunes. In the doorway of thekitchen stood a thin woman, clothed in a ragged dress,with a torn kerchief over her head. This was theRebbe’s wife, of blessed memory. Her face was sohaggard and sunken that I had difficulty in recognis-ing her. In great pain and distress she told me of “thefresh trouble” that had come upon them: they hadbeen ordered by the housing department of the TownCouncil to take in a non-Jewish tenant, a governmentofficial, and to share their kitchen with him. Thismeant that the Rebbe’s family was in fact deprived169 AI. Bunim, ^Aharon ha-Admorim be-Karlin/ Sto-liUj Sefer Zikkaron, p. 227; A. Shakh, ^Yeshivath BethYisrael/ Yizkor Kehilloth Luninyets-Kozhan-Horodok,edited by Y. Zeevi and others, p. 45, Tel Aviv, 1952;Y. Kule, ^A Hasidisher Shabbes in Luninyets/ YizkorKehilloth Luninyets-Kozhan-Horodok^ p. 152.of the use of the kitchen, since the new tenant, a pureRussian from Greater Russia, naturally paid no heedto matters of kashruth .. . and even used to roasta small pig in the oven. Moreover, he was intendingto bring the rest of his family to live with them.. .I left the house greatly depressed... On the inter-mediate days of Sukkoth, 1940, when I was workingas the director of the stores of the government con-sumers’ association in the province of Pinsk, some ofthe Rebbe’s followers came to me... After repeatedrepresentations, they succeeded in getting the Rebberegistered for work as a night-watchman for thestores. .. They did this in order to “qualify” the Reb-be as a citizen possessing the full rights of a per-manent local employee, and thus ensure that he wouldnot be forced to leave the Pinsk province, like theother “non-productive elements” in Pinsk who wereexpelled by order of the authorities to remote smalltowns, a distance of fifty kilometres from the city’sboundaries ... Presumably, the Rebbe R. Elimelekhdid not himself perform the duties of watchman lateinto the night, but the few of his loyal adherentsthat remained used to take his place in turn, allthrough the night till the morning. This went on, tomy knowledge, until the 6th November, 1940.. . andperhaps the Rebbe continued to hold this post for along time after this.’‘My friend, Mr. Nathan-Note Weiner, of Vladi-mirets near Visotsk. .. one of the long-standing fol-lowers of the Rebbe, also told me that, on the eve ofPurim^ 1941, he visited the Rebbe at his home inPinsk in connection with some family matters of hisown, and found him in a state of great depressionand looking very ill and distraught. The Rebbe toldhim that he had stopped receiving his followers inhis usual manner, since every day brought new andeven greater exactions, miseries and persecutions uponhim, and matters had reached such a pitch that hewas afraid even of the members of his own circle.“My life is so bitter, because I do not know who thepeople dancing around me are”—such were the Reb-be’s words, as reported by the above-mentioned Mr.Weiner.We do not know any details of how R. Elimelekhlived during the Nazi occupation of Pinsk or of howFeivel Ginzburg of Pinsk, now of Ramat Gan,in a letter in his own name and that of Nathan—NoteWeiner of Vladimirets (Volhynia), also now in RamatGan.140W. Z. RABINOWITSCMhe met his martyr^s death. But we have an eye-witnessaccount of the tragic end of his daughter, Hannele.To save herself from a shameful death at the handsof the Nazis, she took her own life by swallowingpoison.^The same eye-witness does not rememberwhether he saw R. Elimelekh in the Pinsk ghetto.The 14th Heshvan, 1942, is considered by the hasidimto be the date of R. Elimelekh’s death; whereas thePinsk-Karlin ghetto was destroyed on the 18th-20thHeshvatiy 1942.R. Yaakov, the son of R. Yisrael, was called tothe United States in 1923 to become the spiritualleader of his father’s followers. He, too, displayed aninterest in general Jewish problems. There were inNew York originally four shulkhens [prayer-houses] ofthe Stolin hasidim. One of these, which was close tothe Rebbe’s house and had been purchased by theStolin hasidimj was called Beth Aharon. In Detroit,too, there was a Stolin shtiebel [hasidic prayer-house],founded by Stolin hasidim working as mechanics inthe city’s factories. On the Penitential Days, the Reb-be’s followers from various towns used to come tohim to pray together with him for a good year. R.Yaakov, for his part, used also to visit his followersin the towns where they lived. His personality prcK*vided a rallying point for the faithful adherents ofKarlin hasidism. He died in 1946, while visiting hisfollowers in Detroit, and was buried there.The youngest of R. Yisrael’s sons, R. Yohanan,was the spiritual leader of the Karlin hasidim in Vol-hynia and its environs up to the outbreak of the Se-cond World War. It is related that, when the Naziforces advanced on the town where he was living,Lutsk, R. Yohanan, together with his wife and twodaughters, escaped with the partisan fighters to Rus-sia, where his wife and elder daughter died. Aftermany hardships on the long journey from the SovietUnion through Germany, R. Yohanan and his surviv-ing daughter finally reached Palestine in 1946, thanksto the intercession of his followers, and settled inHaifa. Practically all the Karlin and Stolin hasidim.A. Dolinko, Kakh Nehervu Kehilloth Phisk ve~Karlin, pp. 73, 83, 84, stencil Tel Aviv (no date of dup-lication) ; B. Ben-Porath, ^Ha~Admor mi-Karlin/ inHatsofeh (daily paper), Tel Aviv, 22.6.1945. Reminis-cences and legends about the Tsaddikim of the Karlin-Stolin Dynasty have been published in the above-men-tioned memorial volume. Or Zarua. M. Unger, Ha-Ad^morim she-Nispu ba-Shoah, pp. 9-11.who had been left leaderless by the deaths of R.Moshe and R. Elimelekh, recognised him as theirRebbe. In addition to the already existing Karlinhouses of prayer in Safed, Tiberias and Jerusalem,another one was built in Tel Aviv, and a Karlin wm-yan came into being in Haifa. Next to the Karlinyeshivah which had previously been established inJerusalem, R. Yohanan set up another, smaller ye-shivah for beginners. On the Penitential Days and onSimhath Torah, the Karlin hasidim used to come totheir Rebbe in Haifa where it was still possible tohear the traditional Karlin melodies. In 1948, R. Yo-hanan went to the United States, in response to a callfrom the Karlin hasidim there, and took up residence1Signatures of the Karlin Tsaddikim1. Signature of R. Aharon the Great2. Signature of R. Asher the First3. Signature of R. Aharon the Second4. Signature of R. Asher the Second5. Signature of R. Yisrael, ‘the Child’6. Signatures of the Sons of R. YisraelHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN141The prayer-house of the Karlin hasidim in Tiberias,erected in Tiberias by R. Menahem Mendel of Vitebskin the last quarter of the 18th centuryin the same house in which his brother, R. Yaakov,had lived previously. He established a yeshivah thereand sent regular contributions to the yeshivoth inJerusalem. The Karlin hasidim living in America look-ed to him as their spiritual leader.R. Yohanan published the Siddur Beth Aharon ve-Yisrael (New York, 1952), incorporating the rites andcustoms of the Karlin dynasty of Tsaddikim. Includedin this prayer-book are sayings and homilies of theKarlin Tsaddikim, taken from the original Beth Aha-ron and arranged according to the order of the pray-ers. At the end of the book there are ^holy letters’written by the Karlin Tsaddikim, also taken fromthe original Beth Aharon. This siddur is intended tomake the religious teachings of Karlin hasidism morewidely known. It is still used daily by the Karlinhasidim.For Rosh Hashanah, 1955, R. Yohanan paid histhird visit to his followers in Israel (his previous visithad been in 1938), and spent the Festivals of themonth of Tishri with them. Now a Karlin Yeshivahis being built in Jerusalem, a large edifice financedby contributions from R. Yohanan’s followers in Is-rael and the United States. R. Yohanan himself wentback to America, intending to return to Israel andsettle there permanently. But shortly after reachingAmerica, he fell ill and died on the 21st Kislev, 1955—the last representative of the Karlin-Stolin dynasty.After his death, the Karlin hasidim brought out thevolume Beth Aharon fin a third edition by.. . ourTeacher R. Yohanan of blessed and pious memory’(Brooklyn 1952, as printed in Brody 1875). On the18th Adar //, R. Yohanan’s followers brought his bodyfrom the United States to Israel and chose Tiberiasas his final resting place—the city in which the Kar-lin hasidim had first settled in the Holy Land, andwhich had exercised a spiritual influence on the wholeKarlin dynasty. When R. Yohanan died, the last re-maining Karlin hasidim were left leaderless.^"^^ TheKarlin melodies still sung here and there in Jerusalemand New York by the still surviving Karlin hasidimare the last flickerings of the bright ray of light which,for six generations, illuminated the darkness of thegaluth for the Karlin hasidim.172 R. Yohanan of Karlin was survived in the U.S.A.by a grandson, Barukh-Yaakov-Meir, his daughter'schild, who was bom just a year before R. Yohanan’sdeath. Karlin hasidism once again passed through thesame crisis as it had known eighty years previously,when the Tsaddik R. Asher the Second had died,leaving no other heir than Ha-Yenuka—‘The Child’(V. supr.). Only this time the situation was evenworse; for meanwhile the movement’s centre in Stolinhad been destroyed and there was now nothing butthe Tsaddik’s personality to hold together the survivingremnants of the Karlin hasidim who were scatteredabout in the U.S.A. and Israel. In contrast to the first142W. Z. RABINOWITSCHIn the early days of hasidism it was customaryfor the teachers and leaders of the movement to showa special personal interest in certain of their disciplesand sometimes even to educate them in their ownhomes. After the Rebbe’s death, some of his followerswould choose as his successor the one of these favour-ite disciples with whom they felt most spiritual affinity.The deceased teacher’s disciples would usually continueto propagate their master’s doctrine, founding an in-dependent ^dynasty’ of their own, side by side withthat of their master. This was the way in which themovement spread and branched out. Of the KarlinTsaddikim only R. Aharon the Great and R. Shelomocrisis, when the ovei'whelming majority of the Karlinhasidim decided to continue their loyal support of theKarlin dynasty, there was this time a split in theirranks. Some of them, particularly the older generation,who felt that they could not live without a Rebbe anddid not want to wait until the j^oung heir grew tomanhood, installed as their Rebbe, on 15th Au, 1962,the Tsaddik of the Lelov dynasty, R. Moshe-MordekhaiBiedermann. This R. Moshe-Mordekhai, who like hisforefathers was close to Karlin hasidism, now receivedthe title of ‘Tsaddik of Lelov-Karlin hasidim.’Below is the text of the declaration made by thehasidim at R. Moshe-Mordekhai's investiture: ‘WithGod’s help and on behalf of the Karlin hasidim in theholy city of Jerusalem and all the cities of our HolyLand and the Diaspora, we hereby undertake to regardyou as our Master, Teacher and Rebbe—our divinelyappointed leader. We trust that you will guide theholy congregation in the way of the holy forefathersof the Karlin-Stolin dynasty. We pray to Him thatdwells on high that we may all be granted to advance,together with our Rebbe, to meet our righteous Mes-siah.’However, a large section of the hasidim—consistingmainly of the younger generation, but including alsosome older men—considered that the installation ofthe Lelov Rebbe meant the end of the Karlin dynastyand its role in history. They strongly opposed theinvestiture of a ‘foreign’ Tsaddik as their Rebbe andswore allegiance to ‘The Child.’ Even individual fami-lies were rent by this dissension, with the grandfather,for example, joining the supporters of the Lelov Tsad-dik, while the son and grandson remained loyal to ‘TheChild.’ The Jerusalem prayer-houses were also dividedby the schism. The Lelov-Karlin hasidim prayed in theold prayer-house of the Karlin hasidim. But the build-ing of the large Yeshivah Beth Aharon ve-Yisrael, inJerusalem, which was the main centre of the Karlinhasidim, became the stronghold of the loyal supportersof ‘The Child.’ These were joined by the Karlin hasi-dim in the U.S.A.The future of Karlin hasidism—from which the wholetrained up disciples of this kind. R. Shelomo of Karlinwas, as already noted, the disciple of R. Aharon theGreat (though he was also one of the disciples of theMaggid of Mezerich); and R. Shelomo’s discipleswere R. Asher of Stolin, R. Mordekhai of Lakhovich,and R. Uri of Strelisk. Karlin hasidism thus had fouroffshoots—in Lakhovich, Koidanov, Kobrin, and Slo-nim—whose influence was confined, in the main, tothe territory of Lithuania.THE LIBESHEI DYNASTYThere were in Pinsk hasidim of three hasidic dy-nasties that did not owe allegiance to the Karlin hederof Lithuanian hasidism sprung—^will be decided byhistory. (See the following Hebrew newspapers: Maa-riv, 16.8.1962; Haarets, 19.8.1962 and 3.2.1964; Heruth,18.2.1963 and 1.3.1963; Yedioth Aharonoth, 14.8.1964.)In his work Divrei Aharon (v. supr., n. 161), A.Hausman published sixty letters from R. Elimelekh(pp. 125-186), and thirty-two from R. Yohanan (pp.187-208), which provide first-hand evidence for theopinions of these two Karlin Tsaddikim. Most of R.Elimelekh’s letters were written to his followers inJerusalem for the various Festivals. He encouragesthem ‘to be strong in joyfulness and not to pay toomuch regard to “Frumkeit,” ... for the way of hasid-ism is to be always joyful and this is the quality thatdelivers a man from everything evil. Whereas, throughexcessive “Frumkeit,” we may fall (Heaven forbid!)into melancholy, which was greatly abhorred by ourholy forefathers... Let us band together... in unityand affection, to implant in Jewish hearts love andpious awe, and to pluck out the irreligion that hasspread like a plague... Everyone must guard againstdissension... for you have all bound yourselves to me... although by my deeds I am unworthy of this.’Most of R. Yohanan’s letters—nearly all of themdated only by the Portion of the Week—^were writtenwhile he was in the United States to students in theKarlin yeshivah in Jerusalem. Like his brother, R.Elimelekh, he too stresses the principles which werecharacteristic of hasidism as a whole, and particularlyof its Karlin branch: ‘... To live in unity and brother-hood, to raise oneself up above the darkness... toexalt the Torah and hasidism... to study constantly... and to do everything with enthusiasm, as we havealways desired...’ Particularly interesting is the pledgeof allegiance from the 15th Shevat, 1948, entitled Aha-vath ve-Ahduth Haverim [‘Love and Brotherhood ofFellow-Members’], which is signed by twenty Karlinhasidim and proclaims their allegiance to their Rebbe,R. Yohanan, and to each other.Also in his book Birkath Aharon, Hausman quoteswritten statements of sons of the Tsaddik R. Yisraelof Stolin, and oral remarks attributed to them.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN143(or school). These were the dynasties of Liubeshov(popularly called ‘Tibeshei”), Horodok and Berezna,all of which originated in Volhynia. The Libeshei andBerezna dynasties were genealogically related.^Thefounder of the Libeshei dynasty was the son-in-lawof R. David Halevi of Stepan, the well-known Vol-hynia Tsaddik and Maggid and author of the volumeHanhagath Adam^ and the disciple and son-in-law ofone of the Besht’s disciples, R. Yehiel-Mikhal of Zlo-chov. And the founder of the Berezna dynasty wasthis same R. David Halevi’s son.The founder of the Libeshei dynasty, R. Shemar-yahu (Weingarten), was the son of R. Avraham-Abba-Yosef of Soroka (in Bessarabia), a disciple of theGreat Maggid, R. Baer of Mezerich.^"^^ At the begin-ning of the 19th century (according to hasidic tradi-tion, in 1802), R. Shemaryahu was Rebbe in Liube-shov-Libeshei, a small town close to Pinsk, at thesame time officiating as Rav in Libeshei and in theneighbouring town of Kobrin.^*^® He had adherentsin the small towns round about Pinsk (Yanovo, Tele-khan, Homsk, Motele and others). His sphere of in-fluence stretched between P'insk and Kobrin, and evenin these two towns themselves there were 'TibesheiGottlieb, Oholei 8hem, p. 103; Grossman, Bhemu-Sheerith, pp. 31, 51; Tsinovets, ^Le-Toledoth ha-Rab--banuth be-Kobrin,^ Sefer Kobrin, pp. 26, 27.—Inform-ation provided personally by the last Libeshei Rebbe,R. Yitshak-Aharon about the dates of the Tsaddikim ofthe dynasty. Gottlieb, the author of Oholei Shem, wasa native of Pinsk and closely acquainted with the Tsad-dikim of the dynasty in Polesia. His book is thereforeto be regarded as a reliable source of information. Thedescription of the tragic martyr's death of R. Yitshak-Aharon, the last of the Libeshei dynasty of Tsaddikim,given below is taken from the article by D. Epstein,‘Ha-Yehudi ha-Yehidi’ [‘The Only Jew’], Yalkut More-sheth, No. 2, pp. 10-11, Tel Aviv 1975. The date men-tioned there—9th Av, July 2nd 1942—contains a doubleerror. The Nazi massacre of Jews in Libeshei tookplace in 1941, as stated several times by Epstein him-self later in the same article. In 1941, the 9th Av fellon August 2nd, whereas the author has mistakenlv«/written July 2nd. I too was told by the writer of thememoirs that the Tsaddik R. Yitshak-Aharon was mur-dered by the Nazis on Tishah be-Av [9th Av]. I donot recall that my informant mentioned the civil date.The day of the week—Sunday—stated by the writeralso suits the corrected date given above. In thatyear—1941—Tishah be-Av fell on the Sabbath (Satur-day) and was postponed to Sunday.174 Grossman, op. cit., p. 51.tables”. In the terms of the official rabbinical appoint-ment which, according to hasidic tradition, R. Shemar-yahu obtained from the Jews of Kobrin, the positionof Rav in Kobrin was vested in him and his sons inperpetuity, and he was also empowered to appointdayyanim [Jewish judges] and ritual slaughterers inthe town as he thought fit. Consequently, the dayya-nim and slaughterers of Kobrin were hasidim, eventhough most of the Jewish population were mithnag-dim. R. Shemaryahu’s following was also swelled bysome of the mithnagdim from the neighbouring smalltowns. In this way hasidism spread, to a limited ex-tent, in this part of the region of Polesia, includingPinsk.The appointment of the Tsaddik of the Libesheidynasty as Rav of all the neighbouring small towns—the only instance of its kind in Lithuanian hasidism—is confirmed by the writer Hayyim Chemerinski inhis memoirs. His eye-witness accounts throw light—albeit from the satirical standpoint of a maskil—onthe state of Libeshei hasidism and on the attitudeadopted to it by the hasidim of the Kobrin branchof the Karlin movement.^76R. Shemaryahu died in Pinsk in 1846. Libesheihasidim from Pinsk and from the surrounding regionused to visit his grave to kindle a memorial lightover it.R. Shemaryahu’s successor was his son R. Yehiel-Mikhal, and after him his second son, R. Avraham-Abba, who was Rav of the nearby small town of Ya-novo (between Pinsk and Kobrin) and in Libeshei.At this time, after the death of R. Shemaryahu, theinfluence of the Libeshei dynasty in Kobrin itselfpassed, as a result of dissension, to the Kobrin ‘court’(R. Moshe of Kobrin, R. Meir Meirim).^’^®175 Gottlieb, op. cit., ibid.; Jewish Encyclopaedia,Vol. VII, p. 526, s.v.: Kobrin.176 Chemerinski, Ayarathi Motele, p. 67 ff., Tel Aviv1951; Cf., Y. Z. Vilenski, ‘Zikhronoth/ Sefer Kobrin,p. 283. Even in a small town in Polesia like Motele wefind a ‘mixed population’—mithnagdim, Kobrin hasidim(like the father of H. Chemerinski, the writer), Libe-hei hasidim and Stolin hasidim (like the maternalgrandfather of the first President of Israel, Dr. ChaimWeizmann). H. Weizmann-Lichtenstein, Be-Tsel Kora-thenu, p. 34, Tel Aviv 1948.177 Gottlieb, op. cit., ibid., and statements by thedescendants of the dynasty.178 Vilenski, op. cit., ibid. The author mistakenlywrote ‘R. Asher’ for ‘R. Avraham-Abba.'144W. Z. RABINOWITSCHAfter the death of R. Avraham-Abba in Pinsk(1861), the position of Rebbe was held first by hisson R. Hayyim-Yitshak (from 1861 to 1879) andthen by his grandson, R. Yaakov-Leib (from 1879 to1922). According to information from hasidic sources,the Libeshei hasidim in those days numbered up totwo thousand. The fact that his son-in-law, R. Eliezer-Lippa Klepfish, was Rav in Libeshei^*^® shows the ex-tent of R. Yaakov-Leib’s influence over the wholeJewish population. At the same time (1886), anotherson of R. Hayyim-Yitshak’s, R. Abba, took up resid-ence as Rebbe of a small town of Yanovo. The smallarea of Libeshei hasidim was thus split between twofactions, with consequent dissensions and conflicts. Ofthese we can read in the satirical description writtenin 1886 by a native of Yanovo, Yisrael Levin.^^® Ac-cording to this source, the Libeshei dynasty was origin-ally founded in the small town Yanovo, and its hasi-dim were originally named after this town. It was R.Avraham-Abba, the son of the founder of the dynasty,R. Shemaryahu, that transferred his place of residenceto Libeshei. As already stated, these two small townswere very close to Pinsk, and therefore Libeshei hasi-dim penetrated to some extent into Pinsk too, espe-cially since some Libeshei hasidim moved into thattown.R. Abba died about 1924.R. Yitshak-Aharon, the son and successor of theabove named R. YaakovrLeib in Libeshei, also livedin Pinsk, where he had his followers and his syn-agogue. On Friday evenings, after the Sabbath evemeal, the men would leave their families and come tothe Rebbe in P'insk to sing Libeshei melodies, andsometimes also to hear an expository commentary onthe Torah.In the period between the two World Wars, heseveral times visited his adherents in America. In thisperiod, while he was living in Pinsk, he gave his sup-port, like the Tsaddik of Karlin, R. Elimelekh, whowas then living in Karlin, to the Tiferetk Bahurim[''Exemplary Young Men’'] evening institute for thestudy of Torah and Talmud by young men after theirday’s work.Gottlieb, op. cit., ibid. Eliezer-Lippa Klepfischwas later a member of the Rabbinate in Brest-Litovsk:Brisk de~Lita, Entsiklopediyah sheJ Galuyoth, ed. A.Steinman, p. 342, Jerusalem 1954.180 Printed in Hamelits (daily paper), Year 26, 1886,pp. 544-545; see also: B. Pishko, Gilgul Hayyim, p. 9 ff.,Tel Aviv 1948.He died a martyr’s death in the extermination ofPolesian Jewry. Of his tragic end we have an eye-witness report by David Epstein, a native of thetown of Libeshei. He writes as follows: 'I saw howthe Gestapo took our holy Rebbe, R. Yitshak-AharonWeingarten, and his two handsome sons and draggedthem off by their long, comely beards and side-whis-kers to a dark, dank cellar^ where they tortured themhorribly.. . This was on the morning of the 9th Av,July [?] 2nd 1942 [?] ... They made them run towork. The holy Rebbe too ... went... to work .. .They cut off one half of his [sc. the Rebbe’s] beard *..stripped him naked, and ordered him to sing anddance and shout. .. They ordered him to wash thehorses with his tollith katan [the fringed vest wornby orthodox Jews, great Arba Kanfoth]. After anhour, members of the Ukrainian police and the Gestaposurrounded the cellar and began to drive out thewretched people inside ... beating them on the headwith rubber truncheons. Our holy Rebbe, R. Yitshak-Aharon, had not the strength to walk, so they tookhim in a cart. .. and transported him ... to the otherside of the river Stuhod... There the}' ordered them... to dig pits for themselves . .. When, after hardlabour, they had completed the digging, all the Jewswere ordered to take off their clothes... A boardwas placed over the pit, and they were ordered tostand on the board, five at a time. In this way, theywere all shot. And the holy Rebbe and his two sonswere tortured ... before they were killed. The killingof our holy Rebbe and his sons . .. ended on July3rd.’Although Libeshei hasidim originated and develop-ed in the centre of Lithuanian Polesia in and aroundPinsk, it was essentially an offshoot of the hasidismof Volhynia, the home of the founders of its dynasty.In character it belonged to the whole hasidic move-ment of the time, in giving the cult of the Tsaddikpredominance over all the other principles of hasidicdoctrine. The Libeshei Tsaddikim left no writtenworks. They were opposed to fasting and stressed theimportance of joyfulness, though they did not knowhow to realise this principle in their lives as Karlinhasidism did. They also had their own hasidic melodies.A characteristic phenomenon of Libeshei hasidism wasthat its Tsaddikim held the office of Rav in Lithuaniantowns (Kobrin, Yanovo and Libeshei). This is evid-ence of the good relations prevailing between themand their predominantly mithnaged environment, andW. Z. RABINOWrrSCH145also of the authority wielded by the founder of theLibeshei dynasty, R. Shemaryahu. This is further de-monstrated by the fact that R. Shemaryahu’s son mar-ried the daughter of the then famous Pinsk RaVy R.Hayyim, the son of R. Perets Hacohen,^®^ who settledin Palestine.^®^THE HORODOK DYNASTYAt the beginning of the 19th century, an independ-ent hasidic dynasty was established in the small townof David-Horodok, near P'insk and close to Stolin.The adherents of this dynasty were known in theregion of Polesia, and particularly in the neighbour-hood of Pinsk and in Pinsk itself, as Hhe Horodokhasidim’ (not to be confused with the followers of R.Menahem-Mendel of Vitebsk, who were also called bythis name). This was the smallest of the offshoots ofthe hasidic dynasties in Lithuania, its followers beingconfined to the small area stretching between David-Horodok, Lakhva, Luninyets, Pinsk and Kozhan-Ho-rodok. While the Libeshei hasidim gained a footholdwest of Pinsk, between Pinsk and Kobrin, the smallHorodok branch established itself to the east, betweenPinsk and Lakhva.The founder of this dynasty was R. Wolf, knownto the hasidim as Wolfche (Ginsburg), the son of theTsaddik R. Shemuel Halevi of Koshivka (a smalltown in Volhynia not far from the well-known hasidiccentre of Neskhizh).^®® R. Shemuel was the closefriend of a well-known Volhynia Tsaddik, R. Morde-khai of Neskhizh.^®^ From a letter written by R. Asherthe First of Stolin to R. Wolf (between 1802 and1826) it transpires that there were friendly relations,181 A. Shisha, Ha-Darom (journal), Nos. 5-6, p. 178,New York 1958; A. L. Frumkin, Toledoth HakhmeiYerushcUayim, additions... by A. Rivlin, Pt. Ill, Sup-plements, p. 57, n., Jerusalem 1929.182 A. Yaari, Sheluhei Erets YIsrael, pp. 769, 777.Amongst the kolelim that existed in Palestine in thelast quarter of the 19th century was also a 'LibesheikoleV (Otsar Yisrael, ed. Y. D. Eisenstein, Vol. IV,p. 286, S.V.: Halukkah, London 1935).188 Kleinbaum, Shema Shelomo, Pt. n, n. 21.184 Zikhron Tov by R. Yitshak of Neskhizh, pub-lished by Y. Landa, p. 94, Petrokov 1892. R. Shemuelwas the founder of an independent hasidic dynastywhich was forgotten even in hasidic circles. His succes-sor as Rebbe in Koshivka was his son, R. Mikhal, fol-lowed in 1892 by his grandson, R. Shemuel (Zikhronfov,.p. 94).and also marriage connections between these twoTsaddikhn}^^We do not know exactly how R. Wolf managedto establish an independent dynasty in the heart of ^theKarlin domain.’ The only hasidic source that mentionsR. Wolf describes him as ‘the Rav and Av Beth-Dm.i®® There was also a popular tradition that R.Wolf was first chosen as Rav in David-Horodok andonly afterwards, apparently on the strength of hisdistinguished ancestry, was also appointed Rebbe inthe same town. Ptecise information about his person-ality, his life, and the date of his death is lacking,but the various popular legends about his death areevidence of the extent of his renown and influence.His successor as Rebbe was his son, R. David,who, according to popular tradition, was not a personof much consequence. Thus, for example, his nameis not mentioned at all in the short family biographyof hasidic provenance.^ ®'^ In contrast to this, his son,R. Yisrael-Yosef Halevi, was one of the chief figuresin this branch of hasidism. He made a name for him-self as an erudite talmudic scholar, and kept firm con-trol of his followers. He was feared and respected bythe inhabitants of his small town, and also by thoseof the surrounding district. In the Karlin suburb ofPinsk, there was a synagogue in which his hasidim, whowere living in the town, used to pray. This synagoguewas called ‘Horodoker Shulkhen’ (‘The Synagogue'of the Horodok hasidim’). R. Yisrael-Yosef’s follow-ers included also Jews of high social standing (forinstance, the well-known Pinsk family of the Tseitlinsused to pray in this synagogue), and even some fromthe mithnaged homes. Thus, for example, wheneverhe visited the Horodok house of prayer in Pinsk, theofficial (government) Rabbi of Pinsk, the public work-er and maskUj Beilin,^®® would come to his ‘table,’ aswould other leading local figures. R. Yisrael-Yosefwas a personal friend of the well-known Volh5niian185 Beth Aharon, by R. Aharon of Karlin, p. 294. Inthis letter ‘my son Aharon, long may he live!’ is R.Aharon the Second, who was born in 1802. R. Asher theFirst died in 1826.186 Zikhron Tov, p. 93. This source implies that R.Wolf died before the month of Tammuz, 1859, sincehis grandson and successor in Horodok, R. Yisrael-Yosef, mentions him in connection with the blessingover the dead, in a letter that he wrote at that date toR. Yitshak of Neskhizh.187 Zikhron Tov, ibid.188 On this person, see Toy send Jor Pinsk, pp. 270,329.146HASIDISM IN PINSKAND KARUNTsaddik^ R. Yitshak of Neskhizh, with whom he wasalso connected by marriage. His dependence on R.Yitshak is clear from his letters to him (from theyears 1856, 1861, 1864). When he writes entreatand beseech... that he should not forget us ... thatI may be able to dwell in my house in peace andquiet,he is apparently referring to the quarrelthat arose at that time between his own followers andthe Karlin-Stolin hasidim, who regarded the Horodokhasidim as their inferiors. The form of prayer in theHorodok synagogues was close to that of Volhynia.When R. Yisrael-Yosef died in c. 1899, a commonstructure [ohel] was erected over his grave and thoseof his father and grandfather in the Horodok ce-metery.On the state of Horodok hasidism after the deathof R. Yisrael-Yosef, and on the difference between thehasidim of Horodok and those of Karlin-Stolin, wefind the following first-hand account in a book ofmemoirs written by a native of the town:^^® ^David-Horodok had its own dynasty of Tsaddikhn, The sonsand grandsons of the old Rebbe. . ., R. YisraelrYosef,still dwell in the town . .. His sons and daughterslived in the street in which stands the beth midrashof “the old Rebbe.” They lived in poverty, but en-joyed general respect reflected from the cold, distantlight of the star that had gone out—their grandfather,“the old Rebbe.” It was otherwise in the prayer-house(shtiehel) of the Stolin hasidim. Here all was happi-ness and joy, especially when the Rebbe from Stolincame to the small town. On those days even the mith-nagdim used to go to their prayer-house in secret andpressing themselves to the side of the roads, for fearof a blow on the neck or back from some drunkenStolin hasid. Still worse was the plight of the follow-ers of ‘Hhe old Rebbe” who were downcast and de-pressed in spirit. David-Horodok was the “capital”of the Rebbe, R. Yisrael-Yosef, just as Stolin was the“capital” of R. Aharon.’The difference between the spiritual and social lifeof Horodok hasidim and Stolin-Karlin hasidim in thisperiod is commented on by another eye-witness, anative of the town of Luninyets, near Pinsk, wheretoo there were Horodok hasidim. Some passages fromISO Zikhron Tov, ibid.M. Slutski, ^David-Horodok mit fuftsig Jor zu-rik/ David-Horodok, Sefer Zikkaron, ed. Y. Edan andothers, p. 405 ff, Tel Aviv (no date of publication).these memoirs are quoted here,^®^ since it may be as-sumed that they reflect the mutually appreciativeattitude prevailing between the two groups in Pinsktoo, although apparently there were fewer Horodokhasidim in Pinsk than in Luninyets.^The large prayer-house known to the Jews as “DieAlte Shul” was the centre of the Stolin hasidim, while“Die Horodoker Shul” was the centre of the Horodokhasidim... Most of the Stolin hasidim prayed according to their own special form of prayer and with thefervour characteristic of the Stolin-Karlin hasidim..The Stolin hasidim prayed at the top of their voicesand with great fervour, to the accompaniment ofhand-clapping, beating on the bench, stamping or run-ning from place to place and from corner to cornerof the beth-midrash .. . What they mainly paid atten-tion to was the kavvanah [intensity of the prayer], andsome of their prayers truly made a tremendous im-pression .. . The “third meal” that they conducted inthe prayer-house after the minhah [afternoon pra-er] on Saturday are a chapter in themselves. Thesinging of the zemiroth [liturgical poems] by theunconducted hasidic choir rose to ever greaterheights of ecstasy... to the “exaltation of thespirit”. Then the hasidim stood up from thetables, formed a ring, and began to dance aroundthe pulpit, their arms linked or their hands oneach other’s shoulders. Here all distinctions andcontrasts disappeared: rich and poor, scholar andsimple man, old and young—they all merged into asingle mass of dancing Jews. The beth midrash of theHorodok hasidim was the second in the town... Inthe old beth midrash most of the worshippers werefrom “the town’s high society”—rich timber mer-chants; here [in the Horodok beth midrash] most ofthem were artisans... The founders and builderswere simple folk... and this beth midrash had apopular character. Here the prevailing atmospherewas ... of modesty and simplicity. The Rebbe of theHorodok hasidim also conducted himself with simplemodesty. .. The Horodok hasidim did not have justone Rebbe, but the whole of the Ginsburg family:R. Bobele (R. Wolf), R. Alterke, and later the youngRebbe, R. Velvele, the son of the Rebbe R. Itsikel(R. Yitshak). Most of the Horodok hasidim were. ..cobblers, carters, carpenters and the like... TheirY. Zeevi, ^Ishei Kahal/ Yizkor Kehilloth Luni-nyets-Kozhan-Horodok, p. 36 ff.. 138 ff.. Tel Aviv 1952.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN147prayers were not noisy but restrained, the words andtunes well known and moderate. The gabbaim [war-dens] were simple men ... Here, too, ‘'third meals’"fon Saturday] were held, but in a more modest man-ner ... The Horodok hasidim had their own zemirothand melodies. They, too, danced, but without theecstatic fervour of the Stolin hasidim. Here they be-sought not only the national blessing of “salvationand solace,"" but also such more personal boons as:‘^May we soon drink at your daughter"s wedding!""...and the like... In the prayer-house of the Horodokhasidim a liberal spirit prevailed . .. There was alwaysgeneral rejoicing amongst the Horodok hasidim duringthe traditional visit to the town Luninyets of one ofthe Horodok Tsaddikim (R. Bobele, R. Alterke or theyoung Rebbe, R. Velvele). The rejoicing went on fora whole week... R. Bobele made a deep impressionon those who knew him by his remarkable good-heart-edness and modesty. He was greatly loved and re-vered by his followers."These memoirs give us a picture of the relationsprevailing between these different branches of hasi-dim, although in Pinsk this difference was not felt onaccount of the small number of Horodok hasidim inthe town. The memoirs testify to the way of lifecharacteristic in those days of each separate branch,as seen through the eyes of ‘enlightened’ [maskiltni]contemporaries.Of R. Yisrael-Yosef"s descendants, his grandson,R. Yitshak (d. 1908) still had a certain influence. Ofthe latter-day descendants of R. Yisrael-Yosef of Ho-rodok mention should be made of R. Aharon, wholived in nearby Luninyets. He was not an official Ravor Rebbe, and was supported by the local inhabitantsand the Horodok hasidim. He spent all his days study-ing Torah and was in the prayer-house the acknow-ledged spiritual leader, a noble and modest man wholived in poverty and want. He did not preach or ex-pound, but taught the Torah to all. He was killed bythe Nazis, together with all the population of Luni-nyets.R. Aharon’s brother, R. Moshe, was the last Reb-be of the Horodok dynasty. R. Moshe studied Torahand Talmud in the yeshivoth of Volozhin and Lida.A gifted preacher, he became a supporter of Zionism.His tragic death at the hands of the Nazis is describ-ed by eye-witnesses: ‘Three weeks after the massmurder of the men in Horodok, a women’s ghetto wascreated .. . Amongst the women there were men dis-guised in women’s clothes, one of them being theRebbe, R. Moshe, the son of R. Velvele Ginsburg. Hewas recognised by the Gentile citizens who were exa-mining the faces of the women on the transport, takenoff and killed."Apart from the letters of R. Yisrael-Yosef, whichhave already been mentioned, the Horodok Tsaddikimleft no written records. The dynasty came into being,it would seem, with the choice of the son of a Tsad-dik as Rav, who thus became both Rav and Rebbeat the same time. In this respect, the rise of this dy-nasty was similar to the rise of Libeshei dynasty. Inthe small Horodok branch of hasidism, the only out-standing personalities were the Tsaddikim R. Wolfand R. Yisrael-Yosef, who somewhat increased thenumber of hasidim in this corner of Polesia.^®^THE BEREZNA DYNASTYUnlike the Libeshei and Horodok dynasties, whicharose in Polesia, the Berezna dynasty came into be-ing in Volhynia—where there were also Karlin hasi-dim—and penetrated into Polesia from there.The founder of the Berezna dynasty, R. Yehiel-Mikhal, known amongst the hasidim as R. Mikhele(Pichenik), was the son of the Tsaddik and Maggid,R. David Halevi of Stepan in Volhynia. He at firstlived at Stolin in the house of his father-in-law, R.Leib.^^*^ Later, presumably after the death of his fa-ther (1809),^^“^ he took up residence as one of hisfather’s successors, in the small town of Berezna notfar from Stepan (between Sarny and Rovno). Accord-192 The reminiscences and legends about the Tsad-dikim of the Horodok dynasty quoted here have beenpublished in the volume David-Horodok, Sefer Zikka^ron, pp. 92, 95, 153, 155, 208 ff., 412; in an article writ-ten by one of the descendants of the dynasty, Ts.Kunde-Ginsburg, ‘Zikhronoth/ ibid., p. 97-99; and inthe memorial volume Yizkor Kehilloth Luninyets~Ko^‘zhan-Horodok, pp. 36 ff., 139, 194, 207, 218 ff.The Horodok dynasty, like its Koshivka origin, wasevidently forgotten even by the hasidim themselves,since neither of them is mentioned in the genealog^icaltable of the hasidic dynasties (liana de^Tsaddikaya,Warsaw 1927).193 Grossman, op. cit., pp. 31, 51. According to fa-mily tradition, R. Leib was a disciple of R. Shelomoof Karlin.194 In Dubnow's ‘Hasidic Archives’ in the YIVO In-stitute in New York there is a reproduction of theepitaph of R. David, the son of R. Yehudah Halevi ofStepan, who died on the night of the Day of Atone-ment, 1809.148W. Z. RABlNOWrrSCHing to hasidic sources, he settled in Berezna on theinvitation and with the support of the local porits[Gentile aristocrat and estate-owner] who hoped, byestablishing a hasidic ^court^ in Berezna, to developthe town to his own material benefit.^®® The ties form-ed by R. Mikhal with the Jews of Stolin during his re-sidence there continued after his departure, and bothin Stolin itself and in the surrounding district (Pinsk,Luninyets and other towns) there were ^Bereznahouses of prayer,^ even though the actual number ofBerezna hasidim in these towns was small. It is quitepossible that R. Mikhal was helped in making a namefor himself in Stolin by the fact that this was the time(after 1810) when R. Asher the First left Stolin andmoved to Karlin.R. Mikhal died in 1848.^®®His son and successor, R. Yitshak, was the leaderof the Berezna hasidim till 1865.^®'^ He gained a re-putation as a wonder-worker and his main influencewas with the simple masses. Even Christians frequent-ly turned to him for advice or to obtain his blessing.^®®After R. Yitshak’s death, the dynasty split intotwo. One group, including the Berezna hasidim livingin Polesia, recognised R. Yitshak’s son, R. Yosef, astheir leader; while the other chose his son-in-law, R.Hayyim (Taubman), who was also the son of the Li-beshei Rebbe, R. Yehiel-Mikhal. R. Hayyim foundedhis own dynasty in Berezna. He died in 1907.R. Yosef died young in 1869.His eldest son and successor, R. Avraham-Shemu-el, faithfully preserved the heritage of his fathers forforty years, till 1917. He won the esteem of the mith-nagdim, and used to pay regular visits to his sup-porters in the towns of Polesia (Stolin, Pinsk, Luni-nyets) in order to maintain his links with them.Here is an eye-witness description of R. AvrahamShemuel himself and of the life led by the Bereznahasidim: ‘R. Shemuel was a faithful leader and goodfather to the hasidim of Berezna and the surroundingdistrict, up to Pinsk and Luninyets ... He was a short,broad-shouldered man, with fiery eyes, penetratingand wise. He had a long whitish-yellowish beard, andwore a silk or satin caftan and white trousers. All thisA. Pichenik, ^Ha^Shoshaloth ha-Hasidiyoth he-Vohlyn\- Berezna, Yalkut Vohlyn, Osef Zikhronoth w-Teudoth, No. 5, Tel Aviv 1946.Grossman, 8hem u-Sheerithj p. 31.Pichenik, ibid.198 Pichenik, ibid.gave him a dignified appearance. On Simhath Torah,the Berezna hasidim flocked to the Rebbe’s housewhere the ‘^courP^ musicians competed ... And on Ha-nukkah nights, hasidim of all classes flocked tohis house—merchants and artisans, every one ofwhom, according to, and even beyond, his means,gave Hanukkah money to the Rebbe and en-joyed Maoz tsur [the Hanukkah hymn) sung inthe special Berezna fashion. On Sabbaths theycame, towards evening, to the '‘third meaP^ toobtain the privilege of a crumb or a piece of ^'ge-filte” fish ... When the Rebbe began the havdalahprayer in a low voice with "Behold God is my sal-vation,^’ the hasidim listened intently to these wordsand firmly believed in the God of salvation... Pray-ers and supplications in the town: the Rebbe is ill!For whole nights Psalms were read, and on the lastnight the people of Berezna did not close their eyes.As the reports on the Rebbe’s condition came in oneafter the other, the foreboding grew that he was aboutto depart this life. Berezna mourned his death for awhole year.’R. Avraham-Shemuel of Berezna was succeeded byhis three sons. The first, R. Yitshak the Second, alsoheld the position of Rav in Berezna,^®® and used tovisit his followers in Polesia, Pinsk, Luninyets andother places. He died in the autumn of 1939. The se-cond son, R. Nahum, was Rav and Rebbe in thesmall Volhynian town of Dombrovits (between Be-rezna and Stolin). He was killed by the Nazis in 1942.The third son, R. Yosef, settled in Sarny.^®^ The suc-cessor of R. Yitshak the Second, R. Aharon, settled inRovno. He died of cold and hunger while hiding withthe partisans in one of the forests of P'olesia, and hisgrave was dug there by his two daughters. His otherson was R. Yehiel-Mikhal.The parallel branch of the Berezna dynasty washeaded first by the sons of R. Hayyim, R. Gedalyahand R. Aharon, and after R. Aharon, by his son, R.199 Dr. G. Beigel, Ayarathi Berezna, p. 143, TelAviv 1954; A. Avatihi, ^Ha-Shosheleth ha-Bereznaith/Sefer Stolin, p. 151; Y. Zeevi, *Luninyetser Botei-Mid-roshim/ Yizkor Kehilloth Luninyets-Kozhan^Horodok,pp. 140, 142, Tel Aviv 1952.299 Gottlieb, Oholei Shem, p. 30.291 Pichenik, op. cit; Dr. G. Beigel, Ayarathi Berez-na, p. 23 ff., (this book contains details about the lastrepresentatives of the dynasty); Y. L. Yonathan, Nofva-Geza, p. 10 ff., Tel Aviv 1955.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN149Hayyiin, R, Gcdalyali and R. Hayyiiti died as mar-tyrs, together with their followers.One of the grandsons of R. Avraham-Shemuel ofBerezna, R. Ben-Zion Rabinovich, emigrated to Ame-rica and founded a synagogue in Detroit named, afterhis grandfather, Beth ShemuelThe Berezna hasidim who lived in Pinsk were, inlater years, loyal followers of their Tsaddikim—R.Avraham-Shemuel, to whom they used to make the‘pilgrimage’ from Pinsk and its environs on Rosh Ha^skanak;^^^ his son, R. Yitshak the Secondandfinally the latter’s son, R. Yehiel-Mikhal. The Tins-ker Shtime’ newspaper of August 12th 1938 containsthe following report: ‘A Distinguished Visitor to Pinsk.The Rebbe of Berezna, Our Righteous Teacher andRdv R. Yitshak Pichenik of Berezna is staying in thehouse of Feivel Minkovski... and for the coming Sab-bath the Rebbe will travel to Luninyets.’ R. Yehiel-Mikhal was an enthusiastic Zionist, who made thealiyah to Erets-Yisrael with his family in 1922 butbecause of a serious illness returned to Poland in 1928,and settled in Karlin as the Tsdddik of the Bereznahasidim in Pinsk. In 1935 he went back to Bereznaand succeeded his deceased father as Tsdddik there.He was killed in the Holocaust.^®^The Berezna dynasty left no book or other writtenrecord. Like the Libeshei and Horodok dynasties, thatof Berezna was the product of the Volhynia hasidicmovement and resembled it in character^ being freeof the tendency to talmudic scholarship which wasfound in other branches of hasidism at the time. Mostof the Berezna hasidim were simple people whose un-questioning belief in their Rebbe strengthened theirtrust in God and gave added joy to their lives.♦Of the more than forty synagogues and bdtei mid-rdsk in Pinsk and Karlin from the middle of the lastcentury onwards only six were hasidic: two synagogues202 Beigel, op. oit,, p. 78.203 Zeevi, op. cit,, p. 140. Pinsker Shtime, 1938,N. 32 (677), p. 4.204 Personal communications from two descendantsof the Berezna dynasty, Rabbi A. Pichenik and Y. L.Yonathan. Unger, op. cit, p. 231.of the Karlin-Stolin d3masty, one of each of the otherdynasties mentioned above—Libeshei, Horodok, Be-rezna—and one synagogue called Konjederdt [fromconfederation’] Shulkhen, frequented by ‘foreign’hasidim who did not belong to any of the hasidic dy-nasties in Polesia. The small number of the hasidicsynagogues in Pinsk and Karlin shows that, despitethe great importance of the Karlin hasidim in thehistory of hasidism, Pinsk was a mithnaged strong-hold.♦Together with the destruction of the Karlin-Stolindynasty in the Nazi Holocaust went the loss of theStolin genizdk, the great store of hasidic historical do-cuments. These archives, which served as a basis ofthis present study and which have been frequentlymentioned in this monograph, were referred to by thehasidim themselves as ^the holy writings.’ They werehoused in the cellar of the old Rebbe’s residence (thecourt’) in Stolin and comprised the following items:ihe correspondence of the Karlin Tsdddikim and offhe Tsdddikim of other important dynasties, fromevery period of the hasidic movement; regulationsgoverning various associations; wills; manuscripts, pub-lished and unpublished; pledge of loyalty (shetdr kith-kashruth) given by R. Yitshak Luria’s and R. HayyimVital’s disciples in 1575; old books; a talmudic com-pendium of Alfasi, printed in Venice in 1522; Seferhd-Tsoref (1,400 pages, 22x35)—manuscript writ-ten by the Shabbatean, R. Yehoshua-Heshel Tsoref;a manuscript, said to have been written by R. Yehu-dah Liva (Maharal) of Prague; and other writings.‘Accompanied by the granddaughter [of the Reb-be’s wife]’—so wrote the late David-Tsevi Bakhlinski‘I went down to the cellar and took out severalfiles full of various letters. I now discovered that,when I had entered the cellar for the first time theyear before, I had seen only the tenth or twentiethpart of all the treasure hidden there. I estimate thatthere are there about a thousand letters and otherwritings of the leading hasidic figures of all periods.’Thus were lost important original documents whichcould have provided valuable source-material for thestudy of Jewish history.150W. Z. RABINOWITSCHMANUSCRIPTS FROM THE STOLIN GENIZAH OF THE KARLIN DYNASTYThe asterisk (*) indicates that a copy of the originalms. is in the present author’s possession.♦Aharon the Great of Karlin; His postscripts in theNesvizh pinkas.*Idem; Letter to one of his hasidim about principlesof hasidism.Aharon the Second of Karlin, Proclamation on be-half of the Jewish community in the Holy Land.*Idem; Proclamation after buying the prayer-housein Tiberias, which had previously been erected by R.Mendel of Vitebsk.*Idem; Letter to Kozhenits hasidim.Idem; A short prayer.Idem; Letter to his hasidim about their payment tothe ‘court’ fund.*Idem; Letter to his family about doctors [in thepossession of his descendants].*Idem; Letter to his daughter Miryam and to hisson-in-law R. Avraham-Yaakov [in the possession ofhis descendants].*Idem; Letter to his daughter Miryam and to hisson-in-law R. Avraham-Yaakov of Sadagora (29.7.1866)[in the possession of his descendants].Regulations of Mishnah-reading society in the townYanovo, signed by R. Aharon the Second of Karlin(1830).Deeds of sale relating to houses bought in R. Aha-ron’s name in Jerusalem and Tiberias.Letters to R. Aharon the Second of Karlin from therecipients of the halukkdh, appointing him as the‘chief general administrator’ of all the funds sent tothe Holy Land and his son, R. Asher the Second ofStolin, as his assistant.♦Asher the First of Karlin; Letter to R. Yosef ofPinsk about the persecution of his followers.*Idem; Proclamation on behalf of the Jewish com-munity in the Holy Land.*Idem; Letter to the Tsaddik R. Yisrael of Kozhenits[in original and a copy].Idem; Letter to the salt merchants of Kremenets(Volhynia), that they should not desecrate the Sab-bath.Idem; Letter to one of his followers explaning thevalue of the hasidic-style prayers on Rosh-Hashanah.Idem; Various letters to his son R. Aharon the Se-cond about family affairs.Idem; List of his books.Idem; His lucky charms and other proved means ofwarding off illness.Idem; Receipts for various sums of money sent byR. Asher to the Holy Land.Idem; Pinkasim comprising testamentary and familymatters.♦Asher the Second of Stolin; Letter signed by himand sent to his hasidim [in the possession of A. Ben-Ezra].Avraham of Kalisk; Letter to R. Nahum of Cherno-byl about contributions of money for the Holy Land.Avraham-Yehoshua-Heshel of Apta; Letter of NewYear greetings to R. Asher the First of Karlin.Idem; Letter about the ritual slaughterers of Olevsk(1810).Barukh of Mezhibozh; Letter to a certain R. Yaakov-Shimon about the journey of a family to Rashkov(1810).David Halevi of Stepan; Letter to the Jews of thetown of Rokitno about their behaviour.♦Dov-Baer of Mezerich; Letter to R. Eliezer Haleviand R. Hayyim of Pinsk on behalf of R. Aharon theGreat.Hayyim Vital; Tract in manuscript, attributed tohim.Levi-Yitshak of Berdichev; Decision in the matterof a dispute between two Jews of Petrikov (1780).Mordekhai of Chernobyl; Letter to R. Shemaryahuof Olevsk about the ritual slaughterer’s licence.♦Mordekhai of Kremenets; Testament.♦Moshe-Yehudah-Leib of Sasov; Letter to the hasidim(1796).♦Pledge of loyalty \_shetar hithkashruth'] given in1575 in Safed by disciples of R. Yitshak Luria andR. Hayyim Vital.♦Resolutions in the pinkas of the Nesvizh commu-nity ((1769).♦Shelomo of Karlin; Letter to R. Aharon Segal ofVitebsk.Shemuel-Avraham Shapiro of Slavuta; Reply to in-vitation to R. Aharon the Second of Karlin’s wedding.Yehiel-Mikhal of Zlochov; Letter.Yehoshua-Heshel Tsoref, Sefer Ha-Tsoref [The Bookof the Refiner], in manuscript.♦Op. cit.; page 61.♦Op. cit.; Forewords and Postscripts by the copyistsof the manuscript.Yisrael of Kozhenits; Letter to R. Asher the First ofKarlin, after the death of the latter’s wife.Yisrael of Ruzhin; Friendly letter to R. Aharon theSecond of Karlin (1848).Idem; Letter to R. Aharon the Second of Karlinabout the funds collected on behalf of the Jewish com-munity in the Holy Land.♦Yisrael of Stolin; Testament to the family (1921).Copy belonged to a Stolin hasid closely associated withR. Yisrael of Stolin.*Idem; Testament to his hasidim (1921). Copy be-longed to the above-mentioned hasid.Deeds of sale relating to houses bought in R. Yis-rael’s name in Jerusalem and Tiberias.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN151PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE BY THE DISCIPLES OF THE ARI AND R. HAYYIM VITAL (1575) *Signatures of the disciples of R. Yitshak Luria (‘Ha-Ari’) and R. Hayyim Vital (1575) [from the Stolingenizah']‘We the undersigned have pledged ourselves to forma single company to w-orship the Divine Name andstudy His Law day and night, as we shall be instructedby the perfect and divine Sage, the Rav and Teacher,R. Hayyim Vital (may his light shine forth!), and weshall learn with him the true wisdom and be faithfulin spirit, concealing all that he shall tell us, and weshall not trouble him by pressing him too much forthings that he does not wish to reveal to us, and weshall not reveal to others any secret of all that weshall hear spoken in truth by his mouth, nor of allthat he taught us in the past, nor even of what hetaught us in the lifetime of our Teacher, the greatRaVj, R. Yitshak Luria Ashkenazi (of blessed memory)during all that time; and even what we heard fromthe lips of our Teacher, the above-named Rav (ofblessed memory), we shall not be able to reveal with-out his permission, since we should not understandthese things if he had not explained them to us. Thispledge, taken under solemn oath in the Name of theLord, concerns our Teacher, the above mentioned Rav,R. Hayyim (may his light shine forth!); and the dur-ation of this pledge is from today for ten consecutiveyears. Today is the second day of the week, the 25thMenahem Av, 5335 of the creation [1575], here inTsfath [Safed] (may it be built and established speedi-ly in our days!); and all these words are clear andvalid.’‘SEFER HA-TSOREF’by R. Yehoshua Heshel Tsoref (born 1633, died 1700 or 1720)Forewords by the Copyists of the Manuscript‘With God’s help, the words of the first copyist. Thisis the Sefer Ha-Tsoref [The Book of the Refiner]which was found in the house of our Master, ourTeacher the Rav Ribash [R. Yisrael Baal Shem](of righteous and holy memory), and in which the fol-lowing was written: This book was composed by theperfect and revered Sage, through whom the spiritof the Lord spoke and His word was on his lips, theTeacher R. Heshel Tsoref from the community of Kra-kov, who had a different spirit, as it is written: “Apure heart He has created for me,” etc.; and fromHeaven he was vouchsafed various wondrous and awe-some mysteries, for all of which (?) he providedauthority, almost every single one of them being basedon a small verse in the Torah, ^^Hear, O Israeli’ When*A copy of this Pledge of Allegiance was made inStolin by the late David-Tsevi Bakhlinski in 1937. Thesignatures were copied by him in ink on tracing pa-per. He reported that there were altogether about tensignatures, of which he copied only seven (see W. Z.Rabinowitsch, ‘Min ha’-Genizah ha-Stolinaith/ Zion,Year 5, p. 123 ff., Jerusalem 1940; G. Sholem, ‘ShtarHithkashruth shel Talmidei Ha-ArV, ibid., p. 133 ff.).you, O reader, see them (God willing) in the originalhand of the author and when you look at page 130, he[sc. you] will know from the contents of his manu-script that it is more than human intelligence. Espe-cially as it is explained how four volumes like thesewere written about the verse. Hear, O Israel! Thus farwhat was written of the author. The father of theauthor was called R. Yosef, as explained on leaf 400,in the passage beginning with the words ‘‘You shallrule,” at the end of the passage. There it is explainedthat the spirit of the Messiah revealed itself in him,as I was told by the talmudic scholar, the TeacherR. Shabbethai of Rashkov (may his memory be bless-ed!), on the authority of Ribash, in the followingwords: The year 1648 was the time of grace for theLord... to create the soul of Messiah. Ajid when, onaccount of our many iniquities, there was an accusa-tion [sc. divine displeasure] against Israel (Heavendeliver us!), the author took upon himself to composeseveral books through an act of repentance that hethen performed. See leaf 31 of the author’s work;...and possibly page [ ? ] referred to this. This book isthe fourth part, as the author wrote in this book se-veral times. The author was a refiner [i.e., goldsmith,Heb. tsoref^, as he wrote on page 409, see there.And the Teacher R. Shabbethai told me that the152W. Z. RABINOWITSCHRibash had intended to make a copy of it. The Ribashtherefore gave it to him to copy out, but in the mean-time the Ribash was summoned to heaven, and hisson, R. Tsevi Hirsch (of blessed memory) came andtook this book from his house, until eventually thisbook came into the hands of the son of R. Tsevi-Hirsch,the Sage R. Aharon (may his light shine forth!). Heagreed with my Teacher, R. Yeshayahu Halevi, whowas a Maggid in the community of Dinavits [i.e., Du-nayevtsy], that a copy should be made of this book,when he saw that this precious work was in dangerof being lost as the pages were becoming defaced. ThenI, a young man sitting at the feet of the righteous,came forward and was ordered by the Teacher R.Yeshayahu to copy it out. He also sent me writteninstructions to copy it out letter by letter. After theusual greetings, he informed me that, when he was inthe community of Kasnitin, he had seen the SeferHa-Tsoref in the home of the learned scholar andTeacher R. Aharon, the grandson of the Besht, andhad spoken with him about making a copy of thatbook and publishing it; also that he had mentionedthere that I could copy it out; and that they hadagreed that I should live in the house of R. Yesha-yahu, both on Sabbaths and on weekdays. For theabove-mentioned man had undertaken this in his pres-ence gladly and most affectionately. A special roomhad been set aside for the writing, and if I was willingto go there, so much the better. Such were the con-tents of the letter written by the Teacher, the Ravand Maggidj R. Yeshayahu Halevi.For several years from the time of R. Shabbethai ofRashkov I kept on thinking how I could succeed incarrying out this task of copying it [the book] letterby letter, as I have now done. When I saw the book, Ifound that it refers from leaf to leaf, so I decided towrite it out leaf by leaf. Only, there was too muchwritten on the leaf, so that it was impossible to copyit exactly leaf for leaf, and I therefore chose to trans-fer all the annotations on the page into the body ofthe text. Moreover, on every single page I marked offthe annotations between two half moons, one like this( at the beginning, and one like this ) at the end. Andwhere I found yet another handwriting on the page, Imarked it off from the first by a sign like this (( atthe beginning, and like this )) at the end, to showthat it was another handwriting. Subsequently, I dis-coveerd that this was the handwriting of the author’sson, as is explained on leaf 230a (see there), and thiswriting was so old that it was almost effaced. ButHeaven granted me the privilege to be its copyist, andwith the help of the Lord, Whose loving kindness didnot desert me or the learned author, I was given thestrength and good eyesight to be able to copy it. Praisebe to God who by His grace enabled me to see wheremortal men cannot see, for the manuscript had beeneffaced by age. Also, the handwriting was very small,and without God’s help it would have been impossibleto copy it. But God was with me and helped me. I alsomake grateful mention of the Sage, R. Aharon, thegrandson of the Besht, who lent me the book to taketo my home. For when I saw how great the work wasand that the task could not be performed in a day,I was obliged by the pressure of the times to take thebook home with me, since I could not be away frommy home, for without fiour there is no study [i.e., ascholar must earn enough to feed himself]. Blessedbe He that has helped me thus far to copy it; andmay the merits of the author, together with the meritsof the Rav Ribash and of all the righteous ones whowished to have a copy made of this book, be my sup-port, that I may be of those that worship the Lordwith love and awe, according to His will. Such are thewords of the first copyist, Yehoshua, the son of theTeacher Aharon of Dinavits, resident in the communityof Dinavits.This book was also in the archives of the holy Teach-er and Man of God, the Rav and Maggid of Chernobyl(of blessed and righteous memory) to whom it wasleft by his father the Tsaddik.., who had copied itfrom the text that he found written in the house ofthe Tsaddik R. Yeshayahu Halevi of Dinavits; andafter his death it was divided up by lots between threeof his sons, since it was bound in three parts, themiddle part being as large as both the first and lasttogether. It was agreed between them that, if one ofthe sons wished to have it [sc. the whole book] copiedout for himself, then the other two would give himtheir parts to be copied. The first to have a copymade was the renowned Teacher R. Aharon (long mayhe live!) the son of the above-mentioned Rav, by thecopyist Mordekhai the son of Rivkah of Kovli [Kovel].Next came his equally saintly brother... R. Moshe...who had the good fortune to receive by lot the middlepart of his father’s library; this Moshe had the firstand last parts too copied out for himself, also by theabove-named copyist, two being better than one...And now the third holy Sage to rouse himself [to thetask] was the sons’ kinsman, the Rav and Teacher R.Aharon of Karlin, who desired to have a copy of thisbook made for him, also by the above-named copyist;and since he was their kith and kin, he gladly, withtheir [sc. the sons’] permission placed this holy bookin his library at the disposal of that copyist who liveshere in Chernobyl. Moreover, since the middle part asdivided up by lot among the brothers (may theirrighteousness protect us!) contains twice as manypages as the other parts, as can be seen from its thick-ness, and since it is hard to carry, the copyist dividedit into two—the first time in the copy of the renownedTeacher R. Aharon, and again now, making twice al-together. All the parts appear pleasingly equal in sizeand evoke the admiration of all beholders for theexcellent work, since they are all almost the same inshape and size and all together contain the pure teach-ing of the Lord, for they all form parts of one whole.By the merits of the author, may it speedily be grantedus to say “Behold, this is our God! And may the readerHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN153walk in the straight path and comprehend the wordsaright.”Postscripts hy the CopyistsThe first copyist declares: Thus far the manuscriptof the author, the Gaon and Teacher, R. YehoshuaHeshel the son of R. Yosef of Krakov, and I havecopied it as I found it and as I have explained at thebeginning of the transcript. Therefore this is the endof this copy, which is the second copy, on the fifth dayof the week, Portion of the Law Reeh, the 28th of themonth Menahem Av, in this year [5]542 [=1782], byYehoshua, the son of the Teacher and Rav R. Aharon(may his light shine forth!) of Dinavits, resident inthe holy community of Dinavits.And now I, the copyist Mordekhai, the son of Riv-kah, offer praise to God Who has granted me to copythis, the fourth and last part of the Sefer Ha-Tsoref,and has helped me to complete it. I trust that God willraise me up and again have mercy on me and speedilydeliver us; and that the merit of the author will pow-erfully protect us, that we may not be found wantingin anything, for this book was divided into four partson account of its size and thickness. May the merit ofthe author be with us for ever, that this book may beamong the books of the righteous whose names areenshrined in this book; and we and our children andour children’s children will worship the Lord and keepHis commandments and laws and cleave to Him,Blessed Be He.I*UH0VICH.^bvalistokPlESKVOLKOVJSKZi^ O2ELVAHORODISHCH NESVIZMiC^A A.BARANOVICH ZZa OSLONIM LAKHOVICHiJf KLETSKROSH,SHERSHOViVISOKI ®HOMSKBREST-LI'TELEKHANMOTELEKOBRIN A., DROHICHInZ\ I   -miTMLUNINYETSLAKHVA8LUTSK53*DOMACHEVOSI23*KOZHAN.^^HORODOK52*VLADIMIR- ^VOLHYNSK^BEREZNA(^OLEVSK (g)OME2ERICH27*A MAP OF LITHUANIAN HASIDISMZZLIUBESHOV /^KOIDANOV y^lCARLlM@BEREZNA ^KOBRIN ▲ AMOURiT) HC30DOK Zi^SLONIM 2;^LAKH0VICH51*25*154W. Z. RABINOWITSCHa»,p.r»30o •axPs£Soin-—SOW TicxSisx^=zam-*Sr [n• pj!iito>jt<iS.22<APO2^2171tngiT<o- »& ^ *• Ssfcil>IsS.S3;i3cO'2o25SoSaizrSoSSrq g<ga •ml-®>S£°0>3:<~'5 >ol *0a8>S2o5_ a|if2|.os^^-<31558_si"l—8s*?n-*a?*|oS|:CgZ?02P-S-■►COlI***01s. Iz?iil?-io&i<ga ?x51 <0 "<o o > z o7^ R ■< w 2“g ^ s o E.'*i*§s< r 3:i?’i3}sS29 II U.m^ Iml“Smgr-3S^.lfloT®CH<»”-*niOi32 OS2?5Di^i<o>2o5§ q.8ot<55|8?iW2>2f^ooS-I’S 30*»ax®o>a *-^Iz2*ci»a2x6^ 2«0.3 ■<• r*0-5*55z-.xP’^ro,5C0X}i--.>mS®ro«°W3*285>cbX^-ZO?o?p-g>oz?.-fcOw®8||-sS>Rz:!]§>=oXJODOmZzO3>0>Do>nJ3^5oi§n O<osa0mOWSo02S|oSzOXm_.x®‘w|'6>l3E 31a^^a*s^Ijsa3-?m‘Er-$1*5i^3|:^^zmX OO'o —r*'O o ><;^5>i“-52—• 5»z -»T rn ^ •“50>Sogg°£ii29x“*<0goga;001DZIOB •o » :- o ® SSc??- 2 g- P^ a ? X^ S3 >” E o mw z S 3aO■r®2^o9‘<5^oo|-it?’-1?«S■p"io i §3?-* 3^ 30ij X g •S i >S z 2 «§1^5GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE KARUN DYNASTY AND ITS BRANCHESHASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARMN155GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE LIBESHEi AND BEREZNA DYNASTIESLEGEND : | DISCIPLE .| | SON, GRANDSON 111 SON-IN-LAW[IR. SHEK/IARYAHUof LIBESHEId. 1844ITR. AVRAHAM-ABBAof LIBESHEI andYANOVOR. HAYYIM-YITSHAKof LIBESHEId. 1879FTR. YAAKOV-LEIBof LIBESHEIAHARONof LIBESHEIKilled in theHolocauttIIR. YEHIEL-MIKHALOf LIBESHEIOf BEREZNASon of R. YEHIEL-MIKHALof LIBESHEiT1R.ABBAof YANOVOR. AHARONof BEREZNAIIR. GEDALYAHof BEREZNAR, DAVID HALEVITHE MAGGIDOF STEPANR. YEHIELMIKHALof BEREZNAd. 1848R. YITZHAKof BEREZNAd. 18651861i|ri mII11R. HAYYIMR. YOSEFof BEREZNAd. 1869R.AVRAHAM-SHEMUELof BEREZNAd. 19171922Itd,. 1924 ?IIKilled in theHolocaustIInIIIIR. HAYYIMR. YOSEFR. NAHUMR. YITSHAKHis GrandsonOf BEREZNAKilled in theHolocacistof SARNYin DOMBROVITSKilled in theHolocaustthe SECONDof BEREZNAd. 1939 or 1940R. BEN-ZIONRABINOVICHin U.S.A.HORODOK DYNASTYR. SHEMUEL HALEVI of KOSHIVKAIIR. WOLFof HORODOKIIR. DAVIDof HORODOKIIR. YISRAEL-YOSEFof HORODOKd. 1890 7I II IIIIR. MOSHER. WOLFtfie SECONDof HORODOKIIR. ALTERof HORODOKIIR. YITSHAKHis GrandsonR. BARUKHof HORODOKIIR. AHARONof HORODOKR. YEHIELof HORODOKin LUNINYETSd. 1906of HORODOKKilled In theHolocaustKilled in theHolocaustIIR. WOLFthe THIRDof HORODOK156w. z. rabinowitschMUSICAL SCORES OF HASIDIC MELODIESLyrical Sabbath Song by R. Aharon the Great of Karlin: ‘Lord, I yearn for the Sabbath’s delight‘YAH, EKHSOF NCAAI SHABBATH!’Karlin MelodyDy*i] n-'pnH n"? nau;'? inT[ p’3 n®8 08?T .nOS8 nailK 'T 13 .1'1'8 yC\T’ *58 VpK? 'I'l'lOlfl ■. p4»-:.TF=f=^3p4l=Pii=fi1 flriEBJkf—l J j-j—1-LiJsJiJ93=J^ r r r--^^ ^ J -tyi- J J si} -1^^==^ '131 *l3?9 RJ•itttaw a^fian niiisrxnn o’Vnn v'sbv bv ma’nn.now ,pn« tivb o’enoin.?I5V?33 nio’-i?! ii9«?i?8n oii *10?^“Jf" ’l'?9T “Si.tIOlin? r'io«i?aa n®'iij'3 DS^’jj?oii9> iixil asi 0,7V no?'«! «lb?^ aj.?|ij^.-jj? 031? Q’esa< naw ofaB^ njil ajHo?9 'fs i^ijio ^;8?,031? Dsi 3*150 0^93.!Il?n|7 099 nioSO?!!.n3i?o IP W19'? nq89 l?xa,a’pi ri??> onp nup njqo ’o>3>ns®'® npi?n}i“»9’■'001^‘> f L£f c_r I ^J-iirfrr-p2.'131 qb9^ a;ItiJ.' •< jl !il^ -7~ii J Ui„--=^I I r r &'110Finem3IS:=Scrr^, ^ p'131 qb?8 ajns ^>5 D’Vl>iJoa i|’0ljn I’O?)•nsa K3l*D noj? ?I190 ’8P? nipipO^,0'389n9 nOS^031? ’ll T?!* on^oaiJ!|T09 3?*?’-1^03 “^’OJO'? Q’p:olanq jjy’s’sipai-nia^an osi 03®?!•’lO^TI ’I090S? lisi?0> nls^9?0 H?!.!109n8 o!?in ’V93 n3i?0IW93 .wjp 031?•i’’on; 'I’PJ? ^s?•in’3 iriP li’lT^ T*‘ESHET HAYIL'‘A Woman of Worth’, from Proverbs 31Karlin MelodyOn Simhath Torah in the evening after the ‘circuits’of the Scrolls (hakkafoth).Mspn "mu'? min nnaa; iirj.ftii-;,—^1 PI1 2.I==1 ^iPPJ” ■■ ^HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN157‘KOL BERUEI MAALAH’Karlin MelodyThis liturgical poem by the posek and religious poetR. Moshe ben Yitshak Alashkar (1466—1542), thefirst part of which is thought to have been written byShelomo Ibn Gabirol, became part of various prayerbooks. It was especially revered by the Karlin hasidim,and also included in their siddur ‘Beth Aharon ve-YisraeV,'MENUHAH VE-SIMHAH’‘Rest and Joy’From Sabbath SongsLibeshei Melodyt'PM’xiBc r2'in’ .s'ax'i-n ,in: m ’c-a .’’wa’!? ’jirjaJa - " nn 1 - nn[p’a nvt ctn .rcsa naTX n ia,-r,i\a va’'.n'' ’oa' ~T. ' . .Di» ' 3 " lin DV n ■ tt “ onn n n 't’V - l-nHion ly p'y ' ]-n'1 - IVD - cb 2 - Hin X ‘1n K inTV* T1 • ^'0^'by b-2 - D’a1 ■ iny - a - D’l‘HATSILENI NO MI-YAD AHI’Genesis 32, 12Karlin MelodyTo this sad tune the Karlin hasidim used to sing theverses written here in the musical score, during the‘three meals’ on the Sabbaths following the Festival ofSukkothj because that was the time of the year when,in Russia, young men began to be conscripted into thearmy.[ p’a nra c’ji ’ma ]158W. Z. RABINOWITSCHGLOSSARYADAR: Jewish month, corresponding to February-March.ADMOR: Leader and teacher of the hasidim. See also:Tsaddik, Rebbe.AGGADAH: All that part of talmudic literature whichconsists of ediflcatory stories and legends.AM HA-ARETS: A Jew with no knowledge of Jewishmatters, contrasted with a talmudic scholar.ARI: Abbreviation of Ashkenazi R. Yitshak (Luria)of Safed, leading kabbalist and mystic.AV: Jewish month, corresponding to July-August.AV BETH-DIN: Head of the rabbinical cort of law.AZHAROTH: Exhortations.BAAL SHEM: ‘Master of the Name’—a man able toperform miracles through the name of God.BAAL SHEM TOY: ‘Master of the Good Name,’ thename given to R. Yisrael ben Eliezer, the founder ofhasidism; the Besht.BE-HAALOTHKHA: Weekly Portion of the Law, be-ginning with the words, ‘When you set up the lamps’(Num. 8, 1).BESHT: See Baal Shem Tov.BETH-DIN: Rabbinical court.BETH MIDRASH, pi. BATEI MIDRASH: House ofworship and study.CHERVONTSY: A Russian coin.DAYAN: Judge of rabbinical court; Jewish judge.DEVEKUTH: Intensity of devotion.DIVREI TORAH: Discourse on a topic of (hasidic)doctrine, usually based on a scriptural passage, whichthe Tsaddik would deliver at the communal meal withhis hasidim.ELUL: The month preceding the New Year and Dayof Atonement. It is devoted to self-examination andsoul-searching in preparation for the divine judgement.Corresponds to September-October.ERETS YISRAEL: Palestine, ‘The Land of Israel'.GABBAI: An honorary officer of a synagogue or othercommunal institution who acts as treasurer; amongstthe hasidim, he also assists the Rebbe.GALUTH: The dispersion of the Jews in exile.GAON, pi. GEONIM: Honorific title of address for anyoutstanding talmudic scholar; applied in particular toR. Eliyahu of Vilna.GEMARA: That part of the Talmud which consists ofdiscussions of the Mishnah.GENIZAH: Depository in which Hebrew books anddocuments were placed for safe-keeping.GOLAH: The Jewish Diaspora.HABAD: The hasidic movement founded by R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi.HAGGAHOTH: Annotations.HAKKAFOTH: Circuits made in the synagogue witht)ie Scrolls of the Law on Simhath Torah.HALAKHAH, pi., HALAKHOTH: A legal regulationprescribed by the Written and Oral Law.HALAKHIC: Belonging to halakhah (q.v.).HALUKKAH: Contributions raised from among theJews of the Diaspora and distributed as charity to theJewish poor of the Holy Land.HANHAGOTH YESHAROTH: Rules of Right Conduct.HANUKKAH: The Feast of Lights, commemoratingthe victory of the Maccabees.HASKALAH: The 19th century enlightenment move-ment for the modernisation of Jewish life.HATSOTH: Midnight lamentation in memory of thedestruction of the Temple.HAVDALAH: Benediction recited at the close of Sab-baths and Festivals.HAZZAN: Sjmagogue cantor; reader of prayers.HEDER: (Religious) school.HEREM: Religious excommunication; social boycott.HESHVAN: Month of Jewish year, corresponding toOctober-November.HEVRAH KADDISHA: Burial society.HOSHANA RABBAH: The 7th day of Sukkoth, onwhich the willow branches—a part of the ‘Four Kinds’—are stripped of their leaves.HOVATH HA-LEVAVOTH: ‘The Hearts’ Duty’, a bookof Jewish religious philosophy.ILANA DE-TSADDIKAYA: The Genealogical Tree ofthe Tsaddikim.lYYAR: Month of the Jewish year, corresponding toApril-May.KABBALAH: Esoteric lore of Jewish mysticism.KAHAL: A Jewish community and its administration.KASHER: Ritually clean; permitted as food by theMosaic Law.KASHRUTH: Ritual purity; observance of dietarylaws.K A WAN AH: Intensity of mental concentration andemotional devotion in the utterance of a prayer or inthe performance of a religious act; the mystical mean-ing of prayer.KEHILLAH: Jewish community.KIDDUSH: Benediction pronounced over wine on Sab-baths and Festivals.KISLEV: Month of Jewish year, corresponding to No-vember-December.KI'TTEL: Long white robe, worn on Rosh-Hashanahand Yom Kippur and on the Seder night; also used ascerement.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARUN159KOL NIDREI: 'All Vows'—^the initial words in thesolemn formula of absolution, intoned in the synagogueon the eve of the Day of Atonement.KOLEL: Organised division of Jewish community inPalestine for receipt of halukkah.KOROBKA: (Russian) Communal tax on meat andother commodities in the Russian Jewish communities.Cf. Pinkos Medinath Lita, ed. Dubnow, p. 340, s.v.:Kropkee, Berlin 1925.KUNTRES, pL, KUNTRESIM: Tract.LAG BA-OMER: 33rd day of the counting of the omer(from the second day of Passover); a day of rejoicing.MAARIV: Evening prayer.MAGGID: Preacher, often itinerant; hasidic teacher.MAHASHAVAH: Thought.MASKIL: Active supporter of haskalah movement(q.v.).MASORAH: Traditional Jewish way of life.MATS AH: pi., MATSOTH: Unleavened bread eatenat Passover.MEAH SHEARIM: Quarter of Jerusalem, occupied byultra-orthodox Jews.MEDINAH, MEDINATH: Province, State.MELAMMED, pi., MELAMMEDIM: Teacher of child-ren.MELAWEH MALKAH: The meal taken by the hasi-dim after the departure of the ‘Queen Sabbath’, ac-companied by community singing and often an addressby the Tsaddik,MIDRASH: Allegorical exegesis of Biblical texts.MIKRA: Bible.MIKVEH: Ritual bath.MINHAH: Afternoon prayer.MINYAN: Prayer quorum of ten adult males.MISHNAH: The earliest part of the Talmud,MISNAGDIM: See Mithnagdim.MITHNAGDIM: The opponents of hasidism.MITNAGED, pL, MITHNAGEDIM: See Mithnagdim.MITHNAGGEDIM: See Mithnagdim.MITSVAH, pi., MITSVOTH: Religious injunction.MIZRAHI: Zionist organisation of orthodox Jews.MOREH TSEDEK: Rabbinical judge.MUSAR: Movement stressing moral values.NER TAMID: Perpetual light.NIGGUN: Melody; tune. Ha-Niggun ha-Kadosh: Theholy tune.NIGLEH: The written and oral law, as codified in theTalmud.NISAN: Jewish month, corresponding to March-April.NISTAR: Hidden lore of the Kabbalah.OHEL: Structure over a grave.OMER: Sheaf taken from the first fruits and offeredin the temple (Lev. xxiii, 9-14). See Lag Ba-Omer.PERUSHIM: Groups of disciples of the Gaon R. Eli-yahu of Vilna in the Holy Land.PESAH: Passover, the spring Festival commemoratingthe Exodus from Egypt.PINKAS: Communal register; private notes.PINKAS VAAD HA-KEHILLOTH HA-RASHIYOTHDI-MEDINATH UTA or PINKAS MEDINATH LITA:Register of the principal communities of the Provinceof Lithuania.POLOZHENIYE: (Russian) Laws affecting Jews pro-mulgated by the Russian Government.PORITS: Gentile aristocrat and estate owner.POSEKIM: Authors of halakhic rulings.PURIM: Festival commemorating the deliverance ofthe Jews recorded in Book of Esther.RABBI: General term for Jewish scholar.RAV, pi., RABBANIM: Teacher of the Law; Jewishjudge, and spiritual head of the community.REBBE: A hasidic Tsaddik is designated as ‘Rebbe’as distinct from the Rabbi proper or the Rav, whodischarges the rabbinical functions as spiritual leaderof the whole community.ROSH HA-KAHAL, pi., RASHIM: Head of the com-munity.ROSH-HASHANAH: New Year Festival.ROSH HODESH: New Moon.ROSH YESHIVAH: Head of a talmudic school.ROZEN, pi., ROZENIM: Communal leader.SEDER: The service commemorating the Exodus, con-ducted in the home on the eve of Passover.SEFER ZIKKARON: Memorial Volume.SHABBATH KODESH: Holy Sabbath.SHAM ASH: Caretaker and usher; Rebbe’s servant.SHAVUOTH: ‘Festival of Weeks’, commemorating theGiving of the Law and the ingathering of the firstfruits.SHEMA: ‘Hear O Israel’, the Jewish profession offaith, recited daily in the morning and evening pray-ers.SHETAR HITHKASHRUTH: Pledge of loyalty.SHIDDUKH: Negotiations preliminary to marriage; amarriage agreement; a match.SHOFAR: Ram’s horn, blown in the synagogue onRosh-Hashanah.SHOHET: Ritual slaughterer.SHTIEBEL: Name given to hasidic prayer-house.SHULHAN ARUKH: Codification of halakhic law.SHULKHEN: Small prayer-house.SIDDUR: Prayer-book.SIMHAH: Rejoicing; joy; happy occasion.SIMHATH TORAH: ‘Rejoicing of the Law’—^joyousFestival on the day following Sukkoth.SI VAN: Jewish month, corresponding to May-June,SUKKAH: Booth, tabernacle.SUKKOTH: Festival of Tabernacles, commemoratingthe wandering in the desert and the fruit harvest.TAANITH ESTHER: Fast on the day before Purim.‘TABLE’: Festive communal meal of the hasidim atwhich the Tsaddik delivered an address.TAKANAH, pi., TAKANOTH: Measure, enactment.TALITH, pi., TALITHO'TH: Prayer-shawl.TALMUD: Mishnah and Gemara.TALMUD TORAH: Communal school.160W. Z. RABINOWITSCHTAMMUZ: Jewish month, corresponding to June-July.TANYA: Hasidic philosophical work by R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi.TASHLIKH: Ceremonial purification from sin on theNew Year.TEREFAH: Ritually unclean food.TEVETH: Jewish month, corresponding to December-January.‘THIRD MEAL’: The Sabbath meal, eaten after theminhah prayer and accompanied by hasidic communitysinging and an address by the Tsaddik.TISHRI: Jewish month, corresponding to September-October.TORAH: The Mosaic Law; the teaching of Judaism.TOSAPOTH: Exegetical annotation to the Talmud.TSADDIK: Head and teacher of a hasidic community.TSADDIKISM: Personal cult of the Tsaddik,TSAVAAH: Will; testament.TSOREF: Refiner, purifier.VAAD HA-MEDINAH: Council of the Province.VA-YAKHEL: Portion of the Law beginning with thewords ‘And Moses assembled’ (Exod. 35, 1).VIDDUY: Confession of sins.YAMIM NOR AIM: Penitential Days; Days of Awe.‘YENUKA’: Child chosen by hasidim as their futureleader; Rebbe.YESHIVAH, pi., YESHIVOTH: High school for studyof Talmud.YETSER HA-RA: Evil inclination.YIRAH: Religious awe.YIZKOR: Memorial (Volume).YOM KIPPUR: Day of Atonement, a day of fastingand repentance.ZEMIROTH: Liturgical songs.ZOHAR: ‘Book Of Splendour’, the chief work of theearlier Kabbalah and of Jewish mysticism.BIBLIOGRAPHYIn the case of books which have been published severaltimes, the edition referred to in the Bibliography isthat used in this work.Aharon mi-Karlin: Beth Aharon (Aharon of Karlin:The House of Aaron) Brody 1875.Akty Izdavayemyye Vielenskoyu Kommissiyeyu dlyaRazbora Drevnikh Aktov (Records ed. by the VilnaCommission for the Examination of Ancient Docu-ments) Vol. XXVIII, Vilna 1901, and Vol. XXIX, Vilna1902.Avatihi, A.: Ha-Shosheleth ha-Bereznaith (The BereznaDynasty) Stolin Memorial Volume, ed. by Avatihi, A.and Ben-Zakai, Y., Tel-Aviv 1952.Beigel, G.: Ayarathi Berezna (My Native Town,Berezna) Tel-Aviv 1954.Ben-Ezra, A.: Ha-Yenuka mi-Stolin (The Yenukaof Stolin) New York 1951.Ben-Ezra, A.: Ha-Rav Avraham Eisenstein (RabbiAbraham Eisenstein) Drohichin Memorial Volume, ed.by D. B. Warshawski, Chicago 1958.Benjamini, Y.: Hilluf Mishmaroth be-Hatsar ha-Rebbe (The Old Guard and the New in the Court ofthe Rebbe) Stolin Memorial Volume, Tel-Aviv 1952.Ben-Porath, B.: Ha-Admor mi-Karlin (The Rebbe ofKarlin) Ha-Tsofeh (daily paper), Tel-Aviv 22.6.1945.Ben-Zakai, Y.: Ha-Kether she-Nuppats (The CrownThat Was Dashed in Pieces), Or Zarua, A Collectionof Records and Pieces, ed. by Avatihi, A., and Ben-Zakai, Y., Tel-Aviv 1952.[Y. Berger]: Eser Tsahtsahoth (Ten Splendours)Petrokov 1910.Bihovski, H. A.: Ginzei Nistaroth (Hidden Treasures)Jerusalem 1924.[Bodek, M.]: Seder ha-Doroth mi-Talmidei ha-Besht(Order of the Generations of the Besht’s Disciples),no place and no date of publication.Brafman, Y.: Kniga Kahala (The Book of the Ka-hal) quoted by Dubnow in the Voskhod, 1892, No. 11.Braver, A. Y.: A1 ha-Mahloketh bein R. Shneur-Zal-man mi-Ladi ve-R. Avraham Hacohen mi-Kalisk (Onthe Dispute Between R. Shneur-Zalman of Ladi andR. Abraham Hacohen of Kalisk) Kiryath Sefer, Vol. I,Jerusalem 1924.Brisk de-Lita (Brest-Litovsk) Memorial Volume, ed.A. Steinman, Jerusalem 1954.Buber M.: Tales of the Hasidim, Early Masters, NewYork 1966.Buber M.: Tales of the Hasidim, Later Masters, NewYork 1966.Bunim, M.: Ahron ha-Admorim be-Karlin (The Lastof the Rebbes in Karlin) Stolin Memorial Volume, Tel-Aviv 1952.Chemerinsky, H.: Ayarathi Motele (My NativeTown, Motele) Tel-Aviv 1951.David-Horodok, Sefer Zikkaron (David-Horodok Me-morial Volume) ed. Idan, Y. and others, Tel-Aviv, nodate of publication.Dinur, Benzion: Be-Mifneh ha-Doroth (At the Turn-ing Point of the Generations) Jerusalem 1955.Dolinko, A.: Kakh Nehervu Kehilloth Pinsk ve-Kar-lin (How the Pinsk and Karlin Communities WereDestroyed) Tel-Aviv, stencil, no date of duplication.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN161Dov-Baer of Mezerich: Mag^d Devarav le-Yaakov(Proclaiming His Words unto Jacob) Lublin 1927.Drohichin Memorial Volume, ed. D. B. Warshawski,Chicago 1958.Dubnow, S.; Toledoth ha-Hasiduth (History of Ha^sidism) Tel-Aviv 1932.Dubnow, S.: Chassidiana, Supplement to the He-Avar, Vol. 11, Petrograd 1918.Dubnow, S.: Kithvei Hithnagduth al Kath ha-Hasi-dim (Mithnaged Writings about the Sect of the Hasi-dim) Devir Vol. I, Berlin 1923.Dubnow, S.: Vmeshatelstvo Russkovo PravitelstvaV Anti-Hasidskuyu Borbu (The Intervention of theRussian Government in the Struggle against Hasidism)Yevreyskaya Starina, Vol. Ill St. Petersburg 1910.Dubnow Archives, in Yiddish Scientific Institute—YrVO, New York, manuscripts.Eisen, A.: R. Aharon ha-Gadol (R. Aharon the Great)Ha-Modia, daily paper, Jerusalem 6.10.1954.Eliezer Halevi: Siah ha-Sadeh (The Bush of theField) Shklov 1787.Eliezer Halevi: Reiah ha-Sadeh (The Perfume ofthe Field) Shklov 1795.Emden, Yaakov: Siddur ‘Beth Yaakov’ (‘House of Ja-cob' Prayer-Book) Warsaw 1881.Entsiklopediyah Yisraelith (Encyclopaedia Judaica)Vol. I, Eschkol-Edition, Berlin 1929.Eshkoli, A. Z.: Ha-Hasiduth be-Polin, Beth Yisraelbe-Polin (Hasidism in Poland, The House of Israel inPoland) Pt. II, ed. Halpem, I., Jerusalem 1953.Feingold, Y.: Gilgulo shel Niggun (The History of aMelody) Davar, daily paper, Tel-Aviv 28.12.1945.Fishko, B.: Gilgulei Hayyim (Vicissitudes of Life)Tel-Aviv 1948.Friedkin, A.: A. B. Gottlober un Sayn Epokhe (A. B.Gottlober and His Epoch) Vilna 1925.Frumkin, A. L.: Toledoth Hakhmei Yerushalayim(The History of the Sages of Jerusalem) additions byA. Rivlin, Jerusalem 1929.Fuen, S. Y.: Kiryah Neemanah (The Faithful City)Vilna 1860.Geshuri, M. S.: Niggunei Karlin u-Stolin (Melodiesof Karlin and Stolin) Stolin Memorial Volume, ed. Ava-tihi, A., and Ben-Zakai, Y., Tel-Aviv 1952.Gordon, Y. L.: Olam ke-Minhago, Sippur Sheni, Ah-rith Simhah Tugah (The World as Usual, Second Sto-ry, Joy Ends in Sadness) Vilna 1873.Gordon, Y. L.: Iggeroth (Letters) Vol. I, Warsaw1895.Gottlieb, S. N.; Oholei Shem (The Tents of Shem)Pinsk 1912.Gottlieb, Y.: Ein Onshin Ela Mazhirin (No Punish-ment, but a Warning) Pinsker Wort No. 75.Graet2i, H.: Geschichte der Juden (History of theJews) Vol. I, Leipzig 1890.Grossman, L.: Shem u-Sheerith (A Name and Rem-nant) Tel-Aviv 1943.Grossman, L.: Sheerith la-Sheerith, Supplement toShem u-Sheerith (A Remnant of a Remnant) no placeand date of publication.Had min Havraya: Hithgalluth ha-Yenuka bi-Stolin(The Revelation of the Yenuka in Stolin) Ha-Shahar,Vol. VI, Vienna 1875.Halpern, I.: Yahaso shel R. Aharon ha-Gadol mi-Karlin klappei Mishtar ha-Kehilloth (The Attitude ofR. Aaron the Great of Karlin to the Kehillah System)Zion, 22nd year, Jerusalem 1957.Halpern, I.: Havuroth la-Torah ve-la-Mitsvoth ve-ha-Hasiduth be-Hithpashtutah (Groups for the Studyof the Torah and for Mitsvoth and the Spread of Ha-sidic Movement) Zion, 22nd year, Jerusalem 1957.Hausman, A.: Divrei Aharon (The Words of Aaron)Jerusalem 1962.Hausman, A.: Birkath Aharon (The Blessing of Aa-ron) Jerusalem 1970.Hayyim-Heike me-Amdur: Hayyim va-Hesed (Ha-yyim-Heike of Amdur: Life and Grace) Jerusalem, nodate of publication.Heilman, H. M.: Beth Rabbi (The House of the Rab-bi) Berdichev 1903.Hessen, J.: Yevrei v Rossii (The Jews in Russia)St. Petersburg 1906.Hessen, J. Istoriya Yevreyskogo Naroda v Rossii(History of the Jewish People in Russia) Vol. I, Lenin-grad 1925.Hilman, D. T.: Iggeroth ha-Tanya (Letters of theAuthor of Tanya) Jerusalem 1953.Horodets Memorial Volume, ed. Ben-Ezra, A., andSussman, Y., New York 1949.Horodezki, S. A.: Ha-Hasiduth ve-ha-Hasidim (Ha-sidism and the Hasidim) Vol. II, Tel-Aviv 1951.Iggereth ha-Kodesh, Helek 2 mi-Sefer Likkutei Ama-rim ... Menahem-Mendel mi-Vitebsk ... Avraham ...Kalisk... Hanhagoth ha-Rav ha-Kadosh mi-Lakhovichve-Rabbi Hayyim-Heikel (The Holy Letter, Part 2 ofthe Book of Selected Sayings... by Menahem-Mendelof Vitebsk ... Abraham ... of Kalisk ... Guides toConduct by the Holy Rabbi of Lakhovich and R. Ha-yyim-Heikel) Lemberg 1911.Israeli!, N.: Mishpahath Israeli! (The Israeli! Fa-mily) in Pinkas Kletsk, Tel-Aviv 1959.Jewish Encyclopaedia, Vol. VII, s.v.: Kobrin.Kehal Hasidim (Community of Hasidim) no placeand date of publication.Kehal Hasidim (Community of Hasidim), no placeHasidim’) Lemberg 1904.Kempinski-Lieberman, B.: Yamav ha-Ahronim shelha-Rebbe Moshele Perlov (The Last Days of theRebbe Moshe Perlov) Stolin Memorial Volume, Tel-Aviv 1952.Kerman, M.: Meine Sikhreynes (My Reminiscences)stencil, no place and date of publication, [Haifa 1953?]Klausner, Yisrael: Vilna bi-Tekufath ha-Gaon (Vilnain the Time of the Gaon) Jerusalem 1942.Kleinbaum, Y. M.: Shema Shelomo (The Fame ofSolomon) Petrokov 1928.Kleinman, M. H.: Mazkereth Shem ha-Gedolim (InMemory of the Great Ones) Petrokov 1908.Kleinman, M. H.: Zikhron la-Rishonim (A Memory ofthe First Ones) Petrokov 1912.162W. Z. RABINOWITSCHKleinman, M. H.: Or Yesharim (Light of the Up-right) Petrokov 1924.Kobrin, Sefer (Kobrin Memorial Volume) ed.Schwarz, B., and Biletski, Y.H., Tel-Aviv 1951.Kopelovich, M.: Ha-Yeshivah (The Yeshivah), Sto-lin Memorial Volume, Tel-Aviv 1952.Kule, Y.: Hasidisher Shabbes in Luninyets (A Ha-sidic Sabbath in Luninyets) Luninyets-Kozan-HorodokMemorial Volume, Tel-Aviv 1952.Kunde-Ginsburg, T.: Zikhronoth (Reminiscences)David-Horodok Memorial Volume, ed. Idan, Y., andothers, Tel-Aviv, no date of publication.Levin, Y.: Letter, Ha-Melits, daily paper, 1886, No,26, pp. 544, 545.Levinstein, Y.: Dor va-Dor ve Dorshav (Every Gene-ration and its Interpreters) Warsaw, no date of pub-lication.Lieberman, H.: Bibliografiyoth, Sefer ha-Yovel le-Alexander Marx (Bibiliographical Notes, AlexanderMarx Jubilee Volume) New York 1943.Lifschits, Y.: Zikhron Yaakov (Memory of Jacob)Pt. I, Kovno-Slobodka 1924.Lipson, M.: Mi-Dor Le-Dor (From Generation toGeneration) Tel-Aviv 1929-1938.Lourie, A.: Di Tsavoe fun a Pinsker Baal Bayithfun Onheyb 19ten Yorhundert (The Will of a PinskHouseholder from the Beginning of the 19th Century),Yivo Bleter, Vol. XIII, pp. 390-428, New York 1938.Luninyets-Kozhan-Horodok, Yizkor (Memorial Vo-lume) ed. Zeevi, Y., and others, Tel-Aviv 1952.Mahler, R.: Toledoth ha-Yehudim be-Polin (TheHistory of the Jews in Poland) Merhavyah 1946.Maimon Salomon: Lebensgeschichte, Munich 1911.Malakhi, A. R.: Sefer she-lo Zakah Liroth Or, Seferha-Yovel shel ha-Doar (An Unpublished Book, Ha-Doar Jubilee Volume) New York 1952.Marek, P.: Vnutrennyaya Borba v Yevreystve vXVIII Veke (The Internal Jewish Struggle in the 18thCentury) Yevreyskaya Starina, Vol. XII, Leningrad1928.Margoliyoth Meir: Meir Nethivim (The Illuminator ofPaths) Polonnoye 1791.Margoliyoth, Meir: Sod Yakhin u-Boaz (The Secretof Yakhin and Boaz) Ostrog 1794.Meirson, M. M.: Ha-Shosheleth ha-Kobrinaith (TheKobrin Dynasty), Kobrin Memorial Volume, ed.Schwarz, B., and Biletski, Y. H., Tel-Aviv 1951.Meoroth ha-Gedolim (The Great Lights) ed. Tseilin-gold. A., Pt. II, Bilgorai, no date of publication.Mosesson, Y. L.: Masa be-Russiyah (A Journey inRussia) Ha-Shahar, Vol. VI, Vienna 1875.Moshe mi-Kobrin: Amaroth Tehoroth (Moses of Kob-rin: Selected Utterances) ed. Hacohen, Y. Y., War-saw 1910.Nadav, M.: Toledoth Kehillath Pinsk 1506—1880(History of the Community of Pinsk 1506—1880),Pinsk, Vol. I, Pt. I, ed. W. Z. Rabinowitsch, Tel-Aviv1973.Oppenheim, Y. A. L.: Sheloshah Sefarim Niftahim,Zemiroth shel Shabbath (Three Opened Books, Litur-gical Sabbath Songs) Petrokov 1910.Or Zarua (A Shining Light) ed. Avatihi, A., andBen-Zakai, Y., Tel-Aviv 1952.Otsar Yisrael (The Treasure of Israel Encyclope-dia) s.v.: Halukkah, ed. Eisenstein, Y.D., London 1935.Perlov: Shalom mi-Koidanov, Divrei Shalom (Shalomof Koidanov, Words of Shalom [=Peace] Vilna 1882.Pichenik, A.: Ha-Shoshaloth ha-Hasidiyoth be- Voh-lyn: Berezna (Hasidic Dynasties in Volhynia: Berezna)Yalkut Vohlyn, Tel-Aviv 1946.Pinkas Medinath Lita (Minutes of the LithuanianProvincial Assembly) ed. Dubnow, Berlin 1925.Rabinowitsch, S. M.: A1 Pinsk, Karlin ve-Yoshveihen(On Pinsk, Karlin and their Inhabitants) Talpiyoth,Pt. Kehilloth Yaakov, Berdichev 1895.Rabinowitsch, W. Z.: Lithuanian Hasidism, London1970 and New York 1971.Rabinowitsch, W. Z.: Min ha-Genizah ha-Stolinaith(From the Stolin Genizah) Zion, 5th year, Jerusalem1940.Rabinowitsch, W. Z.: A1 ‘Sefer ha-Tsoref’ (The Bookof the Tsoref [Purifier] Zion, 6th year, Jerusalem 1941.Rabinowitsch, W.Z.: 19 Kislev ve-Hey Hanukkah(19th Kislev and 5th‘ Day of Hanukkah) Ha-Olam,26th year. No. 13, Jerusalem 1937.Rabinowitsch, W. Z.: Mikhtevei Bakkashah (WishLetters) Zion, 33rd year, Jerusalem 1968.Razi, Y.: Mamshikh ha-Shosheleth (The Heir to theDynasty) Or Zarua, ed. Avatihi, A., and Ben-Zakai,Y., Tel-Aviv 1952.Seder Tefillath Yisrael... Or ha-Yashar, Nusakh...Rabbi... mi-Kaidanov... ve-Rabbi mi-Stolin (Prayer-Book *Or ha-Yashar^... of Rabbi of Koidanov and ofRabbi of Stolin) Vilna 1928.Sefer Shimon Dubnow (Simon Dubnow MemorialVolume) ed. Rawidowicz, S., Jerusalem 1954.Shakh, A.: Yeshivath ‘Beth Yisrael’ (‘The House ofIsrael' Yeshivah), Luninyets-Kozhan-Horodok MemorialVolume, ed. Zeevi, Y., and others, Tel-Aviv 1952.Shalom, S.: Dodi Reb Aharele, Shirim (My UncleRabbi Aharele, Poems) Tel Aviv 1949.Shapiro, A. E.: Mishnath Hakhamim (The Teachingof the Sages) Jerusalem 1934.Shazakh, S.: Simhath R. Aharele (The Rejoicing ofR. Aharele) Ha-Tsofeh, daily paper, Tel-Aviv 14.10.1951.Shisha, A.: Hadarom, periodical, Vol. V-VI, NewYork 1958.Shivhei ha-Besht (The Praises of the Besht) ed.Horodezki, S. A., Berlin 1922.Shivhei ha-Rav... R. Shneur-Zalman (The Praisesof the Rav... R. Shneur-Zalman) ed. Druker, Lem-berg, no date of publication.Shneur, Z.: Ha-Gaon ve-ha-Rav (The Gaon and theRav) Tel-Aviv 1958.Siddur ‘Or ha-Yashar’ (Siddur ‘The Light of Upright-ness’), Vilna 1928.HASIDISM IN PINSK AND KARLIN163Stolin, Sefer Zikkaron (Stolin Memorial Volume)ed. Avatihi, A., and Ben-Zakai, Y., Tel-Aviv 1952.Teitelbaum, M.: Ha-Rav mi-Ladi u-Miflegeth Habad(The Rav from Ladi and the Habad Branch [of Ha-sidism] ) Pt. I., Warsaw 1910.Tishby, I. : Ha-Rayon ha-Meshihi ve-ha-Megammothha-Meshihiyoth bi-Tsmihath ha-Hasiduth (The Mes-sianic Idea and Messianic Trends in the Growth of Ha-sidism] ) Pt. I., Warsaw 1910.Tishby I.: Tsevi Herman Shapiro ke-Sofer ha-Has-kalah (Tsevi Herman Shapiro as an Author of theHaskalah Period), Molad, Vol. IV, Jerusalem 1972.Toledoth Anshei Shem (A History of Famous Men)ed. Rand, A. Z., New York 1950.Toyzend Yor Pinsk (A Thousand Years of Pinsk)ed. Hofman, B., New York 1941.Tsawaah... Yad Kodesh... R. Aharon ... mi-Kar-lin ... ve-Hanhagoth ... mi-Beno... R. Asher ... mi-Karlin (Will Written in the Hand of R. Aaron [theGreat] of Karlin and Guides to Conduct by His Son,R. Asher of Karlin) Chemovits 1849, 1855.Tsavaath ha-Ribash (The Will of the Ribash [R.Yisrael Baal-Shem]) Jerusalem 1948.Tsinovets, M.: Le-Toledoth ha-Rabbanuth be-Kobrin(On the History of the Rabbinate in Kobrin) KobrinMemorial Volume, ed. Schwarz, B., and Biletski, Y. H.,Tel-Aviv 1951.Uri ha-Saraf mi-Strelisk, Imrei Kadosh ha-Shalem(Uri the Seraph of Strelisk, The Complete Sayings ofthe Holy Man) ed. Shenblum, B. Z., Lvov, no date ofpublication.Valden, A.: Shem ha-Gedolim he-Hadash (The New‘Memorial to the Great’) Warsaw 1880.Vilenski, Y. Z.: Zikhronoth (Reminiscences) KobrinMemorial Volume, ed. Schwarz, B., and Biletski, Y. H.,Tel-Aviv 1951.Weizman-Lichtenstein, H.: Be-Tsel Korathenu (Un-der the Shadow of Our Roof) Tel-Aviv 1948.Wilensky, M.: The Polemic of Rabbi David of Ma-kov against Hasidism, Proceedings of the AmericanAcademy for Jewish Research, Vol. XXV, New York1956.Wilensky, M.: Teudah ‘Mitnagdith’ bi-Devar Sere-fath ‘Zemir Aritsim ve-Harvoth Tsurim’ (A MithnagedDocument Concerning the Burning of ‘Zemir Aritsimve-Harvoth Tsurim*) Tarbits, Vol. XXVII, Jerusalem1958.Wilensky, M.: Hearoth la-Pulmusim bein ha-Hasidimve-ha-Mithnagdim (Notes on the Polemics Between theHasidim and the Mithnagdim) Tarbits, Vol. XXX, Je-rusalem 1961.Wilensky, M.: Hasidim u-Mithnagdim (Hasidim andMithnagdim) Jerusalem 1970.Yahalal [Yehudah-Leib Levin], Zikkaron ba-Sefer(Memoirs) Zhitomir 1910.Yaari, A.: Ha-Defus ha-Ivri bi-Shklov (The HebrewPrinting-Press in Shklov) Kiryath Sefer, Vol. XXII, Je-rusalem 1945.Yaari, A.: Sheluhei Erets Yisrael (Emissaries of theLand of Israel) Jerusalem 1951.Yevreyskaya Entsiklopediya, Vol. VII, s.v.: Dom-brovitsy, and Vol. XIV, s.v.: Stolinskiye Tsaddiki.Yisrael-Leibel, Sefer Vikkuah (The Book of theDispute) quoted by Dubnow, Toledoth ha-Hasiduth,q.v.Yitshak mi-Neskhizh: Zikhron Tov (Isaac of Nes-khizh: A Good Fame) ed. Landau, Y., Petrokov 1892.Yonathan, Y. L.: Nof va-Geza (Landscape and Gene-alogy) Tel-Aviv 1955.Y. Z.: R. Aharele Ginsburg, Yizkor Kehilloth Luni-nyets-Kozhan-Horodok <R. Aharele Ginsburg, Luni-nyets-Kozhan-Horodok Memorial Volume), ed. Zeeviand others, Tel-Aviv 1952.Zeevi, Y.: Iskei Kahal (Affairs of the Kahal) Luni-nyets-Kozhan-Horodok Memorial Volume, Tel-Aviv1952.Zeidman, H. R.: Aharon Perlov be-Ghetto Varshah(R. Aaron Perlov in the Warsaw Ghetto) Stolin Me-morial Volume, Tel-Aviv 1952.Zemiroth le-Shabbath ve-Yomim To vim (LiturgicalSongs for Sabbaths and Festivals) ed. A.B., Jerusalem1947.Zevin, S.Y.: Sippurei Hasidim, Moadim (Tales of theHasidim, Festivals) Tel-Aviv 1957.Zweifel, E. T.: Shalom al Yisrael (Peace Upon Is-rael) Pt. II, Zhitomir 1869.Gad-Asher Levin, Pinsker Stot Luah (Gad-AsherLevin in the Pinsker Year-Book) Vilna 1903/4.