DAVID AND SYLVIA STEINER YIZKOR BOOKSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISHNO. O4239COLLECTIONLIBRARYKrakow Memorial BookMemorial journal in honor of Jews from Cracow, perished1939-1945¥THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY - NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSTHE STEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARY PROVIDESON-DEMAND REPRINTS OF MODERN YIDDISH LITERATURE©2003 THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY ANDTHE NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERMAJOR FUNDING FOR THEYIZKOR BOOK PROJECT WAS PROVIDED BY:Harry and Lillian Freedman FundDavid and Barbara B. Hirschhorn FoundationDavid and Barbara MarguliesThe Nash Family FoundationHarris RosenDavid and Sylvia SteinerRuth TaubmanOriginal publication dataauthor New Cracow Friendship Society.title Memorial journal in honor of Jews from Cracow, perished 1939-1945.descript 1 v. (unpaged) : ill., facs., ports.; 29 cm.subject Jews -- Poland -- Krakow.Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945) -- Poland -- Krakow.Krakow (Poland) — Ethnic relations.THIS BOOK MEETS A.N.S.I. STANDARDS FORPAPER PERMANENCE AND LIBRARY BINDING.PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.*PXV'l \73- S /3 a.CREDITS:Cover design — suggested by Arie FRIEDMAN, New Yorkand Z. Frankel, Ramat GanExtremely helpful in collecting material, documents and photos were:Dr. Mosheh FRIEDNER, Principal, Hayarkon School, Tel Aviv.Ijs . Josef KERMISZ, Director, Archivum YAD w’SHEM, Jerusalem.Mr. Shimon LUSTGARTEN, Haifah.Mrs. Elsa LUSTGARTEN (Elsa Lapa), Haifah.Dr. Yehuda OHRENSTEIN, Jerusalem.Mr. Zwi SHNER, Director, Museum Lochamei Haghettaoth,Kibbuth Lochamei Haghettaoth.Mr. Samuel SILFEN, Cracow.Permission to use any material contained in this book will be granted to historiansand non-profit organizations upon application.MEMORIAL PLAQUEat MOUNT ZION,JERUSALEM."PITY THE ONES WHO PERISHEDTHEY WILL NOT BE FORGOTTEN!"(Sanhedrin p. 101)lfl/]eS6acj,e oj? ^Jhe cjCiterary, (CommitteeDear Friends;Some time ago our Society undertook a projectof publishing a book about Cracow Jewry and itsfate during the Nazi era. A committee was formedand a considerable amount of money and materialhave been collected.When we started to explore the details of thisprojec-t it became evident that the historical sourcesare not readily available, the material immense, andthe subject too serious to be compressed into onevolume only. We decided therefore to divide thewhole work into two parts: the first part covering thedestruction of Jews from Cracow in Cracow itself;the second part covering the fate and misery of Jewsfrom Cracow in emigration.We are presenting to you today the first part:“The Memorial Journal” containing the history anddestruction of the Jewish Community in Cracow fromthe day of German occupation, through the ghetto,concentration camps in our area, till the day Cracowbecame “Judenrein”. It is a sad and tragic story;a story of inhuman suffering, degradation, humilia-tion, the total annihilation of the Jewish population.The only bright page in this unprecedented inhistory tragedy is the story of a handful of braveyoung men and women who decided to fight fortheir lives and freedom and, if they had to die—to die with dignity, with guns and bayonets in theirhands, defying the enemy to their last breath.To these heroic Jewish Underground Fighterswe dedicated in our Journal a special chapter—and incorporated the only photos which could befound.But it would not be a Memorial Journal if wewould not include also the names of our dear oneswho perished in those terrible times. Their ashes arescattered all over the earth. We cannot visit theirgraves or put a wreath of flowers on the place oftheir eternal rest. This Journal is a monument erectedto their memory, a visible sign of our love andsorrow.We hope that our effort will find the approval ofthe members of the Cracow Friendship Society.To us—the handful of survivors—falls the honorto remember, to mourn and to perpetuate the mem-ory of the great Cracow Jewry.The Literary Committee:MAX STEIGLYDIA WOLFGIZA WORTMANe1965 - 1967My Dear Friends:We are pleased to present to the entire membership of our NewCracow Friendship Society this book dedicated to the martyrs of theCity of Cracow during the Nazi holocaust.It is the aim of the Society that this should be the beginning ofa memorial book which will contain the names of the martyrs andloved ones of our own families . . . parents, brothers, sisters, husbands,wives and children. When finished it will serve as a living memorial tothem, for at the present there is no marker or monument for themexcept the deep scars on our hearts.I pray that all of former Jews of Cracow, wherever in the worldthey may live at the present, whether members of our Society or not—should join us in making a complete MEMORIAL BOOK a reality inthe very near future.May I at this time express my sincere thanks to all chairmen andtheir Journal Committees and to the literary editors for doing a finejob with devotion and sincerity.As ever, your presidentSTEVEN MORROWiuX&X.k fesf. !r<V>\,AV.VAV.VEfffS..   TJeii? Cracoti Jfiend Ah ip £ccieti/ jfnc.'0^§H^uV»VAWAWwV%VDESTRUCTIONOF THEJEWISH COMMUNITYIN CRACOWROMAN PYTEL, B.A. CracowFOREWORDTo write an essay today of Hitler’s inhumanityto man and of his crimes against the Jews in par-ticular, is to repeat again and again “J’accuse”. Weaccuse you of brutality, violence, cruelty and inhu-man persecution. We accuse you of genocide of anentire people—six million Jews annihilated with-out a trace, their ashes scattered over the earth.However, we cannot let this crime be forgotten.We have to keep remembering it in each genera-tion so that we may guard the world against anotherHitler, so that the tenets of freedom, equality anddemocracy can be upheld in the free world.It is quite clear, if one studies the German docu-ments which are available to us now, that Hitler’splans for the Final Solution of the Jewish problemwere prepared side by side with the plans of aggres-sion against other nations. The execution of theseplans was entrusted to Heydrich, upon Goering’srecommendation. The framework for “final solu-tion” was already set before the outbreak of theSecond World War, but the details were filled induring the course of the war, depending on theprogress that the German conquerors were makingin various parts of the world.The fate of the Polish Jews was determined onSeptember 21st, 1939 in the course of a Berlin con-ference during which Heydrich issued directives tothe S.S. for dealing with the Jewish population.In order to reach the final solution, namely thetotal annihilation of the Jews, many intermittentsteps were devised, like concentration of the Jew-ish population in large urban centers, expellingthem from some territories and resettling them inothers, establishing local Jewish Community Coun-cils as an intermediary between them and the Ger-man authorities and collecting data of Jewish parti-cipation in trade, industry, professions, etc.Heydrich’s directives were very specific, and yetleft enough freedom for the S.S. to perpetrate actsof hooliganism, violence, harrassment and arrests.Danger stalked the streets during the^years of theoccupation.The first stage of the Nazi occupation, namelyfrom September 6, 1939 to the establishment of theghettos in March, 1941, is characterized by denyingthe Jewish population the benefits of Polish economy,isolating the Jewish community from the generalpopulation, and diminishing all the sources of in-come to a bare minimum. The S.S. lawlessly engagesin killing the Jews, plundering their property, dese-crating their synagogues, forbidding religious prac-tices. Films are made of the suffering and humilia-tion of the victims for the amusement of the con-queror and for the glory of the future generations.Some of the laws and regulations are covered witha thin veneer of justice and legality in order tolull the vigilance of the victims and to present afacade of justice to the world. The orders were sup-posed to be “hard but just.”One of the most powerful weapons of destruc-tion is the constant wave of deportations. Thosedeportations undermine the morale of the popula-tion, drain the physical strength of the victims, takeaway the last remnants of material security, androb the Jews of their dignity and last vestige ofhope. Side by side with the resettlement of the popu-lation, their property is being confiscated, lootedand their businesses liquidated. The deportee be-comes a homeless creature, uprooted, dispossessedand desperate. The Jewish community becomes grad-ually impoverished, pushed out of industry, com-merce, trades and professions. Jewish property be-longs to the State. According to Himler’s decree ofNovember 1st, 1939, Trust Councils are formed inorder to take over Jewish houses and establish-ments, in some cases employing the owners at aminimal wage.From the very start of the occupation, the Ger-man authorities introduce forced labor. Civil andmilitary authorities hunt for Jews in the streets(easily recognizable, since they are marked with theStar of David on their arm), forcing them to cleanthe streets, shovel snow, wash German vehicles,clean their homes, barracks and hospitals. They de-rive particular enjoyment from forcing well dressedwomen to perform menial tasks and humiliatingorthodox Jews forcing them to sing and pray anddance in the streets, shaving their beards and ear-locks.The second stage of the German occupation wasthe establishment of ghettos in order to “protect”the Jewish population from the hostile local aryanpopulation, and in order to protect the aryan popu-lations from diseases and epidemics, of which theJews were allegedly the carriers. In this way, theGermans had isolated the Jews, shut them off fromthe outside world and placed them as an easy preyto persecution, deportation and brutal murder.The third and last stage of the occupation werethe Camps. Camps of every possible description andname. Concentration Camps (Konzentrationslager),Forced Labor Camps (Zwangsarbeitslager), Educa-tional Work Camps (Arbeitserziehungslager), Jew-ish Camps (Judenlager), Jewish Workcamps (Ju-denarbeitslager), Community Camps (Gemeinschaft-slager), Prisoner Camps (Polizeigefangenenlager),Civilian Camps (Zivillager), Temporary Camps(Durchganslager), Special Camps (Sonderlager),Jewish Transfer Camps (Judenumsiedlungslager),Jewish Labor Camps (Judenzwangsarebiteslager),Exportation Camps (Ausssiedlungslager), etc.All those names of course signified one and thesame thing, murder by every possible means. Shoot-ing, hanging, drowning, strangling, killing by fire,by water, by cold, by hunger, by disease. There isone word missing in the German files; the name“Annihilation Camp” does not appear anywhere.The Nazis created a new vocabulary with differentmeanings for ordinary words. The gas chamber ofAuschwitz had a sign over its entrance entitled “Bathfor the special treated” (Bad fur Sonderbehandelte),and in the camp in Belzec “Bath and InhalationRoom” (Bad und Inhalationsraume). The Nazis didnot forget the proverbial German cleanliness, so inthe deathcamps there were many signs “Do notforget your soap and towel”. The Concentrationcamp for the inhabitants of Cracow was establishedin Plaszow, and this is the third and final stage ofthe destruction of the Jewish community of Cracowduring the Nazi occupation.THE JEWISH POPULATION OF KRAKOWUNTIL THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THEGHETTO, September 6, 1939—March 21, 1941The German occupation of Krakow began in theearly hours of September 6, 1939. As a result of ageneral evacuation of the occupied territories, noneof the governmental or communal bodies were leftin Krakow to represent the Jewish population.Upon the recommendation of Dr. Klimecki, thethen acting Mayor of the City, a Jewish CommunityCouncil had been established, in order to repre-sent the Jewish community in all matters pertain-ing to Jewish affairs in its dealings with the Germanauthorities. The Chairman of the Council was Dr.Marek Bieberstein, who officiated in the buildingof the Council at Krakowska Street. In the middleof September the Council had been officially ac-knowledged by the German Security Police (Sicher-heitspolizei) and by the German civilian authorities.From then on the Council had been officially named:The Judenrat. A special section of the Gestapo wasdealing with Jewish Affairs. This department con-tributed a lion’s share to the history of Jewishmartyrdom.The fate of the Jewish community of Krakow,similar to the overall fate, of the Jews in the restof Poland, had been predetermined already in theearly days of the occupation.Before the first step toward total annihilation ofthe Polish Jewry was taken by the Germans, namelythe establishment of the ghetto, the Jewish popula-tion of Krakow had to suffer the entire gamut ofhumiliation, persecution, acts of hooliganism andviolence, perpetrated daily by the German oppres-sors. Even before the first transports had left forthe extermination camps of Auschwitz, Belzec, Tre-blinka, the German authorities had followed theirinstructions from Berlin to the letter, and isolatedthe Jewish community from the ary an residentsof the city. This policy had been consistently fol-lowed by the Germans and demonstrated in almostdaily orders which started to appear as early as onthe third day of the occupation.On September 8, 1939, two days after the Ger-mans had entered the city, Klimecki published anorder demanding all the owners of Jewish stores,restaurants, coffee shops, etc., to indicate within 24hours that this was a Jewish property, by displayingthe “Star of David” in a prominent place. Thisidentification made it easier for German officialsto pin-point and “inspect” Jewish businesses and italso facilitated looting and other abuses by Ger-man soldiers.On Sept. 22nd, Jews—and Jews only, but not thePoles,—had been ordered to refill the anti-aircrafttrenches dug in parks (Planty) all over the city.This work had to be done within 24 hours, meaningon Yom-Kippur which in 1939 fell on Saturday,Sept. 23. This way a double blow was dealt tothe Jewish morale: Jews were forced to work onSabbath-Yom Kippur and their degradation belowthe level of the Polish population was officiallydeclared.On September 26th, an order prohibiting ritualslaughter and another instituting forced labor forthe Jewish population were issued. Further restric-tions were published limiting the freedom of move-ment of the Jewish community as well as imposinglimitations on its free choice of residence.An order of December 11, 1939, prohibited theJews from changing their place of domicile or leav-ing their former place of residence without a writtenpermission of the Jewish Council.The Jewish Community Council was required toprovide the German authorities with a daily con-signment of labor force. If, however, the councilfailed to supply the required force, the Germanoppressors would take the matters in their ownhands. Jews were being hunted, captured in thestreets, dragged out of their homes and kidnappedfor hard labor.During the cold winter months, German soldierson foot or in motor vehicles would patrol the streetsof the Jewish sections of the city in search of vic-tims. During these “hunting expeditions” other “at-tractions” accompanied the capture of Jews. TheGermans would shave off their beards, force themto pray out loud, and compell them to do varioushumiliating exercises for their amusement.The Jewish Community Council attempted to es-tablish adequate labor brigades and created a specialfund in order to pay the workers, replacing those whocould not themselves appear for work on certaindays. As a further step to satisfy the demands ofthe Germans, the Council had conducted in No-vember 1939, an overall census of the populationon a racial basis. A whole series of decrees whosemain objective was to undermine the foundation ofthe Jewish economy had been issued.On November 30, 1939, several directives werepublished in the Daily Bulletin, published by theGerman Civilian authorities, announcing the abolish-ing of measures, in effect until then, which allowedthe Jewish community council, certain foundationsand organizational bodies to be exempt from taxes.Among other measures taken by the Germans, whosesole aim was the destruction of the economic sta-bility of the Jewish community, were constant housesearches, inspections of documents, arrests, etc.The ancient Jewish quarter of Kazimierz, wherea large segment of the Jewish population was con-centrated around relics of old synagogues was sub-mitted to an infamous search. This inspection tookplace on December 5, 1939. That day and thenext, the entire quarter was surrounded by theGestapo. All apartment houses were searched, andits residents thoroughly looted. Jewelry, art master-pieces, clothing, and other valuable items weretaken. People were being captured in the streets,forcibly dragged into their homes, searched, hu-miliated, beaten, shot at. Women had to submitto “gynecological” examinations. Many Jews wererounded up in synagogues and beaten and tortureduntil nightfall. The Jewish hospital treated that dayhundreds of wounded, mutilated people. The acti-vities of the Jewish hospital had been greatly cur-tailed and consequently the level of medical aid de-teriorated from day to day.In the first months of German occupation theJewish population of Krakow had been greatly in-creased by a feverish exodus from the neighboringcommunities deported by the Germans or seekingvoluntary refuge in the big city. As a result of thiswave of refugees, the population of Krakow had in-creased from 60,000 to 80,000. These refugeesfound shelter in apartments assigned to them bythe Community Council, and in many cases, thefamily living quarters had been reduced to oneroom for lack of space. Poverty was on the increase,the income from commercial enterprises was prac-tically non-existent since the Germans were takingeverything away, and the Jewish residents wereforced to make a living from selling their personalbelongings. The stealing from Jews and robbing ofJewish property did not cease. The Jewish Commu-nity Council was being inundated daily by demandsfor money, jewelry, furniture and various otheritems of value. An order issued on November 20,1939, which had for its aim to secure “Jewish prop-erty”, required that all accounts, deposits and safedeposit boxes in Jewish names be frozen. Jews wereordered to deposit all their assets in one bank. Theywere not allowed to withdraw more than 250 zlotya month, and were forbidden to carry more than2000 zloty in cash. The Germans were extremelyconsistent in their policy of imposing restrictionson Jewish property, and in this way firstly under-mining its stability and finally destroying it en-tirely. German ingenuity in stealing from the Jewshad no limits. An order issued on July 15, 1942declared that exemption from restrictions on for-eign currency or foreign mail was never intendedto apply to Jews. This was just another cunningruse to steal from the Jewish population. The Ger-mans sapped the vitality of the Jews to its last drop.The Judenrat used to receive exhorbitant billsfrom the German authorities for treating Jewishpatients in city hospitals. Based on this policy, thehospital at Kobierzyn demanded the fantastic sumof 200,000 zloty from the Judenrat, and even re-sorted to suing the Council for that sum.In order to facilitate the supervision of Jewishproperty in greater detail, the German authoritiesordered on January 24, 1940 the overall registra-tion of Jewish property in the entire city. The dead-line for registration was March 1, 1940. Long linesof residents formed outside the offices of the Ger-man civilian administration awaiting their turn toregister, since they feared that if they would missthe deadline, they would be severely punished. In-deed the Germans had announced that all propertywhich remained unregistered by the deadline, wouldbe immediately confiscated by the authorities asbelonging to public domain.As far as food rationing was concerned, the Jew-ish population was greatly discriminated against.Jewish residents received a small bread ration; otheritems like sugar, fat, meat, etc., which were dis-tributed to die aryan residents, were never allottedto the Jewish population.In the domain of labor laws, the regulations gov-erning employment of Jews were extremely strictby comparison with those of the workers of otherfaiths. Jews did not receive work cards, they hadno rights to any benefits or any financial aid in caseof illness; neither were they entitled to any of thecompensation received by war veterans.Following an order issued on September 14, 1940,all legal practice by Jewish lawyers was prohibited,and employment of Jewish lawyers by non-Jewishfirms was forbidden and punishable by immediaterevocation of their legal license.Further restrictions limiting personal freedom ofJewish residents were issued at the beginning of1940. Jews were forbidden to use the railway, andin February, 1940 this order had been expanded toinclude all means of public transportation. In orderto use the railway, Jews were compelled to applyfor special permission. To remove the yellow starwhich they wore on their arm as a sign of recogni-tion was an offense punishable by death. Jewswere allowed to use the tramways only in specialcars reserved for them. Jews were prohibited fromwalking in certain districts of the city.As far as the educational system was concerned,Jews were permitted to attend schools conductedand supervised by the Jewish Community Council.the Judenrat in Krakow, however, failed to openany of the schools, so the Jewish community wasdeprived of any educational facilities during theoccupation. Employment of non-Jewish help byJewish households had been forbidden on Septem-ber 19, 1940.The first mass deportation from Krakow beganin the middle of 1940. There was no official direc-tive ordering the deportation, the Jewish Councilwas notified directly, however, that no more than15,000 Jews would be allowed to remain within theconfines of the city. At that time the population num-bered more than 70,000.On September 15, 1940, Governor Frank madeone of his blunt speeches in which he made refer-ence to the “German City of Krakow,” which mustbe rid of its Jewish character. Jews who wished toremain in the city had to apply for a special per-mission to do so. About 30,000 “Ausweise” hadbeen issued by the authorities. Jews were constantlyrequired to produce their documents for inspection,and were immediately deported for failing to presentthem.Many people left Krakow voluntarily in orderto avoid forced deportations and had settled in theneighboring communities, others were forcibly de-ported to the vicinity of Lublin. Hardly had theJewish residents, who had applied for permits toremain in the city, obtained their documents, whena new blow struck the Jewish community. The Ger-mans had reconsidered, and decided to inspectagain the documents which had just been issued.Long lines of Jewish residents formed again aroundthe building where the German commission wasmaking its selection. Those who were allowed to re-main in the city were given new identity cards(Kennkarte). Those yellow identity cards, whichwere distributed by the Germans in January 1941,were the dream of every Jewish resident, who as-sumed that once permission was granted, the roadto salvation would be wide open.At that time, the Jewish residents were beingforced to clear the city streets from the accumulatedsnow. At the end of every day the German authori-ties would inspect the cards and stamp them with aspecial seal indicating that the bearer had fulfilledthe requirements of forced labor. At the end ofJanuary 1941, whoever failed to show 12 such sealswas in danger of being denied an identity card.The yellow identity card issued to the Jewishresidents who were allowed to remain within theconfines of the city, constituted the first step lead-ing to the establishment of the ghetto.In December, 1940 all the Jewish synagogueshad been plundered by the Germans. Beautifuland priceless seven-armed menorahs, chalices, andother liturgical items of rare value disappeared forever. In March 1941 an order was issued to submitthe keys to the synagogues to the Germans within24 hours. This order sealed the fate of the religiousproperty which had been held sacred by the Jewishcommunity for the past 500 years.The Synagogues changed their designation. Somewere turned into military barracks, others served aswarehouses, etc. The old Jewish cemetery near theSynagogue of Remu, which had been in existencesince 1552 and which had served as a place of restto the greatest Jewish minds, talmudic scholars,rectors of yeshivot, rabbis, gaons, founders of syna-gogues, where the remains of such illustrious familieslike Isserles, Jakubowicz, Bach, Spiro and otherswere laid to rest, was abandoned and then com-pletely demolished by the Germans. The last rem-nants of renaissance tombstones, graves of Jewishluminaries had been desecrated. The synagogue “oifnBergel” where the great Jewish thinker and pro-found Kabbala scholar Natan Spiro used to medi-tate, had been also totally destroyed.IN THE GHETTOMarch 21, 1941—March 13, 1943On March 6, 1941, the worst expectations of theJewish population materialized. On that day a decreeannouncing the establishment of the ghetto in thequarter of Podgorze had been published. The term“ghetto” had not been officially employed at thetime, and usage of the term was prohibited. TheGerman directive claimed that “For health and se-curity reasons it is necessary to isolate the Jewishpopulation of the city in a specially designatedsection where all Jewish residents will be concen-trated.” Jewish residents living within the limitsof the city were compelled to move to their newquarters. Jews were not allowed to reside outsidethe boundaries of that section designated as “Jue-discher Wohnbezirk”. The boundaries of the Jewishsector were clearly defined and the deadline forthe move was set for March 20, 1941.A housing committee set up by the Jewish com-munity council was in charge of allocating livingquarters to the Jewish population which had beendisplaced from its former residence. In principle,Jews moving to the new district were permitted tobring with them to their new domicile all their be-longings, except the furniture which had been requi-sitioned by German tenants. They were also com-pelled to leave the furnishings which could not betransported to the ghetto because of crowded livingconditions. These were left to the “Trustees’ office”for safe keeping. This office was supposed to issuespecial permits to sell the furniture, if so desired.Needless to say that in practice it never materialized.Jews who failed to move by March 20th to theirnew district were threatened with deportation. Thusbegan the feverish exodus. From dawn to lateevening hours the Jewish population of Kazimierz,having lived there for centuries, was on the move,transporting their few possessions to their newhomes by cars, trucks, handcarts, etc. Others wereleaving the city for the neighboring communities.On the day designated as deadline the move hadbeen accomplished.The ghetto contained about 320 apartment houses,where 16,000 people resided in congested condi-tions. German soldiers stood guard at the gatesleading to the ghetto, so that no one could leave itsconfines.Certain factories, stores, as well as the Jewishhospital and the Jewish Council were for a whileoutside the ghetto limits. The hospital was laterestablished in the ghetto at Jozefinska Street whichgreatly encumbered the budget of the Council. Thefinancial expenditure for the hospital was quite un-warranted, since the hospital survived only as longas the ghetto, less than two years.While the ghetto was being established, manypeople moved out to the surrounding communities,hoping to have a better chance of survival. However,the German authorities had decided to increase theterritorial boundaries of the city by including thesurrounding communities. All Jews residing in thesecommunities were required to move into the ghetto.This caused a great influx of population into theghetto. The housing conditions, which were alreadyovercrowded, had become fatally congested.The ghetto was swarming with thousands of thepoor. They lived in shelters provided by the Juden-rat, and were being fed by the Jewish Council. Thecrowded quarters and lack of proper nutrition con-tributed greatly to the decline of health conditionsand created a danger of epidemics. The populationof the ghetto increased to 19,000 people. The wallsof the ghetto, shaped like tombstones separated itfrom the outside world. Four gates led to theghetto. They were at Limanowska, Lwowska, PlacZgody and on the other side of Limanowska. Thegates were guarded by the German police and atvarious points also by the Polish Police. Within theghetto the Jewish police had the distinction of guard-ing the walls. The houses bordering on the ghettowalls and facing the aryan sector of the city hadtheir doors closed and windows brick walled. Atrolley car that passed through Limanowska andLwowska streets did not stop in the ghetto, but thepassengers could look out of the windows and observethe life in the ghetto. The German guards stationedat the gates searched all persons entering or leavingthe ghetto. No Jew was allowed to leave the ghettowithout a special permission, neither was a Gentileallowed into the ghetto.The Jewish Police which had been establishedin the ghetto (Ordnungsdient) had distinguished it-self by its inhumanity towards their coreligionists,and left grim memories of its brutal activities. Inthe beginning, the Polish force was under the super-vision of the Jewish Council but in no time theyrid themselves of the authority of the Judenrat andbecame an independent authority directly respon-sible to the Gestapo.In spite of forced labor, often accompanied byacts of hooliganism, physical cruelty, constantsearches, inspections of documents, arrests, plun-dering of Jewish stores; in spite of the unhealthyhousing conditions, poor nutrition, which deteri-orated daily; in spite of all these hardships, dur-ing the first months of the ghetto, the Jewish resi-dents felt a certain amount of relaxation. Itseemed to them that the immediate danger to whichthey were previously exposed had passed, and thethreat of deportation had been averted.People went daily to their places of employment.Hospitals, old peoples homes and a special Jewishpost office had been established in the ghetto. Secreteducation system flourished. Three synagogues werestill in existence. However this self delusion did notlast very long, and the reign of terror began anew.Kidnapping in the streets, constant inspections, will-ful robberies went on incessantly. In many casesduring these searches, men and women were requiredto undress and were brutally searched by Germansoldiers. These inspections were accompanied byviolence and terrorism. Those who resisted wereshot on the spot. Not a single day passed withoutnew restrictions, brutality and violence. The S.S.lurked in the shadows of the night and attackedpeople returning from work.At this stage of the occupation, the Germans werespending their first winter on the Russian front andwere in dire need of winter clothing. Close to theChristmas holidays the Germans proclaimed in thestreets of the ghetto that all furs in Jewish possessionmust be turned in. Anyone refusing to comply withthis order would be executed. The same day closeto 8,000 furs were collected in the offices of theJewish Community Council.Rumors started to circulate again that the Ger-man authorities were planning to diminish the sizeof the ghetto, and consequently deportations wouldbegin. The rumors proved to be true. One nightthe ghetto was surrounded. Representatives of thespecial section of the Gestapo and of the Ger-man civilian administration were about to deter-mine who would be allowed to remain in theghetto and who would be deported. Residents bear-ing identity cards with the seal of the S.S. Polizei-fuhrer were the lucky ones who were permitted toremain in the city.On June 1, 1942, all those residents who did notpossess,the cards with the proper seals were ledby the Jewish police to Plac Zgody. The squarefilled up with women, children, young and old. Allwere being loaded on trucks. Within few hours theghetto emptied out. However the streets were stillpatroled by the German police cars, an indicationthat the action had not yet been completed. Ger-GHETTOW KRUmiE-TOMOltZUA M-—A—-INI © W SO'** b ‘ :f ;■ r,'. ;■' ' ■■-.■■". • ■ ,' - — -«v-ftft """"ft' 1 - *5 Aft"”"’ 3* ,a*.. ■;%<> i<i. ,t t-ritwi. ■ .,. '":"ft" ; - *'•■ S i;.- ?tf ■ jf ^ ft j| -J £!.. f .;.■■;.V fi^.>■:$Vi-' ’:' ' ;> ^ ^ 'r''v*&: ■' ■ -W{ XY..v'^?-£ ')■ ■•*■ -/ ■■■ '■ ■S; ft" " |*C ft W ft? 4^ . - v ^ . ,^-L, . .. s * . .. £.I * Z Z: 25S.:• ■■ 't±\Wtt:W0S}M0mi9mW§0*&mmSi’iiAi■---' •.. -- ■. -   ftft., ■ ; ^ * «"""•<? -g I^ ■ I■ ft, ■■ HI’’ft^ftft-ftji1 «'■iaHHjgill";i a i:■ ’’ ft :’"• ft::.-']••-ftft;. $ —  ■■WI*iiK?rfd?nyftiiifilin1- . , ■. -,V-’>' •-.. ' .©mi iB Imm3 . i tORDER,dated 3.3*1941.establishingghetto in Cracow.i<4Tman authorities had been dissatisfied with the num-ber of deportees. On June 3rd, the search begananew, identity cards were being checked again, anda new selection began. The following night the de-portation began. People were being kicked, beaten,pushed, shot at, mutilated. The road was coveredwith corpses. Among the deportees was Dr. ArthurRozenzweig and his family, Chairman of the Com-munity Council, who bore the responsibility for notfulfilling the deportation quota.Several women were asked to sit down in car-riages which were brought for this purpose and theGermans were taking pictures to publicize the hu-mane way of treating the Jews. In reality everyonewas rushed at a running pace to Prokocim, wherethey were all loaded into sealed baggage cars—destination East. Those who remained behind, inthe ghetto never believed that their loved oneswere being sent to the annihilation camp in Belzec.When they received news from them from Prokocim,they continued deluding themselves that they werebeing deported to other cities.The Germans were well aware of the fact thatthere were still several thousand people in the ghettowithout identity cards. The Jewish police continuedto patrol the streets. Within a short period of timea new decree had been issued. A new inspection ofidentity cards was being held by the German au-thorities. All the residents of the ghetto, includingthose bearing identity cards stamped with the sealsof the S.S., were required to present themselvesbefore the authorities. A thorough inspection oflabor cards and identity cards was held. Newblue slips, called Blauschein, were attached to theidentity cards. From then on only these cards en-titled the Jewish residents to remain in Krakow.This way many people were again deprived of thepermission to remain in the ghetto and were or-dered to assemble in the courtyard of the Optimafactory at Wegierska Street. They were not per-mitted to take any of their possessions with them.The courtyard had filled up with people. Hungry,thirsty, hot and exhausted, the residents of the ghettowere awaiting their fate. More and more peoplewho were denied permission to remain in the ghettojoined their ranks! Old people, hardly capable ofwalking, patients who had been dragged out oftheir hospital beds, crippled men and women oncrutches, who were being led by others. For twosolid days they remained in the courtyard of thefactory, without food or drink, many of them col-lapsing from exhaustion in the debilitating heat.On Monday, June 8th, the action began. Peoplewere driven through Limanowska, Wielicka to therailway station at Prokocim. There they were loadedonto sealed baggage cars going East. As a result ofthis deportation, the population of the ghetto wasdecreased by 6,000 people.It never occurred to the residents of the ghettothat deportation meant death, since they were com-pletely ignorant of the extermination actions heldin other Jewish communities. They did not believethat their relatives and friends were being sent toBelzec to perish, and they still clung to the straw ofhope that they were being resettled in the East.Following the deportation a wave of suicides oc-curred in the ghetto, and some also tried to escape.The territory of the ghetto had been cut again inaccordance with a decree issued on June 20th, 1942.The south side of Limanowski Street had beensevered from the body of the ghetto, whereas thenorth remained within the ghetto.All residents of the Limanowski, Czarnecki, Bene-dikt, Kragus and Wegierska streets had been givenuntil June 25th to find new living quarters withinthe curtailed area of the ghetto. Due to lack ofspace, residents of these streets were compelled toleave behind them most of their belongings. Thearea of the ghetto was greatly diminished, livingquarters became much more congested. The at-mosphere of despair prevailed among the dwellersof the ghetto. Life became even harder, the freedomof movement more confined, permits to leave theghetto were hardly ever issued, it became more andmore difficult to make a living.The Jewish population, exhausted from malnu-trition, forced labor, constant persecutions, economicimpoverishment, was awaiting in quiet desperationits final fate.Rumors again began to circulate in the ghettoabout further deportations. On October 27, 1942,the entire population of the ghetto was tense withfear, dreading a new action which was about tobegin within 24 hours according to rumors reach-ing them from the aryan side. A feverish search forhiding places began. People were trying to hide incellars, attics, or escape temporarily to friends onthe aryan side of the city until the completion of theaction. The same day a patrol of German SecurityPolice approached the wall of the ghetto and com-pletely surrounded it. A new decree was issued or-dering all the bearers of labor cards to appear nextmorning in the building of the Jewish CommunityCouncil.Since the early hours of the morning, dignitariesof the S.S. and the Gestapo continued to arrive inthe area of the ghetto to take charge of the action.At 10 o’clock in the morning the inspection of docu-ments began at Jozefinska street. The selectionbegan. Blood curdling scenes took place. The Ger-man police started to shoot; the streets were coveredwith corpses. The S.S. were inspecting documents,conducting house to house searches, beating theirvictims unconscious, shooting people. In the hospital,the medical personnel was dragged out into thestreets, and those doctors and nurses who refusedto leave their patients were shot on the spot.In order to increase the number of deportees andto draw out those who have succeeded in hidingthroughout the action, the Germans had declaredthe ghetto “Judenrein”. The ruse was successful,and 2,000 people emerged from their various hid-ing places.In the course of the October action, the peopleresiding in the Old Peoples Home were all brutallymurdered. Another victim of German atrocities wasthe children’s orphanage, various shelters for thepoor. Children were dragged out of the hospital forcontagious diseases and loaded on crowded trucks.The October “selection” was one of the most tragicand bloody actions which took place in the ghetto.Six thousand persons were deported; hundredskilled in the ghetto proper. Blood spattered streets,ransacked apartments, streets strewn with corpses,their close relatives and friends no longer there, thiswas what the residents of the ghetto who returnedfrom work found that evening.Following the bloody deportation of October,rumors began to circulate that the Camp in Plaszow,which was in the process of being built, was in realitydestined for the remnants of the ghetto population.The days of the ghetto were numbered. In Novem-ber another decree had been published diminishingfurther the already decreased territory of the ghetto.The east side of Lwowska street, Dabrowski, JanowaWola were severed from the ghetto.At the beginning of December 1942 a team ofengineers appeared in the ghetto with new plans anddiagrams. It appeared that the ghetto was about tobe divided into two sections: A, and B. As a resultof this division, a new decree was issued orderingall residents with labor cards who resided in ghettoB to move to section A, whereas those unemployedwho lived in sector A, to move to ghetto B. Withina few days, section B emptied out. The congestionin section A became unbearable The gate dividingthe two sections of the ghetto was guarded day andnight and no one was permitted to leave or enterwithout a special permit.Life in the ghetto went on restlessly and fearfully.Dread and fear of the uncertain future permeatedall walks of life. Constant searches were being heldby the S.S. often accompanied by violence and bru-tality. Houses were being raided, people caught inthe streets, dragged from homes regardless of ageand sex, never to be seen again.The year 1943 started on an ominous note. Inaccordance with instructions from Berlin, to furtherisolate the Jews from the general population, thefreedom of movement of the Jewish residents wasfurther restricted. The Jews were prohibited frommoving in the streets which were parallel to the onesin the ary an sector of the city. All stores located inthe streets bordering on the wall were closed down.The liquidation of the ghetto was turning intoreality. It was only a question of time when thefinal chapter of this tragedy would be written.The population of the ghetto was diminishingdaily. Transports were being sent to the camp inPlaszow almost daily.At the beginning of March, Commandant Goethadvised the Community Council that the Jews wouldbe transferred from the Ghetto to Plaszow. OnMarch 13, the residents of section A were orderedto proceed immediately to the camp. The ordercreated a panic. The ghetto had been immediate-ly surrounded by the S.S. and the Jewish Police.Within 3 hours 8,000 persons, all employed, ablebodied men and women from ghetto “A,” were ontheir way to the concentration camps in Plaszow atJerozolimska Street. Thousands of others were shotto death. Once more Jewish corpses were piled upin streets and Jewish blood stained the pavements.No children or minors below 14 years of age werepermitted to be taken to Plaszow.Goeth himself conducted a minute search amongthose who left for Jerozolimska in order to deter-mine whether anyone had smuggled out their chil-dren. All children were sent to the Kinderheim andGoeth had promised the parents that the childrenwere to follow the next day. However, his promisesproved false. The Germans immediately proceededto the liquidation of the Kinderheim at JozefinskaStreet. The children were brought from the home,babies were brought in baskets and carriages andthey were all brutally murdered. All the childemwho were assembled in the square were also merci-lessly killed.The very next day, on March 14, 1943, ghetto“B” was annihilated, its inhabitants killed withoutpity. In these 2 days 2,000 (two thousand) Jewshad been murdered in the ghetto and in addition1,000 had been sent to Auschwitz and exterminated.The Ghetto as such ceased to exist. Only members ofthe Jewish Police, the infamous “Ordnungsdienst”and their families were left in the ghetto to superviseand help with cleaning-up operations. Their reprievedid not last long.During the night of December fourteenth, 1943,an armored patrol of the S.S. under the leadership of Goeth surrounded the building of the JewishPolice. All the members of the Ordnung Diensttogether with their families were loaded into trucksand taken to Camp in Plaszow where they were allkilled. The last victims of the ghetto were theCommander of Jewish Police Simhe Spira and hisfamily, as well as other members of the “Ordnungs-Dienst”, traitors to the Jewish community who hadso “loyally” served the Germans.A few weeks later teams of workers commencedthe final destruction of the ghetto wall. The ghettowas wiped out from the face of the earth.A new chapter of the extermination of the Jewishcommunity was about to begin: The camp in Plas-zow.THE CAMP IN PLASZOWThe camp was situated on the grounds of twoJewish cemeteries. With time, however, as the num-ber of the prisoners increased, the camp expanded,reaching Swoszowicka street in the west, Panska inthe south and Wielicka street on its eastern side.The main gate was facing Jerozolimska Street. Thecamp was surrounded by a double strand of barbedwire, divided by a ditch filled with water. The groundwas rocky, in parts even swampy. Since January1944 the camp was called “Concentration Camp”,until then however it was considered as a camp forforced labor: “Zwangsarbeitslager”.The inhabitants of the ghetto were being graduallytransported into the camp. At the beginning onlyabout a hundred people daily were brought into thecamp. Up to November of 1942 only 2,000 prison-ers were living in the camp. Only with the new meth-ods, introduced by the new commandment of thecamp, Amon Goeth, who had taken over the man-agement of the camp in February 1943, the expan-sion of the camp was facilitated, and at the sametime the liquidation of the ghetto itself had beenspeeded up. The camp has been prepared to absorbnot only the 8,000 Jews brought in from the ghettoon March 13, 1943 but to absorb also Jews fromoutside the city as well.Due to the cruel methods introduced by Goeth,the camp had speedily increased its size; new groundshad been added, in order to house the soldiers, whoguarded the camp, the administration of the camp,which had its own buildings, the estate of the com-mandant, and the residential quarters of the officers.The main gate was closely guarded. Across thestreet from the gate was the telephone exchange,broadcasting from the office of the commandant allannouncements and camp regulations.In order to delude the Jewish population intobelieving that this camp was destined for workonly, it was called at its inception a labor camp.Notwithstanding the various names given to thesecamps, they were all in reality execution camps.Before Goeth appeared in the camp, there wereno instructions or regulations given to the prison-ers. There were no local authorities which theprisoners could approach with concrete problems.All this had changed with the arrival of Goeth. Hewas the one and only authority in the camp. Hemade all the decisions, and had the first and lastword in the selection of prisoners either for life orfor death.LABOR, PENALTIES, TORTURINGOF PRISONERSOne of the most cruel penalties meted out to theprisoners was flogging, after which the prisoner wasplaced in a cell where he could not sit or move—hecould only stand, and stand he did for 12 to 24hours. After this punishment the prisoner sufferedfor weeks from swellings and various aches andpains.Most of the prisoners were employed in thequarry, where the German S.S. in charge, Kehmer,was well known for his brutality toward the prison-ers. Goeth’s main amusement was to watch theprisoners while they were being attacked by hisvicious dogs. Under the slightest provocation, themost inhuman and brutal punishments were metedout to the prisoners.When Goeth’s house had not been completedwithin the time prescribed, he called in the engineerin charge and the worker who was supposed toexecute the order, and commanded them to fighteach other. When they did not slap and hit eachother hard enough, Goeth himself stepped in todemonstrate how this should be done, and he wasnot satisfied until he saw the blood flowingfrom the faces of the prisoners.In the quarry the prisoners were being forced tocarry extremely heavy rocks. After two or threehours of such back breaking labor, they would oftencollapse from sheer exhaustion. The S.S. would thenbeat them, kick them and often kill them outright.Another punishment was flogging. The day afterthe punishment had been administered, the prisonerhad to present himself before the commandant andthank him for meting out the penalty to him. Aftera day of hard labor, prisoners returning to thecamp were required to execute various uselesstasks—moving wood, bricks, stones, rocks from onepart of the camp to another.The list of persecutions and brutality is endless.Women and men were forced into the laboratorieswhere their blood was drawn in large quantities,weakening the already exhausted prisoners evenmore. These operations were performed by “sani-tary” personnel who were also in charge of theselection of prisoners in ill-health, unable to work,and who reported their names to camp authorities.DEATH PENALTY, EXECUTIONSThe constant threat of death and execution didnot hang over the prisoners until the arrival of Goethin the camp. Life was full of hardships even then,but the fear and dread of being shot at, brutallytortured at the S.S. slightest whim did not endangerthem then.As soon as Goeth took over the management ofthe camp, the conditions in the camp had undergonea radical change. The methods employed by Goethwere characterized by completely willful administer-ing of brutal punishment and death. Executions be-came part of the daily routine of the camp. Peoplewere shot for the slightest deviation from camp reg-ulations or even without any reason. There weresome attempts of escape from the camp. However,during Goeth’s administration, anyone who wascaught was immediately executed.It often occurred that after a sleepless night spentdrinking Goeth would appear at 6 o’clock in themorning when the prisoners were about to leavefor work, and would summarily shoot at them, kill-ing people at random.People were being shot at, hanged and mutilatedfor smuggling bread and other food items into thecamp. Flogging of prisoners, selections of womenand children and killing them on the spot by theUkrainian guards or brutal beatings by the S.S. werenormal daily occurrences. The whole camp was re-quired to watch the executions of their fellowprisoners. People were being hanged, and afterhaving been already pronounced dead, would beshot in the back of their heads by Goeth. Unde-sirable witnesses to his violent excesses were killedimmediately under the pretext that they were pre-paring an uprising against the administration of thecamp. After one inspection, which was aimed atthe confiscation of Jewish property, some silvercoins were found in one of the barracks. The prisonerin charge of that block of barracks was immediatelyshot.Often mass executions took place of prisonerswho were being brought into camp from the prisonat Montelupich. These prisoners did not even havea chance to be registered in the camp file. Theywere ordered right away to jump into previouslyprepared ditches and were shot one by one by theS.S. Later the guards would burn the corpses. Forwitnessing, assisting or participating at the executionthe S.S.-men would receive special bonuses andwhisky. One prisoner was discovered to possessPeruvian documents. He was ordered to run. Assoon as he started running, Goeth had his dogschase him. They caught him and started tearing himto pieces. In agony the prisoner fell to the ground.Goeth approached him and shot him.Another day 16 prisoners who were employedin the cable factory were accused of performingacts of sabotage. They were forced to undress andwere all executed. The naked corpses were broughtto the bath-house and buried there.In November 1943, during resettlement of Jewishresidents to Skarzysko, Goeth was on a tour ofinspection in workshops for locksmiths and machin-ists. During his inspection in one of the locksmithworkshops he shot one prisoner. A moment laterhe went to the mechanics workshop and there heselected a prisoner to be sent to Skarzysko. Whenthe prisoner begged him to leave him in camp sincehis family was there, he did not answer but tookout his revolver and shot him on the spot. Anotherincident occurred among the employees of thesteam baths. Two of the prisoners escaped, andGoeth ordered the whole group of 24 men andwomen to be shot.In the first months of the existence of the camp,inmates were often witnesses to the killings of prison-ers who had been brought to the camps from variousprisons. One day a group of twelve prisoners wasshot by Goeth for alleged underground activities inthe ghetto. Among them perished two members ofthe OD (Jewish Police) Leon Kunz and Josef Gold-wachs. Another time Goeth drove into the camp,and noticing a woman washing a car, stopped hiscar and shot her.Executions by hanging were also perpetrated onchildren. One day all the prisoners were ordered toline up in front of barrack number 20 where a gal-low was built. Two children were hanged, fourteenand fifteen years old. When the rope tore under oneof them, Goeth himself made sure that the childshould die and killed him with his revolver.Religious practices were strictly forbidden. Twoprisoners were standing one morning with their phy-lacteries, holding a prayer book, and as soon as theywere noticed by the S.S., they were shot. All theinhabitants of the ghetto who were found in thearea of the ghetto after its liquidation on March 13,1943, were executed on the grounds of the cemeteryin Plaszow.One day six prisoners were accused of preparingan escape. They were employed at the time in thecable factory. The prisoners had been locked up ina cellar by one of the guards, and the next morningbrought into camp where they were immediatelyshot. All the prisoners who contracted contagiousdiseases were immediately executed. Constant selec-tions of people who were in ill-health or old werebeing held in camp. After the selection, these prison-ers were usually led out and shot.SELECTION FOR HEALTH PURPOSESAt the end of April 1944, Goeth received an orderfrom Berlin to receive several hundreds prisonersfrom a Hungarian transport. He agreed to acceptsome of them if he would be allowed to clean upthe camp from the unproductive elements, namelythe old, the sick, the children, and those prisonerswho were in such a state of exhaustion that they wereincapable of performing any hard labor. Goeth wasgiven the power to make the selection. At the sametime he was notified that a transport of prisonersfrom Plaszow should be sent to Auschwitz for ex-termination.On May 7th, 1944 a selection was held in thecamp for so called health purposes. The camp physi-cian, Dr. Blanke, divided all prisoners into twogroups, men and women separately. He then markedtheir registration card with a coded sign, which ofcourse none of the prisoners understood at thetime. A week later, on May 14th, all those indicatedby the camp-doctor were called during camp in-spection. A selection was also made in the camphospital. This transport had 1400 people including286 children. They were all sent to Auschwitz.Children were loaded on trucks. Families weresplit. Some children were in the transport, whiletheir mothers remained in Plaszow. The inhaibtantsof the camp were panic stricken. Prisoners were cry-ing, weeping and mourning for their relatives andfriends. Goeth, who dreaded an uprising, threatenedthe prisoners that whoever would dare leave camp,would be immediately executed.LOOTING OF VALUABLESJewelry and other valuables were confiscated onthe prisoners’ arrival in camp. All the propertytaken from prisoners who had been executed wasdeposited in what was called “Effektenkammer.”Some of the valuables which were found on thebodies of the prisoners who were shot or hangedwere sometimes deposited while still covered withblood. The camp dentist used to pull out gold teethfrom the executed prisoners after they had beenkilled, and deposit them in the Effektenkammer.LIQUIDATION OF THE CAMP IN PLASZOW,RESETTLEMENT OF THE PRISONERSIN OTHER CAMPSTransports of prisoners were being gradually seifrom Plaszow, to other concentration camps inview of the approaching front lines. Two thousandprisoners were sent to Flossburg, others to Ausch-witz, Stutthoff and Gross Rosen. In July 1944 alarge group was sent to Mauthausen. Some prison-ers went to camp in Szebnie, where they lost theirlives.In September 1944 there were only a few hundredinmates left in camp. They were ordered to knockdown the barracks, burn corpses, bury the ashesand do everything possible to erase all traces ofcrimes committed in the camp.By the end of 1944 the concentration camp Plas-zow-Jerozolimska ceased to exist. Amon Goethwas condemned to death and executed by Polishauthorities on Sept. 13, 1946. As one of the crimescommitted by him was listed: his direct and/orMonument errected at the site ofconcentr. camp Cracow-Jerozolimska.indirect responsibility for the murder of eight thou-sand persons, almost all of them Jews, in concentra-tion camp Plaszow from February 1, 1943 till Sept.13, 1944; as another of his crimes was listed hisresponsibility for the murder of 2,000 Jews duringthe liquidation of the ghetto on March 13th and14th, 1943.The Jewish Community in Cracow consisted, be-fore the war, of 65,000 Jews. A registration con-ducted on Nov. 8, 1939 showed an increase to68,500 persons, since Jews from small cities andhamlets situated around Cracow started to moveinto the city. Out of this number, less than 1,000returned to their home-city after the war. A verysmall number of survivors live, dispersed all overthe world, but mostly in Israel and the U.S.A. Morethan 65,000 or over 95% perished in the holocaust.Closeup of the monument plaque.MONUMENTS ERRECTED AT THE SITE OF CONCENTRATION CAMPPLASZOW-JEROZOLIMSKA.Craccu? yrienfahift £ccietif JJhc.fer;:: ♦. :• ;•. * *\^•iWAVAYAvICONCENTRATION CAMPS“JULAG I-II-ffl”(JUden LAGern I-II-III)MAX STEIG, New York City*yx***>:The main Concentration Camp, where the re-mainder of Jews from Cracow had been transferredafter the bloody and merciless total liquidation ofthe ghetto in Cracow on March 13, 1943, was lo-cated on the territory of the New Jewish Cemeteryin the “up-hill” part of Plashow-district of Cracow.There existed, however, in the same district an-other concentration camp called “JULAG I”, locatednear the railroad track in the “down-hill” sectionof Plashow.JULAG I had been created much earlier than thelager (concentration camp) on the hill. The firstbarracks had been built as early as in the middleof 1941, and the Jewish men caught in the suburbsof Cracow and forced to hard labor were under theCommand of NSDAP (German National SocialistWorker’s Party). The men in charge: PELZ, NEU-MAN and ZILL were members of this party.The reason for establishing JULAG I was simple.The old railway between Cracow and Lwow, builtlong before World War I by the then Austrian au-thorities, had only two tracks which were sufficientfor transportation of goods and people in industriallyundeveloped Poland. But Hitler needed enormousquantities of food, timber, coal and oil, which Stalin,his friendly partner in dividing and swallowing upof Poland’s territory, was willing to deliver. How-ever, the small and outdated freight terminal inCracow turned out tp be inadequate. Not only newunloading ramps had to be built, but the number oftracks leading to the terminal, including those onthe railroad bridge over the river Vistula, had to beincreased rapidly.And so a Camp of Jewish labor force had beenestablished, right near the railroad tracks in the“down-hill” part of Plashow.In the beginning the labor force consisted ofJews from suburbs and not from the city proper.However, this situation changed soon since the rap-idly progressing liquidation and extermination ofsmall Jewish communities, villages, hamlets andsettlements around Cracow brought waves of newlabor force. Among them were many young andstrong Jews, originally from Cracow, who were de-nied the permission (“Kennkarte”) to remain in thecity at the time of the establishing of the ghetto andwere forced to emigrate. They found a short re-prieve from their cruel fate in villages and ham-lets located near Cracow. Now, they had beenbrought back to Cracow, but as slave laborers.In addition to the main camp, Julag I, two smallerbranches had been set up near and along the rail-road tracks which led Eastwards from Cracow:Julag II in Prokocim and Julag III in Bierzanow.Both of them were for Jews working at the expan-sion of railroad facilities.On April 15, 1942, several smaller cities whereJews had found their temporary asylum: Slomniki,Skala, Ojcow, Lishki, etc. had been made “Juden-rein”. All the Jews from those villages had beeneither killed on the spot or deported in sealed cattlewagons to gas chambers. Only 750 young men wereselected and brought to Julag I. Also for the firsttime some Jewish women had been brought to thecamp and assigned to kitchen duties or as cleaningwomen to the SS quarters.The number of captive Jews increased eventuallyto about 1800 men and this number had been replen-ished as soon as the original laborers died out or gotkilled. However, the increase in the labor force andthe replacements consisted now of young men fromthe ghetto of Cracow itself since the whole vicinityhad been made “Judenrein” already.In one way or other all laborers in Julag I, II andIII performed some kind of work connected withexpansion of the railway tracks and the freight ter-minal capacity. For this purpose, the workers weredivided into groups and assigned to do the work fordifferent German contractors: Ambi-Schroeder, Klug,Siemens-Bau-Union, Stuag, Mayer-Roeder-Kraus.The whole work was under supervision of Ger-man foremen and masters, most of them mercilesssadists and beasts who drove the Jews without anypity to perform their tough jobs. Beating, kickingand slugging were part of the daily routine. Bleedingvictims who could not make it back to the campsafter 12 or 14 hours of hard work had to be draggedor carried back by their comrades.The work at the tracks had to be performed 6days a week, rain or shine, heat or snow. In thecruel winter of Poland, without proper clothing,since most of them had been caught to work unpre-pared, just the way they were walking in the street,—scores of workers collapsed and died daily.In different stages of its existence Julag I had be-tween 1300-1800 Jewish workers, Julag II had from400-600 and Julag III about 600.Sunday was supposed to be a day of rest aftera whole week of backbreaking work at “Baustellen”—construction sites. But the Lager Commandantand the Jewish camp police, “Ordnungs Dienst” hadalways enough work waiting for the prisoners. Alldirty work around the camp itself: cleaning, wash-ing, moving and rebuilding was, as a rule, done onSundays, and so the prisoners were robbed of theirrest.The food was very poor and not sufficient for thehard physical labor performed by the prisoners. Halfa pound of bread and a plate of watery turnip-soupwas the daily ration for a prisoner. Sometimes theyalso received a little jam. No sugar, no fat, no meat—ever. When any of these items were supposed tobe distributed, they never reached the prisoners but“dried out” in the distributions, stopped effectivelyby the “Ordnungs Dienst”. Death from hunger andexhaustion were regular occurrences.In the beginning, all 3 camps were under the su-pervision of NSDAP. But in a very short time theycame under the direct supervision of SS and thenew commandant was an SS man, OberschaarfeuhrerSepp Mueller from Mossbach, Baden. This newmaster of life and death of the prisoners in all threeJulags was 30 years old, married and father of 2children.His main territory was Julag I where he had hisquarters and where he brought his family. Dependingon his mood whether he was drunk or sober hewould shoot to death Jewish prisoners without rea-son, to enjoy his unlimited power. A Jew whosereddish hair was not to his liking was shot to death.A worker who came back from a day’s work notcleaned up “sufficiently” was shot to death. Thepenalty for escape or even suspicion of intendedescape was a shot in the head.Two young Jewish women who could not standany longer the tension of living among the Poles onfalse aryan documents and who broke down underconstant blackmailing and threats of betrayal by thePoles, come voluntarily to Julag I begging Muellerto take them into the camp. Mueller killed both ofthem on the spot.A young Jewish electrician, Mueller’s favorite,who took care of electric installation in Julag I hadthe misfortune of causing a fire in his workshop. Hewas immediately shot to death by Mueller.To force the Jewish worker to greater efficiencya devil’s plan was conceived. Foremen at construc-tion were asked to point out the “least efficient” orthe “most lazy” Jewish workers. Twenty two victimswere pointed out to Mueller who brought them tothe camp and had them executed, participating per-sonally in the execution.All Jews were supposed to wear armbands withthe “Star of David” as identification. Taking off thearmband was punishable by death. But at the con-struction site the armbands hampered the movementsof the workers, so the order for wearing them wasnot enforced too strictly. Somehow Mueller decidedthat the Jews deserved a lesson, came to the “Ost-bahn”—place and ordered a line up.One of the Jews in the first row did not wear theprescribed armband. Mueller shot him right throughhis heart. The range was so close that the samebullet went not only right through the first victim,but succeeded also in killing another one, who wasstanding in the second row.To Mueller his dog was more important than thelife of a Jew. Once, Mueller entered the room ofthe camp Pharmacist—Otto Hofstetter. His dog at-Mrs. Hofstetter (Pola) who in self-defense kickedthe animal. Mueller ordered the immediate killingof both Pola and Otto, although Otto was his favoriteman, who attended to many of Mueller’s affairs, andsaw to it that Mueller always had plenty of moneyin his pockets.Not far from Julag I were located the barracks ofGerman construction company “KLUG.” Jews whoworked for this company did not go back to thecamp every night, but slept in their quarters in thebarracks,—also preparing their meals there. How-ever, when a fire broke out, Mueller ordered allJewish workers at “Klug” killed, including elevenJewish women belonging to the group.The camp was surrounded by a double fence ofbarbed wire and guarded from the outside byUkrainians, Latvians and Tartars. All of them werebrutal, sadistic and specialyl trained to treat theJews with greatest cruelty possible. They used toenter the barracks at night, rob whatever possibleand pull Jewish women outside of the camp, wherethey first raped and then killed them.JEWISH POLICE (“Ordnungs Dienst”—“O.D.”)As compared to other camps and considering theinhuman working and living conditions, the rela-tionship between the Jewish prisoners themselveswas decent. There had been no informers; no Jew-ish worker denounced another one before the Ger-man masters. There was, however, one whole groupof Jews, who constituted an infamous exception. Itwas the Jewish Police,—“Ordnungs-Dienst” (O.D.),who were the rulers over the Jewish workers insideof the Camps.The German masters created this institution, al-legedly, to keep order in the Jewish community.But no decent or educated Jew wanted to serve theGermans as an instrument of oppression against hisown people. With very few exceptions the Jews whoapplied for this kind of job were of the lowest quality,uneducated and poor. The sudden surge of power,the money they c^uld rob or extort from other Jews,the complete immunity against any complaint placedagainst them with the German authorities and theimpossibility of even placing such a complaint wentto their heads and they abused their position to theutmost. Their sadism, beating and mistreating oftheir fellow-Jews was on the level with their Germanmasters. “Do-or-Die” was their rule of handlingother Jews. Whatever human feelings they ever had,disappeared rapidly with the increase of their power.With very few exceptions the O.D.-men were thedarkest page in the history of all Jewish concentra-tion camps. A prisoner who could not pay off anO.D.-man could expect no pity.The most valuable possession a prisoner had—and only few had it still—was his jacket and hiscoat to protect himself from the bitter cold ofwinters in Poland. But in the sumer, while goingto work they had to leave this life-saver in thecamp. In summer 1943, right after the typhoid epi-demic, the members of O.D.-men decided to takeaway all the jackets and coats and put them allegedly“into storage”. They did so while all the prisonerswere at work. All the garments were immediatelyripped at shoulder-seams in search for money, pos-sibly hidden there by their owners. When in October1943 Julag I and II were liquidated completely andthe Jews transferred to an ammunition factory inSkarzysko-Kamienna, they faced the cruel winterwithout coats or jackets. Over one thousand diedin four months.JULAG II—in PROKOCIMJulag II was the first one to be liquidated. Muellerdesignated his subordinate Kuenlein as the com-mander of this camp. Following his chief’s examplehe killed and tortured many Jews.In the summer of 1943 the epidemic of typhoiderupted also in this camp. Afraid that Mueller wouldannihilate all the inmates to avoid spreading of theepidemic, the Jewish physicians: Dr. Edmund Gold-stein, Nuessenfeld, Gumplewicz, etc. did not reportthe truth to Mueller.At the same time a letter, written by this wholegroup of physicians, addressed to the Jewish Organ-ization in Switzerland, asking for help in emigratingfrom Poland, was caught by the Gestapo and givento Mueller. Mueller acted fast. He killed all theJewish physicians and many of the sick. Julag II wasliquidated and the survivors brought to Julag I toreplace the men who died there during the typhoidepidemic.JULAG III—in BIERZANOWThe man placed by Mueller in charge of the Campwas SS-man Ritchek, a 22 year old degenerate. Theunlimited authority given to him went to his head.To flog, mutilate or to kill a Jew was to him an actof glory for the Vaterland. Under the pretext ofpreventing a prisoner from escaping he divided allthe prisoners in groups of five. If one escaped, theothers were shot to death. Since nobody knew towhich “five” he belonged, everybody watched every-body else to prevent his escape. Every few daysRitchek transferred all inmates of a barrack to an-other one, not letting them take their belongingswith them. They reached the bottom of pauperisa-tion almost immediately. Ritchek’s greatest pleasurewas flogging the victims in public and hanging themin public. To this “feast” he used to invite hisfriends and their wives from the City.The Jewish representative in this Camp was Dr.Leopold Lipschitz, a highly educated jurist, a manof great character and wonderful personality, a for-mer member of the Jewish Zionist Organization“Akiba”. Under his leadership the conditions inJulag III had been much better than in otherCamps. Somehow he became a favorite of Muellerand had used his influence and position to facilitatethe survival of Jewish compatriots. He was laterkilled by Ritchek.Julag III was liquiated November 15, 1943, atthe same time as Julag I. The survivors were sent toconcentration camp in Skarzysko-Kamienna.TYPHOID EPIDEMICIn summer 1943 an epidemic of typhoid fevererupted in the Julags. In the beginning Mueller usedto shoot to death all sick Jews to prevent spreadingof the sickness. But the plague of lice could not bestopped so the epidemic continued. Finally Muellerrealized, that he would have to kill all the inmatesand by liquidating the camps lose his own job andthe almighty position. He would probably be sentto the front lines in Russia. So he left the care ofthe sick to Jewish physicians: Dr. Mietek (Marvin)Margulies and Dr. Leo Kurtz. These two men savedas many prisoners as possible. But Dr. Kurtz suc-sumbed to the epidemic himself and died in thecamp.WOMEN AND CHILDRENFirst women were taken into the camp in June1942, when small Jewish communities near Cracowhad been wiped out. They did their hard work inthe kitchen, cooking for the prisoners. They hadalso to serve as cleaning women in the SS andCamp-guard barracks. They were very decent andtried to help the starving prisoners, whenever pos-sible. Officially no children were permitted in theJulags. Somehow, however, their mothers succeededin hiding them. There were about 25 children, whohad to be kept out of Mueller’s way.On Nov. 15, 1943, during the liquidation ofJulag I and III, all the children were brought uphill,to the main lager at Jerozolimska, and killed.EPILOGUEMueller escaped the Polish Authorities, but hehas been tried and sentenced by a German court inMossbach, Baden, on April 21, 1961, to life inprison. He has been found guilty of: 22 cases ofproven direct murder, 58 cases of orders to murder,5 cases as a murder accomplice and 4 cases of strik-ing to death (Totschlag).All traces of the 3 camps have been wiped out.There are no visible signs where they were located.There was no specific place to bury the dead andthe killed. They were buried all over the camp andin most cases just dumped into the swamps near thecamp.At the site of Julag I there are now some industrialbuildings. Some bones and skeletons discovered dur-ing construction have been buried in one commongrave.There are no historical documents related to theJulags outside of the hardly accessible protocols ofthe trial in Mossbach. This article is probably theonly “YISKOR” for the Julags and is based onpersonal experience, some testimonies recorded inYad W’Shem, Tel-Aviv branch, and memories of ahandful of other survivors now living in New YorkCity.RESISTANCE MOVEMENTIN KRAKOWMOSHE SINGER, Beth Yehochua, IsraelDuring the first two years of the Nazi occupationthe Germans had indeed succeeded, by means of theirpropaganda tactics directed at confusing the Jewishcommunity, to force it into a complete lethargicstupor and inactivity.The Germans had first entrapped the Jews withinthe confines of ghettos; had gradually persecutedand terrorized them into total inaction and then de-ported them to labor camps and gas chambers.Only in 1941, when the Jewish population be-came finally aware of the evil plans for its extermi-nation, the organized resistance movement was in-tensified. Thanks to this movement, which had beenresponsible for uprisings in the ghettoes of Warsaw,Krakow, Bendzin etc., the honor of the Jewish peo-ple has been saved and the heroism of its fightersconstitutes a glorious chapter of human resistanceagainst oppression.1. SPIRITUAL SOURCES OF THERESISTANCE.From the perspective of twenty-five years, a sear-ing question probes our minds: from what unknown,hidden sources did the handful of Jewish youths delveinto their spiritual strength to resist, with practicallybare hands, the nazi oppressor at the height of hismilitary might?In the issue of Hechalutz Halochem of August13, 1943, which was the official paper of the JewishFighters Organization in Krakow, edited in Polishby Szymek Dranger, member of the Executive Boardof Akiba, the names of all the members of theFighters Organization who had fallen in their strug-gle against the Germans, were published. Close toseventy names including two “families” appear inthis memorial issue. The lion’s share of them belong-ed to the Youth Movement Akiba which, under theleadership of Aharon Liebeskind and Shimon Drang-er, was the leading spirit among the Jewish youthmovements of Krakow before the outbreak of thewar as well as during the years of the occupation.However, among the names appear members of otherfighting organizations as well; Dror, under the leader-ship of Abraham Leibowicz, Hashomer Hatzair,Hashomer Hadati, Hatzofe and Histradruth HanoarHechalutzi under leadership of Maniek Eisenstein.There was also another splinter movement, smallerin number, which was sponsored by the Polish LaborParty (PPR-communist) whose leading spirit wasHeshek Bauminger and Gola Mire. From the dataindicated in the letter addressed to Dr. Bauminger(brother of Heshek B) by one of the surviving mem-bers of that group, Shlomo Shine, this organiza-tion was comprised of about twenty members. Ifwe take into account that in August 1943 therewere still some survivors among the fighters whohave not been mentioned in this memorial issue ofHechalutz Halochem as having fallen in battle, thenthe Jewish Fighters Organization in Krakow num-bered about 150-160 members.This was a handful of isolated, almost homelesspeople, deprived of all human and civil rights, sur-rounded by an unfriendly population, without anyoutside help, cut off from the rest of the world, un-armed, without any strategic base, and without anyexperience whether in the field of conspiracy or inthe military.This feeling of isolation and loneliness was ex-pressed by Szymek Dranger in the organ of theorganization Hechalutz Halochem: “No one hadextended a helping hand to the doomed Jews, orhad attempted to aid them in order to facilitate theirescape from certain extermination. Even the hatredof the Germans on the part of the Polish popula-lation disappeared when it concerned giving aid toJews. Only very few retained the spark of humanityand even those were afraid to demonstrate it pub-licly. The truth of our isolation has been demon-strated again and again, and we will carry its tragicconsequences to the last day of our lives.” Theheroic wife of Szymek Dranger, Gusta, expressedthis feeling in very strong terms in her “Diaries”written in prison at the beginning of 1943. “The Jew-ish fighters had to operate outside the ghetto walls,in spite of the fact that if caught outside, the offensewas punishable by death. It was often easy to evadethe German pursuers, but it was unavoidable tooverhear unpleasant conversations about Jews. Oneheard scraps of conversation of the kind that ‘it wasa good thing that Jews were being persecuted; thatit was high time to do something about them; thatthey rightly deserved the punishment meted out tothem; that they often escaped—but luckily most ofthe time were being caught’. Vile slander, base lies,and the expression of animal pleasure on the facesof the slanderers at the fact that thousands of women,children and old people were being slaughtered daily.Like vultures hovering over corpses, they were lyingin wait, anticipating the plunder of Jewish property.While these whispers were going on, a man wassitting in the corner of the railroad car, someone whohad just been orphaned, or had just lost his wife andchildren, and he dared not move a muscle in his facefor fear of being discovered. Inside his blood wasboiling, but outwardly his face was a mask of stone,and woe unto him who let any emotion register inhis face or eyes.”It was no accident that next to the names of thefighters who had fallen in battle, Szymek indicatedtheir organizational affiliation. The fact is that amongthe fighting organizations both in Krakow and War-saw most of the participants were members ofyouth movements. Until the beginning of mass de-portations, most of the fighters were still livingwith their families. On Saturdays they would as-semble with the members of their respective move-ments in meetings where they would find intellectualsolace and spiritual sustenance. In some cases theylived on a collective farm established by the variousyouth organizations.In the middle of 1942 mass deportations hadliquidated most of the Jews and the fighterscould no longer stay with their families, but had tofind living quarters throughout the city. There wasno party competition among the various fightingorganizations. On the contrary, a spirit of coopera-tion carved by common fate and brotherhood pre-vailed among the fighters of different affiliations.The leading role in the overall resistance movementwas held by Akiba, which was the oldest youthmovement in Krakow. The organization had beenfounded in the 1920’s by students of Jewish highschools. They called themselves AKIBA after RabbiAkiba, the great scholar of the Mishna, who in hisown personality symbolized the supreme sacrificefor the sake of Judaism, and the spirit of the Jewishrebellion during the Bar Kochba uprising againstthe Roman Emperor Hadrian. His immortal words“Love thy neighbor as thyself” were also the mottoof the movement, and his ideas of armed resistanceagainst oppression had been adopted as their guide-lines.Long before the uprising took place in the Warsawghetto, the Jewish Fighters Organization in Krakowhad organized acts of sabotage, attacks and armedresistance against the Germans on a large scale.Hela Shipper-Rufeisen, a member of Akiba, writesin her memoirs: “We accepted without a murmurand without any feeling of humiliation the Germandecree that every Jew was forced to wear a whiteband with a blue Magen David on his arm. We boreproudly the symbol of our Jewish identity, and werenot ashamed of our heritage. Unfortunately, veryoften we had to remove the band in order to survive.”2. SPECIFIC DIFFICULTIES ENCOUNTEREDBY THE JEWISH RESISTANCEThe conspiratorial activity required free mobilityon the part of the members of the Resistance in theghetto as well as on the outside. The Gentiles whowere engaged in this kind of work had only to hidetheir activities, but the Jews were compelled tochange their appearance, their customs, their speech,their mentality and their place of employment. Thiscreated technical as well as psychological difficulties.Gusta Dranger Davidson writes in her “Diaries”:“How can they, who for years have been proud oftheir heritage; who have proudly resisted any at-tempt of slander against the cherished traditions ofJudaism; they who have given their youth to theirpeople and who saw in the rebirth of the Jewishpeople their whole raison d’etre, how can they, ifeven for a fleeting moment, deny their identity andcowardly hide their origins? But this was a necessitywithout which no one could survive.” The Jewish re-sistance fighters, who changed their appearance in or-der to be considered as Poles, carried with them ar-yan documents issued on false names. Since they wereafraid that on the basis of these documents, if founddead, they would be buried as aryans—they had sewninto their clothing small notes with their real names.Such was the case with Abraham Leibowicz (Laban-Romek), the representative of “Dror,” one of theleaders of the Command of the Resistance. He hadsewn into his vest his real name and his date ofbirth and indicated on it “I am a Jew.” GustaDranger’s brother, David, who had been employedat the time in the steam bath of the camp in Plas-zow, had found that piece of paper in Laban’s vest,all covered with blood, after Laban had been shot bythe Germans.The Polish Press was far from being sympatheticto the Jews. As a matter of fact it went to greatlengths in order to hide from the Polish populationthe truth about Jewish heroism. On April 29, 1943,women who had been held until then in prison atHeclow 30 Street were being led to the camp inPlaszow for execution. Among the prisoners wereGusta Dranger and Gola Mire. They decided toescape. Gusta succeeded in eluding her German pur-suers. Most of the women, however, were shot andkilled while fleeing. The Polish press failed to reportthat the women were Jewish.TECHNICAL LABORATORYPresence of mind and arrogance were not enoughto hide one’s true identity. That was an era ofdocuments, official seals, permits, etc. One wpsunable to leave one’s home without carrying all thenecessary papers. “And if one happened to be Jew-ish,” writes Gusta, “one had to carry with him abatch of documents proving that one was not Jew-ish.” From day to day the regulations changed. Newdocuments were required, new seals had to be ob-tained from the German authorities in order tovalidate the documents required for identification.Shimshon Dranger was responsible for the supplyof necessary papers to the members of the FightersOrganization, without which one could not functionwith any measure of freedom. Szymon Dranger(Marek) had organized and administered the techni-cal office for forged documents in order to facilitatefree mobility for the members of the organization.His chief assistant was Idek Tenenbaum, who wasknown under the pseudonym of Czesiek. Idek Ten-nenbaum, according to Gusta’s reminiscences, wasliked by all, was well known for his wit, and hadcontacts in various official circles. He had enjoyedthe confidence of people employed by the variousdepartments of the government. He had acquaint-ances in the labor offices, police precincts, andeverywhere was considered as an intimate. He wasgreat friends with the policemen, and everyone wasgrateful to him for something he had done forthem. Idek exploited his popularity in the officialcircles for the benefit of the cause. He never hesi-tated to act. He would enter one of the governmentoffices, would nonchalantly greet one of his ac-quaintances, and with his other hand would appropri-ate documents, forms, questionnaires—even officialstamps. Exploiting his acquaintance among the em-ployees of the civil service, he was able to purchasecertain articles and chemicals which were inacces-sible to the civilian population.Szymek Dranger, an amateur typesetter and drafts-man, knew how to exploit every little bit of Idek’sbooty and put it to practical use. In a very shorttime the technical office was operating at full speed.The documents were so expertly forged that eventhe Germans themselves could not detect any irregu-larities. The technical laboratory partly financed thebudget of the Jewish Fighters Organization by sup-plying forged documents outside the ghetto walls.All this work was being executed in quite in-credible conditions. They had no office, no placeto work. It was a wandering operation. “At thestart,” writes Gusta, “he carried his entire opera-tion in his pockets. When something had to bedone, one had to look for an empty room. Once aroom was found, Szymek would spread out his en-tire office on a table and would function until suchtime when steps would be heard on the staircase.Then he would hide his entire activity in his pocketsagain. As soon as this operation had expanded, andhis pockets could no longer contain it, he had toresort to the use of a briefcase. He would officiatein various places depending on the availability ofempty quarters. This wandering office symbolizedthe activities of the Jewish Fighters Organization,which had been created from a vacuum and had ac-complished a great deal through its strong will andperseverance. In time the briefcase could not containall the documents, and one had to follow Szymekwith briefcases, boxes, typewriter. Every morningthis entire caravan had to start wandering again inorder to find a place of work.” The danger ofworking under these circumstances was great bothto Szymek as well as to the people for whom thedocuments were being prepared. They had to finda niche for this office, a good hiding place, and liveon its premises. This assignment was entrusted toGusta Dranger who in the early Fall of 1942 foundan apartment in Makow, where they resided underaryan names. None of the neighbors ever suspectedthat in the intimately furnished apartment the en-tire apparatus of the technical office had been lo-cated.Within twenty minutes walk from them an apart-ment was found for Hanusa Blass (who was shot inApril 1943), who served as liaison between thetechnical office and the city. She would pick up thematerial from Szymek and travel to Krakow by busdisguised as a peasant going to the market withbaskets of eggs, apples and mushrooms.CONSPIRACYThe Jewish Fighters Organization was made upentirely of members of youth movements. They allknew each other, had complete confidence in eachother, and knew that each one of them would ratherperish than inform on his comrades. That was thereason why the necessity for conspiracy was so diffi-cult for them to accept. All plans for future acti-vities were being determined collectively, and everyone of the members of the organization was wellaware of what was being planned ahead. Despitethese feelings they had slowly come to realize thatconspiracy was a necessity.The names of all the fighters were well knownto the general population of the ghetto. “In whispers,”writes Gusta, “the rumors of the activities of theresistance would circulate from one home to thenext. The population of the ghetto felt nothing butawe and respect for what the fighters were trying toaccomplish, but there was also the danger that thenames of the fighters might reach the ears of theJewish police and other undesirable elements. Thenecessity to move the operations of the resistanceaway from the ghetto to the aryan sector of the cityh&d been recognized. It was high time to do it.”Apartments were found in the aryan part of thecity. Idek Tenenbaum found living quarters in theGerman section of Krakow which he shared withLaban (here is where Idek and Dolek Liebeskindwere killed in battle with the Germans following theaction which took place during Christmas of 1942).PREPARATIONS FOR ARMED RESISTANCEIn August 1942, the command of the resistancebecame aware of the necessity for armed struggleagainst the German oppressors. However, the re-sistance fighters were not yet ready. “All the fight-ers were educators, they were teachers and leadersof youth movements, but their leadership had aspiritual character. They could instill in the Jewishyouth their own ideals and serve as an example ofreadiness, perseverance and willingness for a su-preme sacrifice for the sake of the Jewish people,but they were not military men. Nothing in theirpast had prepared them for this function, and theywere in no way ready to lead others in this armedstruggle. They were willing to serve in the ranksthemselves, but they needed a leader to commandthem—someone with great military experience whowould know what to do and how to act in time ofemergency. They hoped to find this military experi-ence, as well as the weapons necessary for armedresistance, in the ranks of the Polish underground.However, the Polish underground was not ready forarmed resistance as yet. It was their opinion thatnothing could be accomplished by responding toterror with acts of violence. They wanted to gatherstrength and await the results of the war beingwaged on various fronts. They wanted to wait fora propitious moment created by favorable inter-national development. They were not threatenedby extermination and had time to wait. Certain circlesin the Polish underground, probably those who werelinked to the Polish Government in Exile in London,offered to hide the Jewish fighters until such mo-ment when they would be able to strike but theyfailed to offer arms and military aid.The next step attempted by the Jewish Resist-ance was to approach the PPR (Polish CommunistParty), in whose ranks many Jews were loyallyworking before the outbreak of the war. They wereconvinced that the PPR would offer its undergroundexperience as well as arms to the Jewish FightersOrganization. A contact had been established withthe PPR through Gola Mire and Heshek Bauminger.Gola was very active in the Party before the War.She was a member of the Party Council of Lwow,was convicted by Polish courts for underground com-munist activity and sentenced to 15 years. She hadthe soul of a poet, indeed wrote poetry, and had amagnetic personality. She had very good relationswith the leadership of AKIBA and was trying toincorporate the Jewish Fighters Organization intothe framework of the PPR. However, no agreementwas reached since the PPR demanded individual af-filiation and not collective collaboration of inde-pendent Zionist groups of the Jewish Resistance. Thereal reason, however, was that the PPR, like theother Polish underground organizations, was alsobiding its time for a suitable moment to strike, andonly the Jewish element within the party was forcedto, and expressed its willingness, to act immediately.Gola was still hoping that at least the PPR wouldhelp the Jewish Fighters with provision of arms. In-deed the first five revolvers had been acquired withthe help of the Party; the rest of the arms were ac-quired by attacking and killing German soldiers andconfiscating their weapons.EXIT TO THE FORESTSThe Jewish Resistance Movement approachedthe PPR, asking them for aid in establishing con-tacts with the Polish Partisans in the forests. Theythemselves would provide the fighters and theequipment. In September 1942, the first group offive fighters; Zyga Mahler, Edwin Weiss, BenekWechsner, Salo Kanal and Milek Gottlieb left for theforests of Niepolomice.The boys who were trained by the PPR were leftto their own devices by the Polish guide of thePPR as soon as they reached the forest. The anti-cipated contact with the partisan group failed tomaterialize. They were wandering around the forestunable to perceive the truth that they had indeedbeen deceived. Their supplies dwindled, and theydid not know whether to return to the city or re-main in the forest. In the meantime they had beennoticed by the neighboring peasants who immediatelynotified the German authorities that 300 fighterswere hiding in the forest planning an armed attack.The German forces surrounded the forest shootingin all directions. The boys decided to send one ofthem, Edwin Weiss, to report on the situation tothe command of the Resistance in Krakow andawait instructions. Edwin delivered his report tothe utter dismay and shock of the command, whohad realized the terrible disloyalty of the PPR. Theyinstructed the boys to abandon the forest and go tothe nearest village and await instructions.Completely disillusioned, they reached the sadconclusion that they could not count on anyone forsupport, and that they were standing completelyalone. They had not abandoned their hopes forarmed resistance in the forests. A group of fourfighters, (Benek Weksner, Jehuda Schmerlowitz,Zyga Mahler and Salo Kanal-Adas) were dispatchedto the forest in the vicinity of Debica to preparethe terrain for future operations of the Resistance.After every armed action the fighters had to leavethe forest and remain a couple of weeks in thecity. Who can evaluate the tremendous effort, dan-ger, courage and presence of mind in executing thisplan? They were four men, and had two revolversbetween them. That was their armed equipment.When their food supplies began to dwindle, two ofthem would go into the village. One of these expe-ditions ended in a tragedy. Benek Weksner andIdek Szmerlowich were surprised by two policemenaccompanied by a forestier. Benek, who succeededin pulling his revolver out of his boots, shot thetwo policemen; if Idek had another revolver hecould have killed the armed forestier. But the otherrevolver was left with their comrades in the forest.Both young fighters were killed. Their comrades inthe forest waited for them all night long. Finally,they found out what had happened. They hadto notify the command. They returned to Krakow.They paid dearly with the lives of their friends fortheir inexperience. From then on they knew thatwhoever goes into battle must have his own arms.ACTIVITIES OF THE RESISTANCEAmong the members of the Fighting Organizationwho had fallen in battle listed in the memorial issueof Hechalutz Halochem of August 1943, three morevictims of the groups fighting in the forest are men-tioned. They are: Milek Gottlieb, Edwin Weiss, bothfrom Akiba, and Chaim Sternlicht from HistadruthHechalutzi. The fiasco of the partisan activities con-vinced the Jewish Resistance Movement to changeits tactics and to move the center of armed resistanceto Krakow itself, which served as official seat of theGerman authorities. In Krakow they could operatesimultaneously in several places and operate withsmall groups of fighters. The awakening of unrest inthe capital would have a strong echo among thepopulation outside the confines of the city.The leadership had decided on an immediatestart of armed activities, rather than wait until Spring,at which time the partisan activities in the forestcould perhaps be renewed according to the opinionheld by some members of the Resistance. But theywere facing death daily. No one knew whether theywould succeed in escaping. Where was the cer-tainty that they would indeed survive until Spring?They had to act now.Every fighter had a clearly defined area of ac-tivity assigned to him, be it liaison work, 'technicalwork, or attacks on German soldiers or destructionof German installations. Some of the fighters had todeal with informers within the confines of theghetto. But the main objective of the resistance wasindividual terror against German soldiers, and con-fiscation of their weapons. The fighters were activein many sections of the city, lying in ambush, lurk-ing in dark corners, behind house gates and, when-ever possible they would suddenly emerge from thedark, attack, attain their objective, and disappearagain in the hustle and bustle of the teeming city.The excitement of battle seared their souls. Aftera successful attack they would stay up all night re-living the excitement of the action.After each operation the city was combed bythe Germans in house to house searches and in-spections looking for the perpetrators of the action.The German authorities would not admit that theseactions were committed by Jews. After each incidentthey circulated rumors that the respective soldier orofficer was killed by unknown attackers, or elsethat he took his own life.On the other hand the Germans had taken stepsto increase security measures. Curfew hour wasmoved up, the city was being patroled more fre-quently and inspections and searches of people andapartments were daily occurrences. Hostages wereconstantly caught and arrested in order to tie thehands of the fighters.The apartment at Jozefinska Street served as themain base of operations. The apartment belonged toSzymek Lustgarten, one of the youngest membersof AKIBA. After the deportation action of October1942, some of the fighters lived there and many ofthe leaders also used to frequent it. The intensity ofarmed resistance and the frequent searches on thepart of the authorities forced the organization toliquidate this base of operations whose residentswere well known to the population of the ghetto.On the eve of closing down the apartment, thefighters spent the night in various sections of theghetto, Wuska, Dolek’s wife, in one place, andDolek and Laban together. They paid dearly forthis carelessness.On the night of November 25, 1942 the apartmentof Dolek’s parents, where both Dolek and Labanwere staying, was surrounded by the militia led byArthur Loeffier, who had been suspected of inform-ing on the fighters of the resistance. He told Dolek,that his wife had been taken as a hostage by thepolice. Dolek expressed his willingness to followthem on the condition that his wife would be re-leased. Loeffier promised to release her. Whiledressing Dolek succeeded in taking a revolver withhim. On the way to the police station, disbelievingLoeffler’s promise to release Wuska, he decided toescape. His attempt was successful and he escapedfrom the ghetto.Jcmfpnutj - fttnfifitclben * funhfpLdjl^iintinrwrJyTtetfjc.'SirikwnofinfPftmfct:w—mmamm* W Lz"r—r*-xr*'rr— ■ icnT0|fcvrrd)kysr—■>- II ‘ 1BtfSttertmIMkurtfi-3 Kk,♦ BERLIN NUE 236 703 2b.12.42 1425 *HI«AN SS-08ERGRUFPCNFUEHRER U 0 L F F -FUEHRERHAUPTQUARTIER.~»BE I DER UEBERHOLUNG EINES DURCH ANHALTENDE VERHEHMUNG  IyOES JUOEN ABRAHAM L E I B 0 W I C 2 BEKAMNT GEWQROENEN mC..-31TERROR ISTEM-SCHLUPFWINKELS IN KRAKAU AH 24.12.42 ABENDS.| WUROEN DI£,fN DEM SCHLUPFWINKEL ANGETROFFENEM JUDEN LADOLF Ly\ £ 9 E S K I N D. GEB. 3.10.1912 IN ZABICRZOW.KREIS KRAKAil, WQHNH. KRAKAU. GHETTO. LIMANOWSKI EGONR. 9/10. UHD JUDA T \A\ N E N B A U H, GEB. 16.0.1920"IN KRAKAU. LED. WOHNH ./kflAKAU, GHETTO. KRAXUSA 20.717, *rNACH HEFTIGEM KUGELWECHSEL ERSCHOSSEN. DER SCHLUPFWINKL.BEFAND SICH IH KELLEPRAUM EINES NUR VON RE ICHSBAHNBEAMTENBEWOHNTEN GEBAEUDES. DIE ALS POLEN MIT FALSCHEN ~|"KENNKARTEN GETARNTEN JUDEN SIND VON DEM FOLNISCHEMHAUSMEISTER GEGEN HOMES ENTGELT IN DAS GEGAEUDEiI E I r.’GESCHMUGGELT L'ND CORT IN DEM WOHNLICH HERGERICHTETEN| SCHLUPFWIKKEL VERSTECKT GEHALTEN WORDEN. IN DEM VERSTECKIwURDEN S I CHERGESTELLT ;—| j-H-l-J 1 l—l L^L— I 1 ! i ..1 MAUSER PISTOLE NR. 102090. KALIBER 7.65 HM -1 FN. PISTOLE ORIG. NR. 201999. KALIBER ?.£S MM -*1 VIS P0LN. ARMCEPISTOLE NR. 19063. KALIBER 9 MM -45 PI STOLEN-PATRONEN. KALIBER 7.65 MM -RAD 10APPARAT - 1 SCHREIBMASCHINE -1 VERYIELFAELTIGUNGSAPPARAT« FLACHDRUCKER. GREIF-|. 200 DOLLAR - 10 540 ZLOTY - JE 2 AUS EINER MUETZE UND(EINEM MANTEL 6ESTEHENDE UN IFORNSTUECKE FUER EINEN.I P0LNISCHEN POL IZEIBEAMTEN UND EINEN RE I CHSBAHNBEAMTEN. —I DER POLNiSCHE HAUSME I STER UND SEINE EHEFRAU WURDEN—| 1—FESTGENOHMEN. DIE ERMITTLUNGEN IN DIESER ANGELEGENHEIT —WERDEN MIT NACHDRUCX FORTGEFUEHRT. WEITERE ERGEBNISSEWER0E ICH S0F0RT NACHBERICHTEN,REICHSSICHERHEITSHAUPTAMT AMT R0EM 4_| GEZ. MUELLER. SS-G*UPPENFUEHRER*Telegram,send by chief of security policein Cracow to Hitler’s headquarters,noty-fying that the leaders of Jewish under-ground forces have been killed.THE ATTACK ON CAFE CYGANERJA,DECEMBER 22, 1942Most of the operations of the Resistance werecrowned with* success and they gave an added im-petus to the Movement and stimulated it to furtheractivity. They had decided at this point to stagea big operation which would strike at the heart ofthe Nazi authorities, stir up the Jewish residentswho had been living in a state of lethargy and con-stant fear, and at the same time would throw con-fusion into the German camp and would throw itinto a panic of fear and instability.This action took place in cooperation with thePPR. The aims of the operation were:(1) To throw hand grenades into three coffeehouses in the center of the city which were wellknown as meeting places for German officers; (2)To set fire to the military garages of the Germanarmy, as well as to execute various acts of sabotageagainst the coast guard boats on the Vistula; (3)To raise the national flag on the river and to dis-tribute anti-Nazi leaflets; (4) To shoot at Germansoldiers and officers encountered in the city. At thesame time they were planning to call false firealarms in various parts of the city and in this way toconfuse the Germans and throw panic into theirmidst.The date set for these operations was December22, 1942, on the eve of the Christmas holiday. Thecity was teeming with Germans who had been mak-ing purchases before leaving for home in order tocelebrate the holiday.The coffee houses which were selected for thesite of the attack were Cyganeria, Esplanada, andZakopianka, an Officers Club. The same day, twomembers of the resistance movement in Warsaw hadarrived in Krakow, Lola Follman and Yitzhak Zuker-man, to persuade the members of the resistance toopen up resistance operations within the ghetto.The bunker which had been prepared as a hidingplace for the fighters after the operation was ahouse at Skawinska 2. The attack on Cyganeria hadbeen crowned with great success. Seven Germanswere killed and many were wounded. All the oper-ations were carried out as planned and the Germanswere struck by panic. The population of both theJewish and Polish sections witnessed many Germancorpses being transported by the German militarycars.THE BUNKER AT SKAWINSKA STREETIt was definitely a mistake to prepare one shelterfor a larger group of fighters. Before they had evena chance to come back to the shelter it was sur-rounded by the Gestapo taking the fighters by sur-prise. Apparently the fighters were denounced. Theinformers were Julek Appel and Nathan Weissman.On December 24th, the apartment of Dolek Lie-benskind was surrounded. At that time Idek Tenen-baum was also there. They defended themselvesand Dolek succeeded in killing two Germans andwounding a few others. Idek also killed one. Buttheir situation was hopeless. Following previousdecisions, Dolek shot- first Idek to death and thencommitted suicide. They were not taken alive bythe enemy.The arrest of Laban and the killing of Dolek Lie-benskind was considered a feather in the cap ofthe Germans and consequently a secret comuniquewas transmitted by the Commander of the S.S. inKrakow to its headquarters in Berlin relating the“incident”. The original of that cable was submittedduring the Eichmann trial in Jerusalem by GideonHausner, the Chief Prosecutor in the case. In Jan-uary 1943 Szymek and Gusta Dranger were alsoarrested. They were imprisoned until April ’43 whenthey succeeded in escaping while being led forexecution.The acts of sabotage performed on December 22,1942 were the culminating point of the Resistancebut also its swan song. The greater part of theresistance fighters were arrested and killed, andthe movement was paralyzed after its leadershiphad been liquidated. However, it had not been com-pletely silenced. Those who survived were reorgan-ized by Hilek Wodzislawski, and the terrain of theactivity had been moved to Wisnicz in the vicinityof Bochnia. Alas, their activities did not last long.All the girls, members of the movement whowere performing liaison duties for the underground,were imprisoned together at Helclow. Gusta Drangerand Gola Mire were detained there too. They wereall aware of what their ultimate fate would be. De-tails of their life in prison are portrayed by Gustain her “Diary of Yustine”. The two survivors—PesiaWarszawska and Elsa Lapa-Lustgarten depict theirexperiences of prison life in their respective memoirs.Elsa Lapa writes that her stay in prison withGusta was her most profound experience during theGerman occupation. Pesia, a member of the groupof Heshek Bauminger, portrays her impressions inthese words: “We did not feel that we were indeedin prison. We shared the fate of great personalities(referring to Gusta and Gola). We were facing death,but we lived in complete harmony. Each one of usbehaved like a heroine, but Gusta and Gola servedas shining examples of glorious courage. During theentire war I have not felt such tingling excitementand such spiritual uplift as I experienced in prison.”prison.”In this atmosphere Gusta wrote her Diary on a rollof toilet paper which was being distributed amongthe prisoners. The Diary was found after the Libera-tion and published in 1946. In 1953 it was issued inHebrew in Israel with an extensive introduction.The Diary is not only a lofty document of humanityand heroism filled with love of Judaism and itstBE»mmm whukmua1 jawM”v3*^' " * ■>4;"' *■■•■>,-.-•<' willSfiOTr^EKaR w vestas insanemawm msmm m nur .-ia hjkhhiilOOflBRR IlSRHEa KH BRRERP EfSffiKHHE HR H8 HH ffi * HIm 1  HE H3 ■'■>" . KH# itic ’Hir 'mapriwi #4# >S » f& "" 4S, # - i S <$.**.* *tf ifA . 4;".S,ililii®U 3 C E A L tr €M1 IIt&MM tsJRHr ?l|p"™fliP®llps!!PiSS ■ WRWip^imPl^gP^ffip - ■ . 1 ■ . ,t i i|.11SUUGui HE HH2IHHH MHHHHS WmtmHit mm i3L MHHHH:! HHHEHH Mnlfe«.:. I 13 uiJHH u aKitHMii JitiKHHHII H • HE rJi im 13 Hi• Ji - - iU. . . r.r rfMn -' -. m, mi :w hm*i Allj^SsCi is o r ti # *; j o :Eiiti-Acji... -.0 H - I I .iOE |ia- $p ?<n il m m m* m mm m§ m m m - ■ '& m m m - #§» #m m §m «t» p# m &p.■*#* l§ #1 «§ n« \ # pm m m m m m * * m m m«s* w ^ h»» ^ ■•> •. - « m> m <w *m *§* ««s « >-a * « ws* m -- *fe» « m m «■* *wf “■ w- ,m:V.I * I .t 1 AJUCO^C* *W ■•#''.»» .«•' -«%. .«* .«» w '«* ■•»» • .*• *•* ** ^ ■»** 'a^s: 4jjRi '«•Pi «t?k, 3.yjII.lv M.il«#•' m-.a o7. V'. bo <fc?n?sm©* «lv?' !&■/ ’’ i ’ • -’ - 3m, '. i . '-i’"’" : -': ' , ■ ' /. ^Jk Z 3 0 *# ijj133f . r.“-..;-K:CK b* fM i ■%■- W\ f•f'k4$ ><:. ?■ 4?%^:t -‘3‘M»0'' i s - ^ "i; ll|lv'"'' ^ ■ o»tnt#oana aif sbliaaaohilliiiij® ^rsssiw.. .GP;III# ««cic z&zynnlv m% aalfcrc* Xl«i1 rye .£e w3 % £ r %ItMwmy' nm- af€ap#4ai^ms wajisjttiiiiipgr stw.1,4 4o wmlkl o iw iatniame*I-£':a:.iaa;::3 Ill Ml :IIv.;:i I -!•' -I; -'I'-Pp Pia/rM'I:!: il>:;::l ;:.;vv:;'-Ill;': I ' / M' ". ii;!;'-:;-.; Ill;'-:.::'l;;lM.M>.::IlIv;M'I:':';':;:'::;I ’•>;••: PiM-iPiv: Ipa! .'I'-I.;' .:'::i;':: ./ill. /.: I -I;-!?'::.;; i; aplMV'. ll Vl'I'i'V.;.''M'I -I';- • ".. \ I l': ••••"•: M •• \' \ ; , .'.", .’•• '•••••;'"• '•••• '. '.; . ’" '' I ■ ■ '' ''M i o € a i - %ftk% % w r-v tu useif *? X £ £ 4 a # !%# 4»%h wml^,0isl@sy> wl^€f?ci|es *p W c . <£»' . 1 w4.M9W*^na wysBi^xofifa so bit #,citfnwkttm ^ #f.• Jfi-khzlifiiy, .Mi# i^iic iiif ssi§#«iff4 ciai^#• jc^jsu orak si* do • ntj, >to- ■■ .. - ■«.. » iL ■i y a i i *HI# oil r % tu^ « h»i e yr it * t, & - w, asle*; “ij mu in#5S0&y#i4',;f%£ i s? Itsys#®# tTfimMm 1' r &wm$m^ MNtipkddm§M%.dHi#p-mmmm. t«p. IMP1•#h• prk mA . ' W&*Hill.■**»■sfc :w>' nullwsi*.iddujrt^UUt .:t!i ^4"MM:ii-.'y*tSi 5. y 'A" ' ; 'i & * 44 d.r• fft:.S?Sl:#aIi:I::£Sa4■wr 4 f iWrnwmtmAe4«a o,> & Fslilililillliiiilii#:Al:I:4'AAA:f;AHlsI?lAiI§ # Y"' t-V’ >v M - ,|» ^mrjrt ptit >>! ;„*• > Sti.0S§i * 41 r ; 11, ■ , aAiBgjtoaC*towjll W d#ry*T i.; f.. 0lllllfliiiliBOJOVSJ OH%|t SfeiK:! MMii&itMMMum^s§ lii tti|i mb w -lisi## £ I % p ,>uv fc >" #j&ayi a .idA <* # f’ LI :<^4,* ^ W # W>Wf :f;BATTLE ORDERpublished by SHIMON DRAENGER in # 31. of theJewish underground paper"THE FIGHTING HALUTZ','"HECHALUTZ HALOCHEJM"heritage, but it also has a high literary value, sinceGusta was not only a teacher, a heroic conspiratorand a fighter, but had also a sensitive and lyricalsoul.After her escape from prison she plunged fer-vently together with Szymek into the whirlpool ofunderground activities. On November 9, 1943 Szy-mek was again arrested in Wieliczka. An attemptto escape had failed. He had been recognized atthe Police station. Kerner, Chief of the SpecialSection of the Gestapo dealing with Jewish Affairs,went personally to Wieliczka to identify him, sincehe had known Szymek from previous arrests. Afterhaving identified him, Kerner turned to the otherJewish prisoners, who were inmates in the cellto which Szymek was brought, with these words:“Get up, this is your leader,” then said to Szymek:“This is the last time I am arresting you. I will notplay games with you.”Gusta and Szymek had an agreement that theywould die together if there were no other way out.When the news of Szymek’s arrest reached Gusta,she cried that she wished voluntarily to give her-self up. On November 11, 1943 agents of theGestapo brought her a letter written by Szymek.She got up and went willingly with them.Till the last moment before his last arrest Szymekwent on with his underground activities. After his es-cape from prison in April 1943, he renewed the pub-lication of Hechalutz Halochem which was theonly organ of the Jewish Resistance, and which ap-peared every Friday in about 250 copies. Only fiveissues of that paper have been recovered. They arenow in the museum named in honor of Izchak Katz-enelson in Kibbutz Lochamej Haghettaoth, in Israel.The last issue, No. 35, bears the date of RoshHashana, 5704, October 1943, and was permeatedwith the spirit of resistance, certainty of final victoryover the oppressor, and the rebirth of the Jewishpeople in Palestine.The last leader of the Jewish Resistance, HilekWodzislawski, a member of the executive of AKIBA,functioned until Yom Kippur 1943. He organizeda series of well hidden bunkers in the forests, inthe vicinity of Wisnicz, which served as shelters forthe survivors of the movement as well as for theremnants of the general Jewish population. He tookcare of Gusta who had been wounded while es-caping from prison. He provided the survivors inthe bunkers with food and other provisions. He hadorganized attacks on German patrols and actions inretaliation against the peasants who informed theauthorizities of the whereabouts of the Jews. Hewore the uniform of a Polish policeman. He metdeath under the following circumstances: In thevillage, a Jewish child was murdered. (There existsa version that it was Hilek’s brother). Hilek, withtwo other fighters, went into the village at night on aretaliatory raid. During the action, Hilek’s revolverjammed, and one of the peasants wounded himbrutally by striking him on the head with an ax. Inthe bloody struggle which ensued, two peasants werekilled, and the fighters succeeded in moving Hilek tothe bunker, where he lived a few days more. Gustanursed him until he died. He was buried in the forest.FIGHTING GROUPS OUTSIDE THEJEWISH FIGHTERS ORGANIZATIONMembers of the “Hashomer Hadati” collaboratedwith the Jewish Resistance Movement. Accordingto various documents which have been preserved,several members of that organization took part inthe operations of armed resistance. Among themwere Naftali Rab, Szalom Meir Grinwald, Salomand Gusta Hirschberg, Rachel Spitzer and WolfKrabler. In March 1943 their bunker was uncoveredby the Gestapo and completely liquidated.Another group which actively participated in theResistance Movement, and whose soul and heartwere Hesiek Bauminger, Gola Mire and BeniekHalbreich, was the splinter group of the PPR. Theactive fighters of this group were the Jewish mem-bers who performed acts of resistance similar incharacter to those of the Jewish fighters organiza-tion under the leadership of Dolek Liebenskind,Szymek Dranger, Maniek Eisenstein and AbrahamLaban. Derailment of trains, attacks on the Optimafactory, setting fire to a German garage and actsof individual terror, were all carried out by this group.They also participated in the action, on a vastscale, which took place on December 22, 1942.During the months of February and March 1943,this fighting group had also been liquidated. Atthat time Hesiek Bauminger and Beniek Halbreichwere killed. Gola Mire was arrested and subsequentlyshot to death during an attempt to escape fromprison of Montelupich on April 19, 1943.The leaders of the Jewish Resistance Movementwere well aware that the road which they hadchosen would not lead to individual salvation. Therewere other ways to assure self-preservation. Onecould hide in the villages, change one’s identity,and await the final outcome of the war in inactivityand fear. They did not choose to walk that path.In their last meeting at Jozefinska Street, Dolek de-fined the aims of the resistance in these words:“Once we choose this road there is no return. Weare crossing the path of death, daily remember this.Whoever desires to live should not look for fulfill-ment amongst us. We are approaching the end of theday, but it is not twilight that we are facing, butdeath.”They never expected to be victorious. They want-ed only to revenge in slight measure the sheddingof innocent Jewish blood—not to be led like sheepto the slaughter. To die with dignity, proudly, with-out fear—defending their life with weapons in theirhands. Their only fear was that they might perish33before they would have a chance of accomplishingsomething worthwhile.Their courage had no limit. They were not afraidto fight the armed enemy even with their bare hands.When on April 29th, 1943 Laban was led out ofprison on the way to execution, he tried twice toescape. He jumped on one of the soldiers trying totear him to pieces with bare hands. He foughtuntil the bitter end, but finally fell, ridden withbullets.This is the kind of men they were. They all diedlike heroes.EPILOGUE:Out of 150-160 underground fighters in Cracowonly about 20 survived. Most of the survivors livenow in Israel, and among them, luckily are also a fewerroneously listed by Shimon Draenger in his famous“Yiskor” as dead: Leopold Wasserman, ShimonLustgarten and Elsa Lapa-Lustgarten. Draenger’smistake is easy to understand in view of the situ-ation at that time; the collapse of the whole resist-ance movement; broken contacts and dispersal ofthe survivors.The remainder of the group perished. Some ofthem are not even remembered by their names;some are presently known by their first or theirlast names only, sometimes with an indication whatcity they came from. Thanks only to the tirelessefforts of Shimon and Elsa Lustgarten and the cour-tesy of Zwi Szner, director of Izaak Katzenelson’sMuseum of the Ghetto Fighters, Kibbutz LochamejHaghettaoth, have we been able to obtain the fewexisting photos of the fighters, and photostats of“Hechalutz Halochejm” published in this book.Those who survived insist on not having their ownphotos put in this book, so that nothing shoulddiminish the homage paid to the ones who gavetheir lives for freedom and dignity of the JewishPeople.None of the seven Resistance-leaders has sur-vived. Out of the two leaders who adhered to thecommunist ideology—Gola Mire was shot to deathwhile trying to escape from Montelupich on April19, 1943, and Heshek Bauminger was killed some-time in March 1943. Posthumously, in 1948, thetwo were awarded by the Polish Government thehighest distinction: “The Grunwald Cross.”Out of the five leaders who were Zionists: AharonLiebeskind, Commander in Chief, a man born withqualities of a great leader, intelligent, suave, con-vincing and able to make people follow him withdevotion,—shot himself to death on Dec. 24, 1942,to avoid being taken alive by the Germans. He alsowas awarded posthumously in 1945 a “Medal ofMerit” by the then Chief of Staff of the Polish Army.Shimon Draenger, the activist and genial forgerof badly needed documents, was killed in prisontogether with his wife, Gusta Davidson-Draenger(Justyna), after having been arrested by the Ger-mans on November 9, 1943. Abraham Leibowitz-Laban fell to his death on April 29, 1943 hit by 9bullets while attacking with his bare hands one ofthe SS-men leading him to his execution. ManiekEisenstein was killed in the Ghetto. Hillel Wodzis-lawski, the last leader of the Resistance, diedmortally wounded in a retaliatory expedition.Their ideology did not call for any fighting orkilling. They were Zionists, and their aim was toemigrate to Erez Israel, to start a new life as freemen, working toward the establishing of a freeJewish Homeland. They were forced by the Naziaggressors to fight and to kill in self defense—drivenby their enemies into a trap without escape.But the reality itself surpassed their wildest dreamsand the wildest dreams of other Zionist members ofthe Jewish Underground Organization.The State of Itrael had been created. And tocrown the most vivid phantasy they could ever have,the Government of Israel, the free Government ofTHEIR country created and accorded to each oneof these fighters a special distinction:“THE MEDAL OF THE GHETTO FIGHTERS.”mm wW§m0&WMHmImmmmv*;:.\■: ;mimm1i ft>> ft ft’A ftHeu Cractu ^tiend^hip £ccietif jfnc.Avf^.v.v.v.vy.GRUENWALD, SZALOM MEIRfrom MiechowGUTMAN, HESIEKJewish Literary CircleGURENREICH, SZAJAHALBREICH, BENEKP.P.R.HEFFNER, LEIBEKHacofeHEIT, OSKARH1RSCHBERG, JUSTAHashomer HadatiH1RSCHBERG, SALEKHILFSTEIN, ZYGAHUPPERT, GUSTAWINFELD, LUSKAISRAELOW1CZ, ISRAELISRAELOWICZ, HESIEKDrorJOLES, EWAJOLES, WUSKAfrom RzeszowJOZIEKfrom WarsawKANAL, SALO“Adas”, AkibaKALINA, MARIA-RAJZIADrorKLAUSNER, ROMANKLEINER, JANEKKRABLER, WOLFHashomer HadatiKUNTZ, LEONLAUFER, HIRSCHLEIBOWICZ, ABRAHAM-LABAN“Roman”-Dror,member of the General StaffLIEBESKIND, AHARON-DOLEK“Jan Ropa”, Chief of Staff, AkibaLIEBESKIND, MIRIAM-MIRKAAkibaLIEBER, ICEK“Jedrek”-AkibaLIEBERMAN, KUBAHechalucLIEBERMAN, ZYGALUSTGARTEN, ROMEK“Roman Gwozdz”-AkibaLONEKfrom Cracow, HacofeMAHLER, ZYGMUNT-ZYGAAkibaMALTER, ROMANMENACHEMfrom WarsawMIRE, GOLA“Lidia”—Member of the GeneralStaff, PPRMICHALOWICZ, ESTER-IRKAAkibaMONDERER, HENEKAkibaMINCZELES, MANIAMICHLEWICZ, ESTUSIA-IRKAAkibaPARISER, NATAN“Nolek”—AkibaPRIVES, ADASRAB, TULEKRAFALOWICZ, MONIEKREICH, ROMEKfrom BochniaMOooocoMaofr f‘nnnnnrnn'onoo'tftfiTnri—nr rnnnnn'ti'n'n'iViin'ritri-nrT-^rf ■utrn'n'nnn nnnrTTnr’r'-^Trrft—flirn|..vX-,■/-AV\V(eu> Ctacou Jrienfaki/t £ccietij J/hc.jw,-KKgST-gv.:.:.:Ai‘l¥llYlV«V»V)AAAAAAtVAVA'.V.V.VjNAAJUkA*3:3RUBINEK, HALINAAkibaRUBINSTEIN, DORAAkibaSZMAJUK, SALA“Stasia”—AkibaSCHREIBER, SHALOM-SZYMEKHashomer HadatiSCHNEIDER, KELENASPITZER. RACHELHashomer HadatiSZMERLOWICZ, JUDA“Igna”, HashomerSTOCKHAMMER, GIZAAkibaSPRITZER, HANKA“Anna"—AkibaSPRITZER, LUSKAHashomer HadatiSTARK. TOWA-TOSKAAkibaSPERBER. HENEKSCHREIBTAFEL, ISRAEL“Wladvslaw”—Jewish LiteraryCireleSTEIMAN, CESIASTERNLICHT, CHAIM-HARRYHistradrut Hanoar-HechalucTENENBAUM, JUDA-IDEK“Czesiek Jodlowski”—AkibaTIEGER, FISZEL-FISIEKWARSZAWSKA, SALAWEISS, EDWINAkibaWEKSNER. BARUCH-BENEKAkibaWEKSNER, ROMEKWEINFELD, USZERWIENER, MANIEKAkiba, from ChorzowWIEMBERG, TOWAWAJNTRAUB, MANIAAkiba, from RadomWITTENBERG, IZIEKWORTSMAN, GENIAAkibaWODZISLAWSKI, HILLEL“Antoni Ludwikowski”—The last Chief of StaffWOLF, MOSZE-MONIEKWULF, JOSEFJewish Literary CircleZELLME1STER, DANKAHashomer Hazair, from WarsawZUCKERMAN, MONIEKThe following persons, relatives of the Jewish Underground Fighters,have been listed by Shimon Draenger in #29 of "Hechalutz Halochejm"as killed or deported, victims of retaliation by German hangmen:Brothers LeibowiczDawid DraengerStefania LibeskindFamily TenenbaumFamily SpiraIgnacy LiebeskindAbraham SchreibtafelRozia SchreibtafelMMipWMWmmm*Wgxm&.Heu> Craccu' 'Jfieiui^hip £ecieti/ 9LEADERS OF THE RESISTANCEGENERAL STAFFGOLA MIREHERSH BAUM/NGER(Hesiek)MANIEK El SEN STEINSHIMON DRAENGER(Shimshon)AHARON L/EBESKIND(Dolek)ABRAHAM LEIBOWICZ(Loban-'Roman")iOMOMCtaccu JrieHitAkifi £ccietij JfhcyvIIV •• ;.v. v'X'Xw! •**X*X*XHillliliW&M:§8%i§iV'.Ctacoto JriehdAkif* £ccietif &LEIB HAEFFNERSZALOM ME/R GRINWALDGUSTEK DEUTSCHERW.WXS:« ♦:» jr<mmiwii'iiTj'uriiii J u'n'nn n'nrwihirijtf^^V\eu> Craccut JrieHdAki/t £cciettj JfhcMINKA LIEBESKINDGUSTAW HUPPERTGENIA GOLDFLUSSCESIA DRAENGERNAFTALI RABZYGA LIBERMAN*:*;*#:**$:Heu Crac«u> JrietutAkiji £ccietif JfnePaulina (Pola)Sister of IdekFAMILY TENENBAUMFather: MarcusMother: HankaWT' Vi ,r„> v\vVw\nVv7*'• "*•&?Veto Crace & Jrienfakip £ecietif J)hc.•.. Bat ^Jhe Eusli ^HaSriot &een&onsumeThrough the ages the history of the Jews is the history of tears,sweat and blood. In every generation, somewhere, someone to justifyhis life, his shortcomings and failures, found escape and glory in sac-rificing the Jews. It happened in times of the Bible, in times of theChristian Crusades, Spanish Inquisition, pogroms, killings and lootings,till the last but not least, the most cruel, the most organized, the bestplanned annihilation of our nation by the Nazis.But there is no use to go back over and over again our agonies,our path of sorrow and tragedy. Our book “In Memoriam” will bekept for ever in the depth of our hearts, but we, the living, must lookforward, forward to the new and ever wider horizons and to the lightthat is shining brighter every day.From the ashes of our dead and from the handful of the survivorsa new nation has been born. Our men who knew life only in the ghettoesof Europe are building a new country. They are building it from thevery foundation in the most unusual for the Jews occupations, asfarmers, bricklayers, fishermen, miners, sailors, soldiers, statesmen,judges and ambassadors.I was never more proud to be a Jew than at the time when Itraveled through the Holy Land, over roads lined with philodendrontrees in bloom, through the fields changed from parched and barrendesert to lush, green orchards, farms and meadows.As a Jew from Cracow, I am proud that among the builders ofIsrael are my friends and neighbors. They fill every place where theyare needed. They are lawyers, doctors, military advisors, technicalaides to underdeveloped countries, envoys, teachers, scientists, mer-chants and laborers.To them, to their living memory, to their work and achievementsI dedicate these few Words.New York, April, 1967For the Literary CommitteeLYDIA WOLFMEMBERS OFORGANIZATION OF JEWISH FIGHTERS(ZOB)who survived the holocaustFLEISHER, SONIA—Living in IsraelFRIEMER, CESKA-KARMIELI—Living in IsraelGOLDWASSER-OTTER ROZKA-WIENER—Living in IsraelHERTZ, DUSIEK-DAVID—Living in GermanyHIRSCHBERG-NORDLICHT, GUST A—Living in GermanyKLINGBERG, RAJZIA-KOHEN—Living in IsraelLAPA, ELSA—now LUSTGARTEN—Living in IsraelLUSTGARTEN, SZYMON—Living in IsraelLIEBERMAN, KUBA—Living in IsraelLIEBESKIND, WUSKA—now KUPPER—Living in IsraelSZAJN, SALEK—Living in IsraelSCHIPPER HELA—now RUFEISEN—Living in IsraelSCHREIBER, POLA—Living in IsraelSCHREIBER, SZALOM—Living in IsraelSCHREIBER, SZYMON—Living in IsraelTIEBERGER, FRYCEK—now GLOBERMAN—Living in IsraelWASSERMAN, POLDEK—now MAYMON—Living in IsraelWARSZAWSKA, PESKA—now KALUSZYNER—Living in IsraelWOLF, JOEL—Living in IsraelWULF, JOZEF-JOZEK—Living in GermanyLIEBER, MANIA—Living in BelgiumJOHANNES, BERNARDTHE FOUNDING OF OUR SOCIETYThe New Cracow Friendship Society has a shortbut impressive history. It is just celebrating its thirdaniversary of inception. It was conceived by a hand-ful of people, 13 to be exact, who are the actualfounders of the organization. These people, whosenames are listed on the following pages as thefounders, had the foresight, wisdom, and aware-ness of the great need for such an organization. Theaims and purposes of the Society are clearly out-lined in the Preamble of its constitution. . . unitingJewish Polish survivors of the district of Cracow. . . developing and elevating the mental and moralcharacter of the people of our faith; of promotingthe principles of philanthropy, honor and patriot-ism.” To strengthen our ties “with our Brothersthroughout the world and particularly in Israel; tohelp the poor and needy; to bring cultural and socialevents to the members.”The first founders’ meeting took place at StevenMorrow’s residence on February 7, 1965. This dateis considered the day of birth of the New CracowFriendship Society.The many weeks of planning culminated in thefirst meeting of Jews from Cracow on March 14,1965 at the Jewish Center of Kew Garden Hills inFlushing, Queens.The enthusiastic masses attending that historicalmeeting, happiness and tears brought on by out-bursts of emotion, were proof of the necessity fortheir long awaited realization of such a society. Theenrollment of members then began. Thus, the NewCracow Friendship Society became a reality.A second General Meeting followed on May 2,1965 at the Fraternity Club in New York City. Theagenda was to hold elections. On the suggestion ofthe Nominating Committee, those assembled gavethe founders a mandate for one year. This prompteda standing ovation. Hence the first Board of Di-rectors was elected.The Board consisted of a group of very capablepeople dedicated to the proposition of successfullybuilding a society based upon friendship and mutualunderstanding. The envisioned plans for the growthand development of the organization were imple-mented by the forming of several commitees. Hereis an account of the duties and activities of all thecommittees, some which came into being during thevarious stages of our development:The Membership Committee—To solicit member-ship and keep records containing vital informa-tion of all members. To organize membershipmeetings.Social Committee—To plan, organize and executesocial events serving the entire membership.Israeli Committee—To maintain close ties with Isra-el and to celebrate Israeli events.Welfare Committee—To help members in need.Newsletter Committee—To prepare, collect, andedit news items in a monthly newspaper.Gemilat Chesed Committee—To manage funds forthe purpose of lending money to members inneed.Sunshine Committee—To bring “sunshine” into thehearts of members in times of distress.Public Relations Committee—To make the Societyknown and to promote good will.Club House Committee—To take charge in main-taining the club house.Cultural Committee—To promote and organize cul-tural gatherings.Grievance Committee—To mitigate and possiblysettle grievances and complaints brought to theirattention by members of the Society.Cemetery Committee—To make acquisitions andkeep records of cemetery plots.Journal Committee—To solicit memorials and pre-pare material for a Memorial Journal.The idea to issue a memorial journal was con-ceived in June, 1965 and was promptly acted upon.The first chairmanship was entrusted to RomanGunz, who organized a working Journal Committee,with Jacob Halpern in charge of the literary part.They collected substantial amounts toward the Jour-nal. In May, 1966, Beno Sonenschein succeededMr. Gunz as chairman. Under his chairmanship, thecommittee made great strides in the collection of ma-terial for the literary part of the Journal, and a forth-coming book. At the same time, Max Hilfstein servedas chairman in charge of fund raising. In October,1966, after Mr. Sonenschein resigned from thechairmanship, Henry Schreiber was appointed totake his place. He approached this task with initiativeand vigor. Together, Mr. Schreiber, Mr. Hilfstein,and a hard working committee of Philip Buksbaum,Tola Dizenhaus, Sol Dreier, Fela Friedman, ArieFriedman, Regina Gingold, Carola Greenspan, Frie-da Immergluck, Roman Klinger, Ed Mosberg, Na-than Offen, Eugenia Radwan, Erna Rosner, HenrySchwartz, Edith Wertheim, brought the fund rais-ing campaign to a successful conclusion.The Memorial Journal in its present form andcontent was prepared and edited by the LiteraryCommittee consisting of: Max Steig, Lydia Wolfand Giza Wortman.Special recognition is hereby given to all thepeople, some of whom are not members of the So-ciety. They, in one way or another, were instru-mental in this great effort. Through their tirelessefforts, selfless devotion and dedication to the job,they have contributed to the success of this Me-morial Journal, as well as to the growth and de-velopment of theNEW CRACOW FRIENDSHIP SOCIETY, Inc.The Board of Directors1/leu Craceu jNenfaki/t £ccietij J)hc.Richard AbrahamerElias FriedmanBen GeizhalsRoman GunzFOUNDERSMax HilfsteinVictor LewisSigmund MorrowSteven MorrowEmil SiegmanDavid TwerskyManek WerdigerSam WertheimLarry ZelnerFirst Board of DirectorsPresident    Steven MorrowVice President  Richard AbrahamerRoman GunzDavid TwerskyTreasurer  Larry ZellnerSecretary    Sigmund MorrowComptroller  Henry SchreiberSol DreierLeo LiebgoldLouis FagenSimon MandelbaumDavid FishmanDr. Richard OresElias FriedmanJulius RossBen GeizhalsEdward SteinerMax HilfsteinEmil SiegmanVictor LewisManek WerdigerSam WertheimSecond Board of DirectorsPresident    Steven MorrowVice President .  Richard AbrahamerRoman GunzManek WerdigerTreasurer    Larry ZellnerSecretary    Sigmund MorrowComptroller    Henry SchreiberTola DizenhausVictor LewisSol DreierSimon MandelbaumElias FriedmanWilliam RosnerBen GeizhalsJulius RossMax HilfsteinBeno SonenscheinAnn KandelDr. Albert TillesRoman KlingerSam WertheimDr. Naum WortmanThird Board of DirectorsPresident    Ben GeizhalsVice President    Richard AbrahamerMax HilfsteinManek WerdigerTreasurer    Larry ZellnerSecretary    Eugenia. RadwanComptroller    Roman WeingartenSol DreierSigmund MorrowTola DizenhausNathan OffenElias FriedmanWilliam RosnerFrieda ImmergluckJulius RossRoman KlingerMax SteigVictor LewisDr. Albert TillesSimon MandelbaumSam WertheimLydia WolfDear Friends,I have often wondered, even since the idea was conceived at the first meeting of theJournal Committee of our Society, what the purpose of a Memorial Journal would be, and whoseinterests it would serve.I don’t think that we can honestly say that in order to remember our lost ones we mustmemorialize their names in a Journal. I would venture to say that those remembered in our Jour-nal have been named at other times, in synagogues, and in our own homes. The memory of thosewhom we love will never die, and we will not remember them more because their names are in-scribed in the pages of this Journal.I look at the history section of this book and as I read I find myself nodding along, think-ing the history before the words from the page strike my eyes. I know this history, and I think weall do. Except for putting the facts in their proper perspective, and organizing it in proper lan-guage, each of us could recite the history. Even more than that, we each lived through that his-tory and each of us probably has different facts which stand out in reference to any specific event.This book has not been formulated for us, that is, for us who lived through the holocaust.This history is written for the future, with the hope that what we experienced will never be seenagain on the face of the earth. In our homes this book will serve as a book for our children andgenerations to come to read, and try to understand. They will learn the history in school, but athome they will associate the history with the family names which are familiar to them. They willsee the little things that can only be seen when you study one specific community. Faces of peoplekilled while working for the underground will mean something different when they think that theirparents went to school with and grew up with them. Often history, as such, is unbelievable, yetwhen it becomes personal it becomes more believable and meaningful.The history which we lived through must become meaningful and believable to coming gen-erations, so that they may learn from history. Future generations will see that life' was quite thesame, and that it was only several orders and several feet of brick wall that destroyed the Jewishcommunity of Cracow. They will ask what the inside of the buildings which are pictured lookedlike, and they will want to know where in the ghetto their parents lived. This all is meaningfulto them because it is small, specific, and personal; not a huge history.This is important, and this is the role of the Journal. It is a memorial and we will all thinkof many things when we read and remember. But this Journal is mean for the future, so that ourchildren and their children will not see what we saw. Many questions will be asked as this bookis read, and you will answer as best you can and try to make them understand. There will betimes when your own memory will become blurry, but as you read and think about it, you willremember and answer the questions.Because of its personal value, this book will find an honored place in every home it reaches.I hope that it can serve as both the Journal of Memory and the Journal of Hope, and that itsvalue and role as both will be realized, understood, and ultimately successful.(President) 1/leu Cracou JrienMi/i ^ccietif Jfhc.TO ALL JEWISH MARTYRSRocznicaA w moim domu nie zal6ni^ zalobne gromnice,Bo musialoby ich plon^c tysi^ce, miliony,By wspomniec dni zatoby i wszystkie rocznice,By uczcic pami^c zmarfych na zawsze straconych.A w moim domu nie zalsni^ zalobne gromnice,Nie staloby czasu, by swiatla rozpalic,Bo cale moje zycie jest strasznq. rocznic^,I kazda ma chwila zatoby si^ zali.Ila Karmel, 1943.This poem submitted and the page donatedin memory of nazi victims byRICHARD O. ORES, M.D.371XM,feSiTie hr Craccut ‘JrieHctAhip £ecietij Jhtc.Jn memoruofMY DEAR PARENTSWOLF JOSEF ZUCKERMANANNA ZUCKERMANAND MY SWEET SISTERSHELA ZUCKERMANDORA ZUCKERMANABRAHAM ZUCKERMANHillside, N. J.:•WF>»W«*«SSi(SO«»OOWC«»»»(iSS#0(»«M«W)OOOM«Wl^..•w***'o..,y-:;m.AVieu> Ctaccu JrieHfaki/t £ccietij Jfhc.mf&szm13n CLruU memoruOF OUR BELOVED CHILDRENESTER12 Years OldANDSAMUEL MENACHEM7 Years OldWHO DIED AL KIDDUSH HASHEMON MAY 14, 1944 (22 IYAR)ISAK AND SALA LEVENSTEIN«'«VAV.v.-^ tAAAM » »‘i ijViVi'i VAW.V.s;m;Jteto Ctacou> jMenfakip £ccietif J)hc.’m'AViWAVAvC1Jn memori^°fOUR BELOVED PARENTS, BROTHERS AND SISTERSFather: HEMIE WOLF ROSENBLUMMother: CUTLE ROSENBLUMBrother: LAZAR ROSENBLUMBrother: NATAN ROSENBLUMSister: HINDA ROSENBLUMSister: HANKA ROSENBLUMBy Their ChildrenSon — JACOB ROSENBLUMDaughter — ROSE ACONSKYSon — DAVID ROSENBLUM‘NT’m    %V*Tleu Ctacpu JrieHfaki/t ^ccietif Jthc.• .v/w.v.v,J„ WL, of W9 2W ParentsWHO DIED AL KIDDUSH HASHEMPINCUS LEZER PANTIRERAge 42BELA SARA PANTIRERAge 41AND MY BELOVED BROTHERS AND SISTERS:ALTER HERSHAge 19CHAIM JOSEPHAge 15MORDECHAI IDELAge 13ESTER RACHELAge 11ISRAEL DAVIDAge 9CHAJA RUTHAge 7MURRAY PANTIRERHillside, N. J.: •: v.*' :V'NV.emory.SAMUEL RAPSESTER RAPSABRAHAM M. RAPSCYWIA RAPSDAVID KRAKAUERPERLA KRAKAUERABRAHAM KRAKAUERASHER KRAKAUERMR. AND MRS. JACOB RAPSjTn^vjXIffTie u; Ctaco to JriehdAkift £ccietif Jhc.Jn wio/^/n / v icinorif ofMY BELOVED PARENTS AND BROTHERS:Father—DAVID BLATT KRAKAUERMother —PERLA KRAKAUERBrother—ROMAN KRAKAUERBrother —ASHER HENEK KRAKAUERJn W<ofn-sn # v lemoru. ofMY BELOVED PARENTS AND BROTHERS AND SISTERFather — ZVI ZABLUDOWSKIMother —RINA ZABLUDOWSKISister —SHULAMIT ZABLUDOWSKIBrother —MENACHEM ZABLUDOWSKIBrother —SHLOMO ZABLUDOWSKIBrother —MOSHE ZABLUDOWSKIJn Wemo^ ofMY BELOVED UNCLES, AUNTS AND COUSINSROMAN FUHRERANNA FUHRERNUSIA FUHRERIDEK FUHRERTHEY ALWAYS WILL REMAIN IN OUR HEARTSMR. & MRS. ISRAEL KRAKAUERIsWet* Craccto 'friendship £ccietif jfncV.'.W.S YA VAVWJn Wemorjf ofMY PARENTS AND BROTHERCHIEL KRANZFEIGA KRANZIZIDOR KRANZBy FAM, J. KRANZJn Wjemory ofMY UNCLES, AUNT & COUSINSISRAEL WIESENFELDFRADEL WIESENFELDARTEK WIESENFELDMANIA WIESENFELDBy FAM. J. KRANZJn E„o7 ofMother— HANA SCHMEISERBrother —ZYGMUND SCHMEISERSister— FELA SCHMEISERBy HusbandFISHEL SCHMEISERBy ChildrenMR. & MRS. J. KRANZMR. & MRS. E. SCHMEISERMR. & MRS. J. SCHMEISERwmmmmVeu> Craccu 'Jtiew^kip £ccietif 9hiemoru(7r.y.- ;&A fIf if :lllfri?ipi ioi ;t f. ? 3 •Jill:5 4 - i ••<t. ' -J ,♦f <s ?UUV ? << • ■r < •'? v'? ■ * < ••4 •" * '!■rJf *ipi;& f I ), :?' v S < ■>I $ 11 :1 i 11 'I! 11 *i 5; f 3 ■•I :•: I * ;t * | | :f 111 yf £ ! f :JEWS from CRACOWwho pensheoEXWhereverTHEIRCRUELFATEHAS REACHEDTHEMwnv■ i « 1 § •:• A A •-o| M i'i > ? i ?> I •? ;■ J :} % f 4 f-; •$ MU-'< 4 f « 3> S 5 I > >" 'I •8 $ | } f .<X 5 } | § .|!j rh :! (111l| liIII ?•' 5 s ; :'i 11 > iCM"i i 5 ■<i < £ £This page donated in honor of Victims byFREDERIC M. ALBERTIAttorney at Law295 Madison Ave., New York 17, N. Y.u. ,JEWS from CRACOWperishedGHETTO OF CRACOW1inmtheSUBURBS OF CRACOWThis page donated in honor of Victims byPHILIP BUKSBAUM.v.v.Ifet* Craccu? JrienjAkip £ccietif Jfhc.3n memoryofJEWS from the City of CRACOWperishedin Concentration CampPLASZOW-JEROZOLIMSKAi!in Concentration CampJULAG I.in Concentration CampBIERZANOWPROKOCIMandARBEITSLAGER LAGIEWNIKIThis page donated in honor of Victims bySELRITE MILLWORK andBUILDING SUPPLY CORP.Roselle Park, N. J.upon suggestion of Mr. MossbergVeto Ctacctoip £ccietl/ JJhc.ii'iVMVAWMVJn memory4JEWS from CRACOWTORTURED TO DEATHIN THE STREETS OF THE CITYIN THE DUNGEONS OF MONTELUPICHIN TORTURE CHAMBERS OF GESTAPOandIN THE BASEMENTS OF THE BUILDINGSOF NSDAP and SDThis page donated in honor of Victims byP. MIESNIEKS & K. STEGERS501 Old Post Rd., Edison, N. J.upon suggestion of Mr. MossbergPerishedin Fight AgainstTHE GERMAN AGGRESSORasSoldwidu JthsL (poli&h *This page donated in honor of Victims byEMBASSY CATERINGQueens, N. Y.vX*VVi.y.*v ••xiZv/' :v^iwv.? ***!*.. .fc-i'K.N.&>■V..\£Ctaccu Jfiend Ah ip £ccietif jfnc.■'X.v.'-wwvw * *«n~ r'--'~-'---'-'-'-'- « »« ««»■»■■»■»*Jn memoryHEROIC FIGHTERSMEMBERSofJEWISH UNDERGROUNDIN CRACOWsiAKIBAHACOFEHHISTADRUTH HANOAR HECHALUTZIHASHOMER HAZAIRHASHOMER HADATIwho sacrificed their livesforFREEDOM and DIGNITYThis page donated in honor of Victims bySTATE LUMBER CORPORATIONPlainfield, N. J.upon suggestion of Mr. MossbergW?w,v.vJv>,'S •p*ntlit*SC'S.’,,T %W w<£&■IMIS*?™L*Ti si>tViL;%w3. Xv>»:w:-w-">yX*x* .;Ctaccu JfieHdAkip £ccietij Jthc.ux^'iV/.SVAVJ„ w.eniorifofJEWS from CRACOWwhoperishedFORCED LABOR CAMPSRUSSIAThis page donated in honor of Victims bySAM LOWIMontreal, Canada‘iHsiiisr%^mMtunv*' • • V /.>.Vxy > sf*i /X .,NSfiv\ •• •.••'•:>.••/ •::•:•:•: • V- ..<X-y\-. :X *&\ ■ AV .v <SimmMiMi \*V| X-iUjUife i'-ifetleu> Cntceu> JriemtAkifi £ccietu Jhtc.Jn W.emorifofJEWS deported from CRACOWwho perishedin Concentration CampsAUSCHWITZBELZECBERGEN-BELSENBUCHENWALDBRUNNITZDORAGROSS ROSENJANOWMAIDANEKMAUTHAUSENPUSTKOWSKARZYSKOSOBIBORSZEBNIATREBLINKAThis page donated in honor of Victims bySEMERANO CONSTRUCTION CO.Paterson, N. J.upon suggestion of Mr. Mossberg wtmmawiWOTWMWwwWm^ P*" f1" r'»W*WW^WW<WWWWWCtWW«l>M>WW)WWMWOOtt^^   Veto Ctaccto Jrienfaki/t £ccietif Jthc.;. V/.WiA^aaa*aaa»VaV. .'. ^WWWWWWI* - - - - - - ■A’.'.'lWlfliWyVj„ m.emoryofJEWS from CRACOWwhosacrificed their livesFightingInTheJEWISH BRIGADE«v»vv«vhv.'-**wXvX ■^oV/AVAV.VAVaOThis page donated in honor of Victims byBROUNELL & KRAMER1478 Morris Ave., Union, N. J.vVt . .** *'eu> Ctacou JrieiutAki/t £ccietif Jfhe./ &8L &£:#..£'•:% ..* •*. •*».. s' *\ .,.•fAjwCCftX^^\ V > • V.JL w«emory°(JEWS from CRACOWwhoperishedDeportedCONCENTRATION CAMPSNameswhichareUNKNOWN TO USThis page donated in honor of Victims byALL WEATHER INSULATION CO.81 Huemmer Terrace, Clifton, N. J.tleit! Ctaccuip £ficietu Jhtc.3memorif°fJEWS from CRACOWperishedwhilefightingforFREEDOMPARTISANSThis page donated in honor of Victims bySENTINEL PROTECTIONHtto Cractu 'JtienMip £ccietif J/hc.lmsyL*X&£/C/C?isk/$bCk>Stkj6J,memory°f5000JEWISH WOMENfromCRACOWloaded forcibly on defective shipandDROWNEDSTUTTHOFFThis page donated in honor of Victims byHYDRONIC HEATING CORP., Union, New Jerseyupon suggestion of Mr. E. Mossberg• Vto o-&'\nV* / Y±liilll»**. *** i- y Tr :•^(i-Biwn ■hwWHHiiliiiill■, N ^ N4 *J vV>V>. .*Ctacou JriendAki/t £ccietif Jfhc.ij»V.VAV.W.w,emorifofJEWS from CRACOWwholavebeensenttheir deathfromTRANSIT CONCENTRATION CAMPDRANCYFRANCEThis page donated in honor of Victims byCARUSO BROTHERS, Elizabeth, New Jerseyupon suggestion of Mr. E. Mossbergmr . . \.S&: ;::4|it:**;*:**:*:;;g4:.;vy,...-' SWMiZ/S.-,I’lv.v’v’vMviv^^^Pj'.,.iiF* :-v%L •-'ovA >N>'MSpi*i!. ¥m>)i-:5if::i::%«i$v::; \ : %  X'i'f.-y:i&kk'svwwv,........, ••• *»**/jpi'fct! CO*X*!*Wi#tf&> Ct-accu JriemtAkift $ccietif J)hc.J,memorifofJEWS from CRACOWwhoperishedEMIGRATION1939-1945This page donated in honor of Victims byAUD PLUMBINGAND HEATING INC.Rockaway, N. J.upon suggestion of Mr. MossbergPMOMMOMMitaV&WfB&GpflfiMOOMOi£tf$ooooceMooMooooMtt$$MOceoeooooooMjmVeto Craccu JrieHifAki/t £ccietij JJhc..»v.y^vAv\AA.iw..wA«^ \v.v«,aw.v.vu4mem°fJEWISH SOLDIERSfromCRACOWwho fought and sacrificedtheir livesALLIED ARMIESARMY OF GENERAL ANDERSARMY "TADEUSZA KOSCIUSZKI"(Division of USSR Army)This page donated in honor of Victims byAPPLIANCE WHOLESALERSRt. 35, South Amboy, N. J.Vteu Cracou? Jrienfakip £ccieti/ JJhc.In MemoryofJews from Cracowwho perishedin Hungary, Roumaniaand other countriesin their questto reachThe Promised Land.•vvav.w^aThis page donated in honor of Victims byDELLA PENNA BROS.138 Chestnut St., Nutley, N. J.  ..... ,;._v               "•-if i s-L ^ ■tiet*> Ctaceto jMenfakip £ecietif Jthc.Jn W.emorifofJEWS from CRACOWBETRAYEDCAUGHTKILLEDwhile trying to save their livesby usingARYAN IDENTIFICATION PAPERSTh is page donated in honor of Victims byMAGUIRE-BURKE AGENCY INC.Trenton, N. J.upon suggestion by Mr. Saul Dreier<v..*****m• 'V,.Cracou; 'friendship £ecietifJthc.§W•v l \;■ .\ v ;• •»x<A¥:W;*V*'>'u'.'.WHW>V«\XAAAAAAAAiX^'X'XwXC^wXaXC :.v.v.v.v.v.v.v.-.-.v.<-roving / r femorifOF OUR BELOVED PARENTSWOLF FRIEDMANNAssemblyman of the Jewish Kehilah in CracovVice President of the Agudath Israel in CracovESTHER LEA FRIEDMANNDaughter of Rabbi Meir Rapaporf—Lukover Rav—Chief of the Rabbinical Court in Cracovof our Dear Sisters and Brothers in Law:IDA AND MOSHE HEITLERSARAH AND ABRAHAM SILBERBERGMIRIAM AND JACK AFFENKRAUTPOLA FRIEDMANNGUSTA FRIEDMANNMILA FRIEDMANNof Beloved Wife of ArieFRIEDA CHEDVA FRIEDMANN nee Besterof our Nieces and Nephews:HALINA HEITLER, RACHELA and MAYER SILBERBERG, MEYER AFFENKRAUTof our Dear Uncles and Aunts:Rabbi Aron Lewin, member of Polish Parliament—Dora LewinRabbi Dr. Samuel Hirshfeld, Esther HirschfeldAbraham and Rose RapaportSchabse and Frieda RapaportIsrael and Polda BaidaffSalomon and Ella FriedmanItta Weiss, Amalia Englard, Salomea Rosenzweig, Hela Rossbachof our Dear CousinsJacob and Mala, Mendel and Czarna Rapaport, Mala FeltscherJoseph, Shabse, Lusia, Dziula Englard, Stelka BrennerLippe and Rachela Sturm, Abraham Brenner, Wolf WeissAlways to Be Remembered byARIE FRIEDMANNELIAS FRIEDMANN*^FK i«»iaiiSiiBis«:li Sm‘^1< V - r *',-* ■■ ■■&>:<g&iMiiiiiwillltleu> Cracow JrietufAki/i £ocietif J)hc.Jn nino,y of W„ JSeLeJ /?,arenMAYER and BASIA DEUTSCHERMy Dear Sisters and BrotherANNA DEUTSCHERKilled in Actionas Member of Jewish Underground AkibaASNA DEUTSCHERLAJZER DAVID DEUTSCHERAunts and UnclesSARA and JOSEPH DEUTSCHERTAUBA and SHMUEL CHAIM GROSSMANFRANIA and PINCUS GROSSMANSZLOJME and FELA BORNSTEINHANNA and ARTUR ROSNERSAMUEL and FELA BORNSTEINCousinsHANNAH and ESTERA DEUTSCHERLAJZER DAVID GROSSMANHANKA GROSSMANMARCUS GROSSMANLAJZER DAVID, FELA, TAUBA, MOTEK BORNSTEINLAJZER DAVID and ALINKA BORNSTEINLAJZER DAVID and ESTERA ROSNERForever in my HeartFELICIA FRIEDMAN nee Deutschermt• \ .V-mimkMi ^^:i ,rfllMl. y - v.Wmum>/m/,VV Mliwi***:*:***:■ v * r y rr:■nnMHw;Xv!*X*HiW*y*!4S;:5*w.v.v.v.v.t:x?j .xift tCtaccu Jnenfaki/t £ccietif Jfhc.v< *jj'iiVAVAW.WJ„ CLriAJ W.emoryoi Our (J3e(oued j-^arentdWHO DIED AL KIDDUSH HA’SHEMJACOB and GUSTA OFFENAND OUR DEAR SISTERMIRIAM OFFENSAM, NATHAN and BERNARD OFFENIn Cherished Memory ofMy ParentsNuhem and Rizei Goldbergand My GrandmotherRyfka GoldbergHELEN OFFENborn GoldbergIn Cherished Memory ofMy Dear FatherJack LesserHYLA OFFENborn LesserWOOMOOOOOOtMMtKWtCttMOttOOCN]^hip £ccietlf J?hc.AJ *»« a •••• •'■'✓•*1A A 'a’a .’.S’.'.‘•V.'.VASV.V.V■“1j„ memo,vof /jen’.s .5rom Cftra co wMr. Juron (Brazil)Ace ExchangeJ. B. ShuesDiamond Auto Glass Corp.Nassau Flooring Corp.Paper Converting CompanyiiiAnslee Novelty Co.Roy Garment Del. Inc.Tie ur Crace Ur JrietufAki/i £ccie tif %c.Jn CLUJ W.emoruOF OUR DEAR PARENTSWOLF and FELICIA SCHREIBEROUR BELOVED FATHERPAUL HONIGAND OUR DEAR GRANDFATHERJACOB HONIGHENRY and HELEN SCHREIBER>:■ vl* V '. -**mks -Ow -r! ■ WMam*:x:v:v^%^wXv^vXv^*:f!eu> Craceu 'friendship £ccietij J/hc.$ W & hui J4 < ? bj •* : -j„ memory°fMY PARENTSSaleonion and 'dfunia oCiebdichMY GRANDPARENTSIf a col and cJ~iauracJ-Lcl£ichMY RELATIVESflackman and *Salina cjCielltchmarcus and sdntaiia Odtornl]o4 W.arini a and Cjustava <Steij?Oscarj f^oSaiia cjCleb licit an d Child,renMY MATERNAL GRANDMOTHERl^Yjaria IdandAND FAMILY•desalt an d fjacham in aAND CHILDREN•d^rom, Ounia, (jolda, ^VFJeir an d w,in aMR. AND MRS. THEODORE M. LIEBLICH•AV.V/AVAVw5mmmsaampjf' is4 >vf#V w.'- » vT; XMk..v>:;::->:-:-:;:;::::-:;:fevW«X*S1,,*,,1\V«,i,X,»VAV,,V»Vi,iVi,«V«ViV»V*%'>'* • • », VIjeui Cracow 'friendship £ccietif Jnc.Jn Wemory of Wj'y EeLeJ ParentsSALOMEA and PINKAS ZEHNGEBOTJn Xovinym.emory4 wsDEAR BROTHER AND SISTERSROMAN, FRYDA and POLA ZEHNGEBOTJn Werncrt of Wy EeLeJ CLP,JOZIU PLANCERALWA YS IN MY HEARTGIZA WORTMANiVa\YA\ VAVAW< 'A i ^*vv>r rr* j < '< ^ S \n tt •%&&$%$&v v\*-:Vv-vv*IMBBHi” ?/■? Craccui 'friendship £ccietu jfnc.Jn nUoru of Wy BcLJ 3amit»Mother — REGINA GARDENFather — JACOB GARDENSister —PERLA GARDENBrother —JOSEPH GARDENSister — BERTA GARDEN-FEITAND HER FAMILYKILLED BY THE NAZISSAMUEL Z. GARDENVI(TiX.M,Veto Ctacoti jNenfaki/t £ccietif Jhtc.x memoryof OuramiliedILONA, MANEK, NORMAN and SHELDONajJiWAV VAVV.V.VoooooooooaKdyooooooooooocoaaoaabWwoocooooooooaoooocSWQOQOQoooooooooooavWvKvX'Xf'^vSy^'S^^^y^'AwX*.* *yi>^y**^*-y^-S^~**-^Vr^ ^ ^^Av>>>>x<vV»>>y//*i^; ,w>»» x%v »>> >*»*o »> ?«-/-> >’-v> >,».vy>».v »; <■' V7'V/ ' > _.*»?;5;it3a« "Sffl4_*; 'v1/leu Ctaccu JtiehdAhift £ccietif Jfhc.Jn Wlemory4MY BELOVED FATHERISRAEL GURFINKIELMY DEAR GRANDPARENTSICEK and ETKA GURFINKIELROZALIA and ABRAHAM PLANCERUNCLES, AUNTS AND THEIR FAMILIESHENIEK GURFINKIEL MONIEK GURFINKIELFRANIA GURFINKIEL FELA GURFINKIELREGINA GURFINKIELDAVID and SALA SCHEINOWITZSRULEK and GENIA SCHEINOWITZHASKIEL and SALA SCHEINOWITZICIE LEIB and FELA SCHEINOWITZHENIEK and ANDZIA SCHEINOWITZKUBA and HANKA PLANCERMARKUS HIRSCH PLANCEREVER IN OUR HEARTSDANKA AND MOTEK KOHN\ •.*' > • .* V. ./ • \#► ; vmrri rximwwMjr**"   P2mmL tesr*v v.’.vXv! •*•* vl*!y. \\ • V •*' • • • ■■••. .v.v.v.v.v.v.w.v.v.v.v • •'•'•**'*•'• .v.v.v. *>Xkr. v,y.v.v. v ’ yHet* Craccu JriendAkip £ccietif JJhc.'em or ifHANA STORCHMATYLDA STORCHBERTA STORCHJOZIU STORCHALTER GATTERERLEA GATTERERLUDWIK MOSBERGBERTA MOSBERGHELENA MOSBERGKAROLINA MOSBERGLEIB BLUMENKRANZCHAWA BLUMENKRANZJAKUB ROSENFELDMANIA ROSENFELDHELENA ROSENFELDHENRYK ROSENFELDREGINA BOHMRUTKA BOHMMR. & MRS. EDWARD MOSBERG, OOOfta&9«COCfr3W^^Vc.VAHian1/leu Ctaccu JriehdAkip £ccietij Jthc.■sbws#^ssiwssiyfeSva'aVWn'emoruMY DEAREST SISTERLOLA MINSKAMY BROTHERLEON PINDECKOUR DEAREST AUNTGUSSIE MEYEROWICZUNCLEMORRIS PINDECKANDn r f / emoruOUR BROTHER IN LAWJOSEPH HIRSCHYou Are Always In Our HeartsMR. & MRS. MARK CHASINand SONSMiAiV.'.VAW.V\ip»*vvwvvv*vvivA’.'.V.V.V. .• WaV.V.V.v. »»»*'nr.-.*.-.-.”v.v.V"V’■iVV. i’.*,,.. v. . . .. V,V .v.vr.v,emorifFAMILY CHASINANDFAMILY PINDECKaIfMR. & MRS. MARK CHASINand SonsWWWWWWfl)MW<fflw^^memory.ALL TEACHERS AND STUDENTSOF CRACOW HEBREW GYMNASIUM, LICEUM,ELEMENTARY, TRADE AND COMMERCE SCHOOLSThat Perished During The Nazi HolocaustSURVIVORS:Amalia AllerhandLouis FagenBen GeizhalsHenry GreenspanIrving HalpernLeonard HiltonMax HilfsteinAnn KandelLeon LewisSimon MandelbaumSteven MorrowDola PolandEugenia RadwanManek WerdigerHarriet WolfeLarry ZellnerBlanche Zwern#Vip £ccietij JJhc.Jn W<0/ Our^sn I v femora of \surPARENTSBERNARD and ANTONINA nee FialaSTEIGBUEGELOUR BROTHER IN LAW AND OUR SISTERMARKUS and HANK A nee SteiglbmegelTENENBAUMKnown as “Family TENENBAUM”Killed for Active Support of the Jewish Underground “AKIBA”AND THEIR CHILDRENJEHUDAH (IDEK €6CZESIEK,9>Killed in Action as a Member of the Jewish Underground “AKIBA”PAULINAKilled as Active Member of the J. U. “AKIBA”OUR WIVES AND SISTERS IN LAWSARAH STEIGBUEGEL nee KrakowskaEVA STEIGBUEGEL ne’e BienandCHAIM IMEK STEIGBUEGEL,age 2son of MICHAEL and EVAMAX STEIGBLANCHE STEIG nee ZurawinMICHAEL STEIGRELLA STEIG nee KraussERNST SPIELMANLOLA SPIELMAN nee SteigbuegelV(eu> Ctaccu JriendAki/t £cciety JJhc.3n Jo.inf t.o7 of Wf Shear 3amil»SAMUEL ZANGERREGINA ZANGERMELANIA ZANGERJOSEF ZANGERHENRYK ROSNERFRANCISZKA ROSNERZYGFRYD ROSNERMARYSIA ROSNER (Offen)STANLEY SIMON ZANGERn n n n innnn rnn nniwu'jurliiiiiVii'irminmririnnnnnnoniinniiii'iiiiii'iiifii'iniliiniinnonnMfflfflTnooooioiWnwnnmMoortoWWim'aiiBuuinnnnann.nj.uwuuiftwinnunn■ rnnnni rirn'r nnnnnnnnrnnminiiniirinnnnri'nnnnnrnnnnnorninirininrin'nrip'rnninnnnniiiinririnnnnnnnnja'iiTirM\fimo.nnnfinnooooeeoooBTOBW8g)^yKK>ooiioniiii~irinn.nririJUUVU1lA)iiia immiywn.'n » • i >’r>w wvwjtow.v nnnn.n n'nmw nnnftnnnnnfli.iiaouVJVWnnnoiwumeooeaoogWAtniccactcooooMtl k' Xvvv^XvIvX1r. v.w.’.va'Xvfleitr Craceu> JrietufAkip £ccietij Jhtc.A CLUJ memoryoi Our (J3e(oveclWHO PERISHEDZichronom LevrochaHusband and FatherNATHAN GREENSPANSons and BrothersLEON GREENSPANARTHUR GREENSPANGrandmothersBETTY GREENSPANPERLA OBERFELDUNCLE USHER GREENSPAN and His FamilyUNCLE EMIL and AUNT ROSE and ChildrenAuntsLOTTI WEISMAN SHEINDLA EHRLICHHELENA TRZEBINERMy Father JOSHUA ISEROWSKIMy Mother BELLA ISEROWSKABrothers & SisterJACOB, ARTHUR & STEFA and Their ChildrenUncles and AuntsGOLDA GREENSPANandHENRY & CAROLA GREENSPAN—    , ... ,,,      I,    VVVVVVYVWVVVVVVN*^V.XIfleu Cmccu JrietutAkifi £ecietif J)nc.V«V*V«VwW3n a efished dldemoru o^ Our o&ear Ones:EDA TILLESZYGMUNT TILLESCELINA TILLES-CHWATREGINA ZUCKERMANNFREIDA DYMWOLF ZUCKERMANNSALOMON DYMNATAN ZUCKERMANNREGINA DYM-BERGLASSByHELEN and ALBERT TILLESiv«*.s v X v*^^^COOa!aV;OuuOuOOOC^^^ESTER and HENRY TILLESmMmmWs.Pei*- CracPh) Oriettfohi/i £ccietu Stic.Jn memoryoi Our ddeloved J-^arentiCELA and MORDCHA BUKIETMAJER and ITA KLEINERMENAHIM and HANA ROSENBLUMBy Their ChildrenMR. AND MRS. AL S. BUKIETMR. AND MRS. JOSEPH J. BUKIETMR. AND MRS. JACK KLEINERMR. AND MRS. IDEK ROSENBLUMli^aommwwwiL<M0pK9MMSSH   iflflflAinniinnnortotooiYaWffiffl'nniww.ViViV.'.VAv/w;'• • • 11 it n r n n nTfflinnnn (in n n n n n n 11 n 11 n'n n n n n n niiiiyiniwinji.n n n n'nj^wnoteoo'aoifi'iiinnniiwwu'iiljuiiw’o.o.etocicinubuuTnnnruiwaiiWQoftwawooMc^ioMiWnruwn.nonMouMownrMui^^o e a WJM nnnnrwinftcoocnjijjj uinAC coc ac s c o 8 a o a 6 e jv\ /*•7leu> Ctaccu JriehdAkip £ccieti/ Jthc.$0 tilt*Jn memory°fOUR BELOVED PARENTSBROTHERS AND SISTER, SISTER IN LAW AND NIECEMEYER KLINGERSABINA KLINGERMONIEK KLINGERHANIA KLINGERLUSIA KLINGERSELIG KLINGERFRANIA KLINGERBy Their ChildrenMR. & MRS. EDWARD KLINGERMR. & MRS. ROBERT R. KLINGERMR. & MRS. SAMUEL KLINGER> aaa^Vi V.'. VA'.V.V.:>  ::>waB»W^aiaaaaw.lofwtni0iict08iienBniini'au8ruinri(V~^^rinMJVifini0fi(ic<B0»«»0ti8at'maa^^:-^^aft^aeoo«giaflawa«fisSArLflflflflflooe8eQoo(iaauunnwx>ir>nnoiinnnnnnnnnnn r nnrnnrin iiiin'iiinnnnniinanxaoQQflooccioflfftisoB W«8«» mnntnicioooeca tr*ibnr\r**t a f.giWWWiswnrw.0 n n n n n n oc o a a eat a aW■>r>fioeoooo9Q'e~l,nj~AiWi.rArui rig aoaaoooeatiaaa B~BYairfr>o<W nwoeatMC u uVVVWVlfliVUliin.fin nmiaauu u utfuMnnmnnnepaaa'eaYa'a'eVaWinai’rtyBWawnnnannnooaa'uVuVWinP a a'no a ti'a hiVWWRP n'rn nWoBipWfflTnfflil^ y  'nrinnnnnnnnrtnfinfin'nn'nni'iiiV^onnntnaBBeuBe’aaoaiiWiAWOcaceBcooooaelS ^1fleu> Ctacou Jrienfakip £ccietij J/hc.In Cherished Memory ofOUR DEAR PARENTSTEMA and ALTER WEISLICSISTERSSARA, FRAIDA, ZELDA,RYFKA and CHANAMOTHER and MOTHER-IN-LAWEMILIA FELDSTEINLUSIA and ISAAC WEISLICGone But Not Forgotten!Jn Cherished W,emorif4Our Beloved Parents, Sisters and BrothersJoseph Baruch WeingartenPesel Frimet WeingartenCesia WeingartenRywa WeingartenAlois WarowiczBronislawa WarowiczRose WarowiczJoseph WarowiczMary WarowiczBy Their ChildrenMR. & MRS. ROMAN WEINGARTENMRS. RACHEL (Weingarten) WALD7leu> Ctaccu? y)rieH<(Ahij2 £ccietij Jfhc.In Cherished Memory ofMy Beloved Parents and FamilyFather — Abraham LeserkiewiczMother — Berta LeserkiewiczSister — Greta LeserkiewiczBrother — Jacob Kuba LeserkiewiczA W.LEON LEWISIn Memory ofOur Dear MotherElaine LewisDied in Sept. 1960DaughtersBONNIE & BARBARA LEWIS^mnMnmnpM#'nPoWoWnar iihh hMrunViTt^ u u ii u mnhnin nrin ii'iiTifni—r r^- irifirmnnnnnnnnnr inn n n nnnn1111n'nin1111nnnnnnn»irinnrinemory.°fOur Beloved Parents and FamilyWho Died al “Kiddush Hashem”in Cracow, During the Nazi HolocaustFather: Abraham LeserkiewiczMother: Berta LeserkiewiczSister: Greta LeserkiewiczBrother: Jacob Kuba LeserkiewiczFather: Israel SteinerMother: Ida SteinerSisters: Teofila SteinerEugenia SteinerYou Are Always in Our HeartsIn Memory of Our Dear Sister in LawEla ine LewisREGINA (Steiner) & VICTOR LEWISLESERKIEWICZimi^XMOtmoacaocoa’aiminirtoortixuiwwiOT?9ccot69QiaguwgwtnmfiMo«Mi»oocoftLiVuvvifinnfinnAfrhi u088 fi ilORJinniBiaaBaawwiaiateg^oii’rmmwiffMoooooeiiawijWinAmnraanniiiiiiuuaBK^x;^;ao;eaoooo8aao~8tatiWinj^WSiiW^,K>^co^eoaec\'inoH{iaoo^umaa^<»ooo«^iJuauVuiiVbVj\rLwnrnfirii8!oaLu'yTiJVir111 rn~rn.n.n nruwtnMn n n n n n nw in n.nn nnmr'n n ri n> n nootr n^^yBZfwuvuvtfyi     ijt  u 000.80 tec eeaoaafinaftnre" "v/,‘ v• ' | v:::::v,:::.I: > vX-::::.:-:: \ •• :>•:•>;//7leu> Ctaccu ^HehMip £ccietif J)hc.* «n*i'«>jVoVV.V.•.YAWAVV.1^Jn W,emorif0/MY BELOVED FATHERJACOBMOTHERTEOFILABROTHERSMOJZESZ AND JOSEPHSISTERAMALIALARRY ZELLNERJn WUory of W» (BeLeJFather: ELLIAS WERTHEIMMother: BALBINA WERTHEIMBrother: HENRY WERTHEIMSAMUEL WERTHEIM-;T] NLk• l> V tViV $:»a^ffliiliiS\**^, s vSi* *#«>> Cfacous 'friendship £ccietii Jhic.Jn Wenra^ of W,, PurenBENJAMIN and HELENA MOROWITZand My BrothersARON and DAWIDSTEVEN MORROWJn Wemory of Wy PcirenLEON and GENIA HOMSKIand My BrotherSTASIEKBARBARA MORROWy n -; m:^w.■ 'A *■1/leu Ctaceu ^fien^kift £ccietif Jfhc.On (Over oCadtintj, YYjcm orij o/Our dOeioved /dcimiiiedFRANCISZKA ROSNERHENRYK ROSNERMARYSIA ROSNER (Often)MELANIA ROSNER (Zanger)SAMEK ROSNEREWA ZUCKERMANN (Immergluck)ROMAN ZUCKERMANNMR. and MRS. HENRY (HERMAN) ROSNERMR. and MRS. WILLIAM ROSNER (ERNA ZUCKERMANN)JOSEF ZUCKERMANNOn Over oLastina YYJ‘emoruBenjamin FeuersteinAnna FeuersteinAdela FeuersteinTHEY DIED 6. ELUL 1942Rafael FeuersteinHE DIED 23. CHESHVAN 1942MR. & MRS. HERMAN BLAVAT_ a! s'Wv^'-kt^ »ggiSISMiip®i  r>:. :mm$m ...k*' u > -*>1i-.v/Xw.-.v!^;-..;>s>v\gjx|>S>&S&38ggHgs8£&fjeu> Craccw 'friendship £tcietu Jfne.x memory°fMy Beloved ParentsMgr. Emanuel HermanRegina HermanGEORGE HERMANwnmiwsi^p&tpSg&K&$$S9$$S&.g'.VHWKKwwciao^w^aaaa8C988ooQ8ooWouVVUVWVViJUimnji.finnnnai8oo888808M'avWinj,iiin)innnfinnnn#'/. fjt p;.••s •.?>; *’. A •A*'i,y• \ \. .*i •: ;•. •:/.•.VA’.V.V.OCvw.-mQQOOSWSQOOOix memoryofOur Beloved Parents & FamiliesBaruch, Rose & Helen FischerWilhelm, Regina & Marcel WeinheberAndzia, Zyndel, Josek & Mania LewkowiczChiel & Hudes WolfChemia, Laja, Mania, Jadzia, Sala SzarferWho Perished at the Hands of the NazisNATHAN & LUBA FISCHERMAYER & BLANCHE FISCHERDAVID & LYDIA WOLFiQnoyoWB’oWaWrtijijuuifijvinnjin.niBooaotBot'aDeuwnrinryni(i«n8iB8V>uWinmuuinji.nl8B888Wg^'IIVWM'nW88fle88989880,0ll'jyilVWWinflnniVJUUini1JI89e89O,988OC9UVVWVWVm9.99969899898.9U8VWUVinnnnW>98«C<  giigvuuwiriwiiww^If 90 8 <19 rt'b&rtfoW fWIWBOBBjDWtfBWVMWVWiiyi n99.9 9 a ilraTB**¥&IesCtacvto jMenfakift £ccietif Jthc." • •' \ ^ i/ .. .^MPrv> ;Wi“ ‘• • *:■ • y, .*.♦>.♦.%•«• ,:;:x;:v;.;. %v . ■ • ' v .1,   .....lv6&v . .f?# WMi-VP^J' CW**'nnnnWr^W^WiJn memorif°fOUR BELOVED PARENTSBROTHER and FamilySELMA AND DAVID FORSTERJn CLUJ W.cm orif oi Our ddeloved jf^arentiSALOMON GERSTNERBRANDLE GERSTNERMOSES DUDELCZYKGOLDA DUDELCZYKBy Their ChildrenMR. AND MRS. DUDELLMR. AND MRS. SILBERSTEINioWgWflomoflocoooouWWUli^^Qf>vy8-^m^nfOflfto'o(yKMg6»a.^QCitforoBoWnnniiiiiPii^"‘r?f8fi fieri—5— ’T\? #* f i «< f. •:/:•k* i< y. y%l♦ .Tt *[M%$m.-«*-■ •••Weu> Craccu> JrieHtfAkifi £ecietu JJhc.Jn Wemart of W, P.arcticCHAIM and TONI SPERLINGand My Wife’s MotherBETTY WASSERMANLEON SPERLINGJn m,emory. oiOUR BELOVED PARENTSBROTHER and SISTERLEON & JULES FTNKERnc Jutnonrjir.n na o'ne'o a a a a'a e a Ba'tfYinruiruin nrifinnonoue tfaimiii;ii;iiiiinQnnnnnniri'rnnnrinVionn;niirnnnnnnnnnnnoonfMio<>iiiii>irninnQiuwij''n'i'ioi'ncn nth nil iWtfi^BQ'o oboe j t a'ntmv'jrj.fifvrr r n VuW<Wi»iWy>»e,QMyoW- .an n inn oot   nnv1TnWrrti—'~,“rnnrn rr';'i i • n n r n n nrtr~~*^—11 r n n r nnn'ooiiiiii'ini'innrinnnri'n'n'oiifrii'iiii'iiiiiiiiii'iannnri.iiriyiiiiiiiiji.i. vT*A Vleu> Ctacvu; jNenfakift £ccietij Jthc.iV.,.V.V.Vt%,>Jn Ck ertslied and dCcovincf.w,emorif°fOUR DEAR DEPARTED SISTERPOLA NEUWIRTHBRONIA GUNZFELA MACHAUFROMAN GROSSJn Xmovincj, i v lemoryofOUR DEAREST WIFE AND MOTHERPOLA NEUWIRTHSALOMON AND NANCY NEUWIRTH‘AVAVAW.S.V pT>OpOOOOOOOOOAO^Ofl^^^fmiXQf^QOOOOOOOOOOOOOOO&O^OOfl^rflip*o^flf|new Chaccu) 'frienfakip £ccietif Jfitc.Jn memory of Our &LJ PuretiiMOSES and OLGA SUNZJONAS, GUSTA AND ROMAN GUNZ3n oCovincj. l/Yjemory of Wiy ^bear f^ictreriiMYER and HUDEL GROSSMy SisterLUSIA GROSSBRONIA GUNZa^'i'jVaW AV/.V.. V‘.V.WJ• • v,."Mo.,.' '-'-Xv.v.XCtaccu? 'JtienMip £cciettf Jfhc.cMl*V^6rtArtA^AAft***AMAju>‘« »'»'«Vk!AVWV>(WllW>AAAAAAAAAA A A « A« A .V.'Va'.'. ■•.•.•.‘.\AAAAAAAAAA A 4 At *-A.■ »> .V.VVAV.saaai^iVjiVi1 .\yXw.vCv^W»' tiuujyywOIN MEMORY OFOUR LOVED ONESDAVID AND NATALIA TWERSKYIN MEMORY OFOUR LOVED ONESSARA DRONSKIAND DAUGHTERS*^**3*«*WWa*N»»»**»«»«**W*^Jn m'emoruMY MOTHERErnestine Anis, born RosenzweigSISTERPauline Lundner born Anis and ChildrenEva, Genek & Wilek LundnerSISTER HUSBANDGizela Abend born Anis Josef AbendKilled During World War II, in Krakow, PolandMRS. IRENE SCHWARZ born ANISJn m’emoruMY FATHERBernard SchwarzKilled During World War IIMR. HENRY SCHWARZIn Ever Lasting Memory ofmy Best Friend,Whom I Have Known Since ChildhoodHANKA FERBERliERNA ROSNER (Zuckermann)W&a-JBr\\ vm- f.i0*y~^imrn^^PwOOogeo900090C^w«w9WQvgopgoQooeoo^:% \ vviiiiiiiii>?.<>w ./\■VIM# ^ jlj'-MMiMmi..IHBgl|».Tleu Crackle jMeHttAkif* ^cciettf %c.IN MEMORY OFOUR LOVED ONESMR. AND MRS. JACK GEIZHALSAND SONSIN MEMORY OFOUR LOVED ONESMR. AND MRS. BEN GEIZHALSAND FAMILYlfWflfltfrtrftftOOllBOOCwnrinnnnfini'ifriili'irifinnflnnnflrinnnnnii'iililiflBifliiooQflfinri iiiiiiiiiiiiiiH'iiiiifinnfinrifinnfiiiii '' '"i winfir iiviiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii’iiiiiiifii'iiii'iriii miiiimiiilraooooooooc«ooycWWWaiM»«oo«M)0<>oooooobbWaa8ifl»««oo<o»ooob^POOO<X>OOOWCOO&3ggWOOO<*>™iyW1rtO<Mrtr^WW<>0™<ttOO»68iBa»^ "fr jiwwcftaowwwaftaftariwwiftfloino^.< \\sv/^*y' "/PSte^asgi'. S^Si*vc->••;. jx* \aarip<>jrN-.;< *•> "': V • iS V • iv V ;’••- %i •■"'•• %■<:<•:^ ■ -Imfteu? Ctaccu 'JfieH^hip cietij Jthc.A m A A am . . Va-W'^w^.vWith Greatest Feeling in Loving Memory ofMy Dear Family — Parents, Brothers & SistersSALOMON, SZYMON, ZYGMUNT, HENRYRYWKA, LOLA, FRANKA, MANIA, BRONIANEIGERand Their FamiliesYou Are Always in Our HeartsMR. AND MRS. JACK NEIGERand FamilyJn nUory of W? &LJ 3am 4Mother SONJA PEWZNERFather LEON PEWZNERBrother HERMAN PEWZNERBrother HENRYK PEWZNERBrother ZYGMUNT PEWZNERSister MANIA PEWZNERSister HELA SAUBER Born PewznerSister HANKA HAUSEN Born PewznerMy Nephews and NiecesMARYSIA SAUBER THEODOR HAUSENLEON LIEBGOLDNAT PEWZNERItaLlU'itlVAVAWaW/xoiaoctgwyggtwwi1 i nWrfill i Ml) I) OOQ 0 0 0 oOTflWoi) ni n'n nn'nn'n'nti'nTtWHlO.OQOnonifiriiTi LfU'uiiiiDOQQGOaTB^ryra^^^W>l>9000Q80088flWf»W»wort c e ot m ewragflft   ^taeaitnuimnftWi^i'Viwciiiiiciiiiiunnruwinnnnririnj,ifi?li j OOP n no n nn nnrinjrihinirihjarLi u'i iryiooiix^^c>a«irfa8UgtnAnnpbbcoooeBao:ri.i JvnnArinnnnntinRcinQoaoBf*19 o a o o e o ac e a oc oa a'o'awwwWWWwcwwwaonboaiirtVWliVWMCiifoaiAim^|2;|Web? Ctactto JriefufAkip £ccietif J?hc.'...V.V.WLVAAAA.'tu^ »'.' .V.VAv.vwua* A.»A.>l>j>,jj'tVX'>vXs‘AW ’j„ memory°fJACOB BUKSBAUMJOSEPH PLENECKIBELLA PLENECKIARTHUR PLENECKIANNA BUKSBAUMLEA BUKSBAUMSALAMON HERBSTHANNAH HERBSTEMIL HERBSTPHILIP BUKSBAUMJn m*emoryoi Our i^eloveclZELDA ENDERAMELIA ROTHGINTEL ROTHREGINA ENDERHERMAN ROTHMONIEK ROTHTHE FAMILY MARKUS & IDA ENDERQOQo^flW)myK>!n<KKttoaocooWiftUWWW^^oooMooaMttaSPooooioctio^owcooeww^^^ywwwoBeoooeoWayowooooocoftooo'oMati'iWWftfiofKHtftooooooeocWnow^Qtooaootooc}'  ::::iS:Ili|P"'"'  ' - V.HfV:r,\:^* xSL -w'Cracow yrienfakifi Society Jttc.Jn CLristJ W.emorif°fOur Beloved FamilyIsaak RosenzweigGitel Franciszka RosenzweigZygmunt RosenzweigCesia RosenzweigMarek RosenzweigErna RosenzweigSzewach WalkowskiJozua WalkowskiAmalia WalkowskaAda WalkowskaBy Their Sons, Brothers andDaughters in-LawMR. & MRS. JEHUDA ROSENZWEIGMR. & MRS. MARCUS ROSENZWEIGJn CLruU W,emory°fOur Beloved FamilySalo HolznerAnna HolznerBronislawa AkselradIdasiek AkselradStela AkselradHenryk MunkLusia MunkGuteczka MunkGizela LangerJanek LangerErna HolznerBy Their Husbands,Sons in-LawBrothers in-Lawand FatherMR. SZULEM LANGERMR. JEHUDA ROSENZWEIGii n tio q o'o Q~oo n c'ci'o'o'n'racaoocoxoxacityaXC>XCB8X0O808^W8WWW^<^8888088tO0tf>WW»yri e a u u u u u WiruyinniVin n n n n nn u y n u g atfuuwru'uw o.o n i o o n c a oia i.ru uWmnruvinjOil 08008(8 60'08V8(lWjW fl 8woMBBoWuTmuvifinftnjijnoaebeaawoooaofrocn x ,.>jyp w illWeis Craccut 3fiend Ah ip £ccietif Jfnc.L*'i tVi'«VAVAv.v\A^A4»\»*ju!*VAVVAVAW»V^' * * *j„ memon^oj? ^ewd ^~}rom C^tracowSIMON LAUFERJn W.emory°fOUR DEAR ONESLOLA AND HENRY TENENBAUMand Daughtersw^n« w w w n P r n-ff n fl n n no orfia^OOTi nnon n n n ao<>f><>ft<»<v>ooK>ftaftfta<topypooot>ooomwftfl fi iv*wy*yyywftwn n (wvkvvinrtKr^mn awoo<yK><>rH)nfk-My «m ■. m xj oyooooo n n noooofroo oWT( iW,s£«&\Wr* NC-* uV^*k l* ♦ i **-JSSSf!m -Cracou JrieHtfAki/t £ccietij J/hc.AA» * »-«_» •«••• •'•VuV^/wV'vV'Jn Ck e rid lied ^Yiemori^ o^ Outd^eloved f^urentd dnd l^eicitiuederidiurMENACHEM MENDEL SILBER SARA SILBERZISMOND SILBER, Wife and Ch ildrenJAKOB SILBER EVA SILBERABRAHAM GOTTLIEB, Wife HELEN and SonHILEL ALTER WEINSTEIN, Wife KAROLA SILBERan d Child renIGNACY KLEINHAUT FRANKA SILBER and SonWife, Children and Grandchildren of SAUL SCHREIBERPINKAS SCHREIBER, Wife and ChildrenSCHREIBER-JELINOWICZ and FamiliesENGLAENDER and Families—POL ACK and FamiliesDR. JOSEF SCHREIBER and DaughterBy JOHN J. and BETTY SCHREIBERABRAHAM ABE, MIRJAM LIBE VERDERBERMAURYCY (Mietek) VERDERBERDANEK, RENT (Rosner) VERDERBERFREDEK VERDERBER CYLA VERDERBERCHAIM LESSER, HELA (Verderber)Children BENEK and MENDEKMOSES BOCH, FELA (Frost) Children, MOTEK, SABINAABRAHAM KNEITEL, SHEINDEL GITEL (Spira)HERSCH KORN, GOLDA (Spira)SCHMERL SPIRA, JACHET, Children and GrandchildrenBERNARD FELDMAN, RACHEL (Tuch)LEIB, ROZA LETZTER,Children and GrandchildrenAlways in Our HeartsBERTHA, RACHEL, RECHAVAROMEK B. EFRAIM. ZVI, ROMEK F.fonflVWHfrnfflInn'o'nl^WoWooPftW (i»o s a a corn (i am a a a a eVa Wwyno e c'c Bboooboynih^>w^~ihniUuWuuuinn.o(i'ri u iiuuuuuu aifuiii;VH>ono^8{eoee8t'aau»i^«a^^»..;.^oi>oc'ecwatoen>iora'ijVWirjmrMriAanjj'ijuiifiiOGoooaio'iVo;a-a      f„,iii(|||p^.nr■ f ■ ri'nnnr*** r-li'ii-nIItnnnnnnrrrrr¥nn(Innnonirnr~r^rnn'n'nnnofinn'innnnyfi'nii'’.:: ■    .»-     * ■1     -|• rnWnWifiitnnnnnnnr-'tt-tnrrIfvm-ymnfirir n'nf/'r r ■ nr'n'irnn'r"-*•^1—irrn'nnnWonnWnVrnntTnnWii'o'nh'nnon'iiiiuiioirirAr'rnnn'nnnnuiiuu'ii'uflyL-:><V /•C-ww¥t&lnngr a**;-"’,s;* f#.4/^01Ctacou> JrieHitAkip £ccietij Jfhc.■jfiiiiiiiiMN.fefcf-VtVsy .vj„ memory.„/MFather: Chaim BisgaierMother: Tila BisgaierSister: Libe BisgaierBrother: Natan BisgaierBrother: Samuel Moses BisgaierBrother: Sam BisgaierBrother: Israel Mayer BisgaierBrother: Efraim Salomon BisgaierSister: Shea Bisgaier married Pluznikand Her SonDavid PluznikFromABRAHAM BISGAIER* v •' y.’ \ v v*A Amovincf / v lem or if°fOur ParentsSzymon and Balbina BorerJakob and Adela SchreiberSisterCyla Sries (Borer)Brothers and WivesMundek and Ida BorerMarcel and Pola Borer (Agatstein)and All Others Members of the FamiliesBORER AND SCHREIBERByNORBERT AND BLANCABORELL (BORER)DR. & MRS.MARK WEITZ (SONIA SCHREIBER)iwiwiw^ai ■•■•■nv'mnnfiiw r i - i i n n fm'irfiwtmtrmftWnn'^" nrfinrnnn f r r it "mrtf nnnnnoffiim'^rmniVonnortnoVitinnnnnnm■■/A „ . , V"-- 'i ilriV*\1/leu Ctacpu? Jnenfakifi £ccietij JJhc.>-A-»y> ywyiW/i<wuwu>J„Ol/Ut{f'em or ifSAMUEL FEILEROTILIA FEILERADA HUBEL-FEILEREISIS KLINGHOFFERCLARA HILT (HILFSTEIN)Jn W.emory. o.OUR BELOVEDMR. & MRS. NATHAN DREWv-»'. ,.w^vvsv?i7*. *.Cv.-ill.vWtf'-*v.XCtaccu JneiulAkift £ccietif Jfhc.J„ W.emori^ewSromracowSILVI CONCRETE CO111Jn nemoryeu/3romracowSUMMIT LUMBER COChatham, N. J.t & 'M V X^>*«!>VSVaS VAW-vVXjV.V.'.'.'.'.'.'.'.^'^^^yjl^^VyV 'Irw■*S:1 fpMIr M v\£v^.a«ir <t t ?rr>MlIj*|H1P«IM1jw.Vvi5> *. .TT' •mMrnmmm^'mitteu> Craccu! ^Hen^ki/t £ecietu $hc.3n memorifofOUR BELOVED FAMILIESMEHRFISHERHIRSHKRAUSHOROWITZAKSELFIALALANGERKEILFILLERBy Their ChildrenTULEK MEHR—EMILIA AKSELAnd GrandchildrenRUTH—SIGMONDa memory^ewsrcicowHARRY SICAKENILWORTH, N. J.Hi.woWRWi »y9i»ft»a«8ii p qpjwian n n m n n o o a tjco aaaf6Agnn ii'fl'uYJ^ju^yywTiivioniiiccaoaWlAoWooWi'rtftjnnnimnnoooioYiiWUYi^poooocboon'nTiyiVLi'iJ^i.a^y^iW'jisiyijii.'ocyoc^V^'ec'e^'e^'^yyiia^cvooooo^'a'oju'Li'uWivuuijiHi.. V.-vVi*.mj„ me mo rip7leu> CracQU JrienMif* £cc/eti/ Jthc.romracowF. L. V. PAINTERS, INCHOBOKEN, N. J.Jn W.e mo ripoj? ^ewd *5rom C^tracowCUSTOM STAIR BUILDERS INCKENILWORTH, N. J.wooonM'eWinnWtfyWftflflaftftOpiftttpMlv*ww^^x.oonrtrttn<ww»Miw»i»*Kinnflrtonn<winfliv^• • Vv* •••• v\£&M$00gtjeu? Ctaccu 'Jtien^hip £ccietif J}hc.In Memory of the Jews from CracowBACO LIGHTING CO., INC.891 STATE STREETPerth Amboy, N. J.Jn memoryoj? Qew.S Z^rom L/racowTOWNE EXCAVATING, INCSCOTCH PLAINS, N. J.1:,:g;teoao»oeooM^iii.kjij'iWiWi#>»»>o<»>ooo»ooo^oob<6Waag/:>>; :>*<?'/>'>* •- >• ••••• i ? ::it::>!<^. J. ^1*y. y -'v.v'-V^r":?Xi k i .N.,xft %AU ^ ;:c,  ^^pPQQQOOOOCOfyVVVVVV%rM>V\<^V^A^^^^vJ»J>x <<<r^vvy^or^ww--^^A,.         'eu Craccti ^Hett^hip £ecietif Jhtc.Jn memoryoj? ^ew6 *5rom C^tracowte& Z t Sl MM .ii- }fc# *.^aViVi'jYAVAW.WFAIRFIELD GREENS INC262 Hollywood, Fairfield, N. J.Jn W,emory.oj? ^ewS *5rom C^iracowCARL PISCITELLIivWiiywnfflftftlinnp n n n’n n n n n nno nWKWHinraflltr^^^M^f^WrfWyf^^ " i ■ * "'■'■ ■w»w'^wwww^.aooooowtoaaaaBpocfHMqciOfrti^^MOOOOOOOOOOMOtofettftMOOMObMOMOOMOttttMCOMeOMOMM< #*> Is&zJ ::;5:iHrrrrr^jzcaa• 7tw-. >. •' i * *:* V i  ^^^^^K?^vvSS5!^E^v^^5SSSS??Sffl??SSiS88??^S2SSSBSS88!88SS^SSSSSS^^WWft^:•^^^^^^^^^^^^Ir^I•^^^^^^:^•^:•: > rfa*' Cractui 'Jt-ienjAhift £cciettf Jfnc.Jn memory.oj^ ^ew5 ^j^rom C^tracowALAN MICHEL PLUMBING. INC2377 Washington Ave., Bronx 58, N. Y.x memoryo^ ^ews ^jJ-rom C^tracowHOUDAILLECONSTRUCTION MATERIALS. INC10 Park Place, Morristown, N. J.■ViViV*'iVA'*V.V»inniWriiw^Mra.ooMoWooeWrflHsiaoaQoooBeocuoYu'i.LJWJ'bXW.rAn/Lra-Ji fi' n^iooaooeaeeaan'i'sy.riAnjirArLPooooaoaaooaaaiiLe'uyiirLr-ar'a'aati'noaaoeaac !iaaf^riA'inonnnnoeT?oafiays^^n'r^^nn<ioo»;iao<wiuLruWLVinacc'aeoc{Ga^ygUB^JViAftf!g<><><>tWNVwoe~eWL^nnnnnnnnnMiVrfmmiVilWdWjWi^^;^wt»7t>^‘^'iffl>'wvr^r*:»;rf^'*i»^i>(i^wMMnn'nn¥(inYn^“;jwwi^ ,nri,,r(nr,riViiViViViViynn'riVin'n~nan.ny"i»■ ■»■ •»»■ nt*t;arnxtV.-y■ i   ' unitv**'•"• *• ^•■•■•■•••■•■•(|-»^w»»»'»«y«rm'•■ ■•■ yteiPeu> Craccit! 'Ji-ieH4ihip £ccietu JJhc.3n nemoryoj' ^ewd ^Irom C^trucowUNION PAVING& CONSTRUCTION CO., INC2568 RT. 22, N. J.x memorijoj' ^ewd C^§racowSTAR OFFICE SUPPLY CO., INC"""" nnn imi m» ■ • • n r n n • -Tnmmn—"•■ n iir nYnr^-'-wif nnn n nn nn n (ftntwiaftfinnn n'nn n n f - -' pir r it r i n n 1 j u y.Veu' Craccu- JrietutAkip £ccietu J)nc.Jn memoryoj? tlieewd from£racowBUILDERS FAIR, INCROUTE 22Springfield, N. J.Jn memoryoi rfewi Z^romrucowOLIVER MANUFACTURING SUPPLY COWoodbridge-Carteret RoadPort Reading, N. J.|p:irteltd* Cracnt JrieHatAhip £ecie tif Jfhc»^V. * »V .^VVAVAVA VVIVV * ’ *J„ W.emory.oj' ^ewA *3rontracowHERBERT MEYERIn Memory ojJosef TeitelbaumSaul TeifelbaumMllek PatrychHenryk TeitelbaumZygmunt PatrychIn Memory ojKlara PatrychCyla PatrychMy Beloved Parents,My Brothers and SistersMR. AND MRS. RAFAEL PATRYCHMRS. M. ABRAMOWICZ ~,^^y«Y>w^fffnnnnnnnnnTiTnnnnnnnnnwnnnnnnnMn(rff^n'nnnnnnii(innn(iiiiiiiiiiil(ii,i()n(imofiiiiii>iNii>iiiw|     .    — ■ * m ■ n Wft"" "*««f ft r n n b n nn ivNttiiti n imrtfin tin nonnonnofioWtiwmiftfi nnooooooooojVeto Ctaccui 'friendship £ecieti/ Jfiie.Jn memorif°fMy Beloved FamilyMax EhrlichScheindla Ehrlich born OberfeldJozef Ehrlich & FamilySarah Ehrlich Weiss & FamilyGrandparentsUncles, Aunts & CousinsHENRY EHRLICHJn Werncry ofW, &LJ JarniLAdolf SauberHelena Sauber born PewznerMarysia SauberMy GrandparentsUncles & Aunts & CousinsSABINA SAUBER-EHRLICH: vw »o.o'WIWWiliajW»>w mum o oc;<w>nne o'»>H..r>rtooAravifio 11 in r.rwu.. :iS- y11 n A M " n 0.0 08 8 0»'ll uVUtP-fiaIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsJuda and Helen WengerWho Died “A1 Kiddush Hashem”in Tarnow,during the Nazi HolocaustABE WENGERIn Memory of OurFather — Wolf SchamrothMother — Sophie SchamrothSister — Mania SchamrothJULIAN SCHAMROTHBERNARD SCHAMROTHon o c o o o oc o o tfhtfh n n nhWoTjyuuuuwiin%:l.Tj.'OLHei* Craccto JriehMi/t £ccietif jfhc.3*^1i&fe’N'/ £ >i k y.A: -i. ii: :•'/, V £•; >wv.wu>»A>kCOi■***»AAA/wvu*>aaaa»aaaaaj^aa!In Memory ofIn Memory ofMy Dear ParentsMy Beloved DaughterMordechai and Celia BeigelIdusia Montagand BrothersAbraham, Alter, NaftaliMotherLOLA RUBINSTEINDaughter and SisterLEE ABRAMOWITZIn Cherished Memory ofIn Memory ofOur Beloved Mother & SisterGolda JachzelHudzia JachzelJoseph Hirsch ZuckermanZofia ZuckermanMojzesz Juda ZuckermanMR. & MRS. VICTOR BLUMENSTYKMR. & MRS. ABE JACHZELFAMILY ZUCKERMAN‘iV.VASVA WWwV    yow><o^o>>o>o>otooayiHtttMraro)BH»M^BMjoio¥rti<^^mWiliUMs> ■: ':x' \ < >•«>'/« v»*<vX vav^Vama In Memory ofFamily GangelandIn Cherished Memory ofOur Beloved Parents, Sisters & BrotherSimon HaberRegina NachhauserFra nciszka NachhauserHerman WichterRegina WichterSarah WichterRachel WichterFamily LobzowerMR. & MRS. MAURICE GANGEL3 1In Memory ofMy DearestFather— Emanuel AbrahamerMother — Wilhelmina Abrahamerborn AbendBrother — Chaim AbrahamerSister—Helen Bergerborn AbrahamerBrother — Joseph AbrahamerRICHARD ABRAHAMERJacob WichterBy Their ChildrenMR. & MRS. MARIAN & POLANACHHAUSERJACOB NACHHAUSERIn Memory ofOur Beloved, Parents, Brothers and SistersAbraham & Anna TyrasMoses, Markus & ReginandJacob & Franciska AgatsteiinPola & MoniekLEO & OLGA TYRASmr. liiiii iiimiy Im1 jiiaisi,_, . r>j $ VH>Hi ,#j'• V: ;X... . .•’ ’ V. ,.>•}eu> Craccut ^fieh^ki/i £ccietif J/hc.''’’ ’i *xi:$,::>!»>>VJ„ mrn.,5, ofIGNACY and VICTORIA GRUNBERGFrom Their ChildrenJULIAN, HERMANALFRED, JOSEPH and Daughter GIENAJn Wemo^ ofABRAM and ITA KALMAN and Son LEIBELFrom Their Daughter & SisterMALA GRUNBERGJn Wen, or» ofHERMAN and MARIA LUSZC2ANOWSKIFrom Their DaughtersHELGA GRUNBERGLUSIA WEINSTEINJn Wen,or9 ofADOLF and SALLY ABRAHAMand Daughter LISAFrom Their Son and BrotherERNEST ABRAHAMJn W,emory oi Our $eioiPAULA NEUWIRTH&LJ 3rieruFROM ALL OUR FAMILIESVsY*' ./ .: : : : -; •X ^ * ,*mm®••>• • ' *;*•*>*:*:**:Vet* Cfacets JriehctAkip £ccieti/ J?hc.In Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsSalomon and Basia LiebgoldandIn Memory ofOur Dear SisterTonia LiebgoldJANEK AND LONEK LIEBGOLDIn Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsAbraham and Bronistawa BlochOur Sister and BrotherIda and EmanuelAlways in My Heart. My SonStefan EisnerPAULINE BOYMANAND LEON BLOCH   rr-f'onWnWn'mnnnnniinnrir -in I) I ini 11 m n i ill i >iiiii i'i rginjn n n H n fl fi f 11111 j 1111111 n n n n n o on on n n n n nTiTitrrr< iiitr n "" '»«» «■«. ■- .-OIn Memory ofFAMILYSCHMARAKMR. & MRS. ADOLF SCHMARAKIn Memory ofOur ParentsJozef Gronner & Pauline RosenbaumSzaja Oscar & Tonka Raucherand Sister Gusta RosenbaumMR. & MRS. JULIUS ROSSirninnanoniii'injiyyiiiODDOiiflflnEocococoooottioo'aWftrcOeeMOMOMOMtift)  •-w^f>T',..ynrnfnnnnn;-^iOTnnri.nnnnrriinifllinnnnnnnnnnnnr'nnii'nr fftilTi nn n n nn n n n n n n n ni ^ fi n n n nYinan.n.nnimnn i n 11 ii m„ . mwp\ ?‘lSi*"'f&S&Mz£m2SBmkneu> Ctaccu jtieh^kip £ccietu 9In Cherished Memory of ourBeloved ParentsSaul and Roza WachtelAbraham Mayer and Sara NeugeborenBrotherHenryk WachtelandSisterFrania WachtelRENA & MICHAEL NEUGEBORENIn Memorv ofOur DearNorbert Berdyczower Sara BerdyczowerMax BerdyczowerSophia HonigSalomon SchanzerJacob SchanzerJoseph BerdyczowerSimon HonigRegina SchanzerEma SchanzerFreda SchanzerSAM AND POLA SCHANZERand SAM BERDYCZOWERjfe? 111!In Cherished Memory ofOur Beloved Parents, Sisters and BrothersIzak and Paulina KleinwachsFerdynand KleinwachsMaurycy and Rosa GoldbergPoldek and Pola GoldbergCyla (Goldberg) and David HilleSabina GoldbergSOL AND FRIEDA GOLDBERGSAMUEL HILLERIn Cherished Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsFather—JacobMother—BerthaSisters—Adela and Amalia LaksYou Are Always In My HeartHENRY LAKS. ...... 'QWoayoWinrirwiiyuwin.Mflftnffinnfln^^^^ h -lf)nf I,iri>riiiiolvi)o)nrinnnnn.(i.nivi(viooii'iK>iroii>rinnririririn' Minffliiffniiii’ii’rifinnao' '.' iw i iin winnnniwinntwmtf IBr awfmi0it}gIn Loving Memory ofOur Parents and SisterMarkus & Helenand Stela EnglanderIfeu Ctacou y}rien4^hip £ccietif JJhc.In Honor ofROSE & ROMAN ENGLANDERand G randchildrenMark and LaurieIn Loving Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsALEXANDER and HELENAand BrotherLEONBENO SONNENSCHEINIn Memory ofIn Memory ofMy Beloved DaughterRENATA KLAPWALDMy BelovedMother—Litka (Lieba)Sister—E vaSister—MilaUncle—Srulek SchenkerRosa Weisser(LONEK) ARIE TEITELBAUMiSfflsiiWets Craccu JrieHdAki/t £ccietif JJhc.■15,v<jj'i^V.SVAVWAIn Memory ofOur Dear OnesIn Memory ofOur Dear ParentsMother—Sydonia WachtelSister—Anna WachtelSister—Balbina WachtelSister—Regina WachtelHELENA PRZYBYLOWSKAMajer Seidenwar Josek WesolowskiPerl Seidenwar Amalia WesolowskaOur Beloved Sisters & BrothersChaim Seidenwar Malka WesolowskaChaja Seidenwar Chaskiel WesolowskiCipora SeidenwarfromJOSEPH SEIDE LAURA SEIDEIn Memory ofIn Memory ofThe Jews Who PerishedGhetto CracowOur Loved OnesSAMUEL HERSLYMR. & MRS. ALEX GRUENBERGV'!v'N*MiHeu> Craccu? JrietuiAkift £cc/eti/ J)nc.In Memory ofOur Dear ParentsJoseph M. Tilles Anna Goldstoff TillesMosze Wolf Dizenhaus Cypora DizenhausOur Beloved Sisters and BrothersSamuel Dawid TillesHelena Till esElla TillesLola Dizenhaus GadSaul TillesSalomon TillesEmanuel TillesChaim GadAron GadMania Dizenhaus Abraham DizenhausTOLA & MAX DIZENHAUSIn Memory ofMy Family—Mother, Sisters and BrothersSTUBERIn Memory ofMy Wife’s Family—Mother, Sisters and BrothersSIEBZEHNER.v«w-*wvw*.v;To The Memory ofIZAK and MINA GRIESand GITLA SOMMERBeloved Parents ofMr. & Mrs. Jack SommerIn Memory ofBeloved Husband, Father and GrandfatherRudolph BresslerA Iways in Our HeartsMR. & MRS. ADOLF STUBERKALMAN GOLDBERGo,,‘•v,.1/leu Ctaceu JrieiutAkip £ccie tif Jfhc.In Memory ofMy DearFather: Henryk HilfsteinMother: Rosalia SterlichMiSisters', Renia and HalinaEDWARD HILT-HILFSTEINIn Loving MemorymSzymon HilfsteinPaulinaHilfsteinAndzia HilfsteinGeniaHilfsteinLeon HilfsteinJulekHilfsteinHela HilfsteinSzymonHilfsteinEDWARD HILT-HILFSTEIN*>VVaaWA^AAMAMAAA>AAAtutVAV.SAMi^ 1In Memory ofMy WifeFRIDA PENNER born LERNERand our DaughtersSONIA and MASZAPeter PennerIn Memory ofMARKUS HIRSCHFELDROSALIA HIRSCHFELDJOSEPH KENNERSARA KENNERAMALIA KENNERMr. & Mrs. Joachim BrenesMr. & Mrs. Milton HirschfeldIT*ms:\Craccu? jMenifAkip £ccieUf Jthc.#xWx>s<.yyi/wwvA*In Memory ofBlanka Molkner WeinbergSTEPHAN WEINBERGitIn Memory ofThe Deceased Members of TheHammer Familyand TheThuroff FamilyTED AND EVA HAMMERaiVAVAV.VIn Memory ofThe Family ofDr. Naum WortmanDORA BLUESTONEIn Cherished Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsMina and Simonand My BrothersJanek and Markusand Unforgetable SonSimonTOBY AND DAVID SCHARFy*UVAYAWkW>4«I'-TYT— • ^BESSSg^^ggSSi!!!!! ■•■,,, v=     v.w - «■%;*r>' m,jS:*$t>.<v.<>wWrXv>x*:vA->:^   Ctacou JriendAkift £ccietif J)nc.In Memory ofMy FatherBernard JuckerMy MotherHelena JuckerMy SisterSala JuckerJACK JUCKERIn Memory ofMy HusbandJechiel BleicherRUCHLA BLEICHERvrvp>,wMww.«jAO^VWAVAVAw'In Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsMR. & MRS. ISAAK FENSTERIn Memory ofAll Our Relatives, Friendsand Neighbors from CracowThat Perished Duringthe Nazi HolocaustRENE & LEWIS FAGEN3yoMWoooooooooofeoooboMWftafififlftaflaaafloooocooooobooewi^ViHXffl^^ r ^■ '"v.wovwww^m.My Beloved Father, Brothers, and SistersKilled by NazisSzymon SchornsteinAron Schornstein and FamilyMaurycy Schornstein and FamilyRegina SchornsteinAmalia SchornsteinSalomea Grunrock and HusbandStefania Wohlfeiler and HusbandANNA KLUGER-SCHORNSTEINIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsRozalia and Jozef KopecSAMUEL KOPECBogota, ColumbiaIn Memory ofOur Beloved Parents 1942-1945Maurice BeerFrimeta BeerOur Brothersignatz — Pinkas — DavidHenryk — Salomon — MaxymilianSamuel — Jacob — OziaszOur SistersIrena — Eleonora — RosaliaALEXANDER BEERSALOMEA STEINREICHANNA ROSENBLUMIn Memory ofMy FamilyParentsSalomon and Jacheta GrubnerBrotherFerdynand GrubnerSister and Her FamilyDina, Josef, Cesia KremsdorfSister and Her FamilyTauba, Max, OlekBronek, Maniusia RettigSister and Her FamilyHelena, Martusia, Dorcia RosenbaumMR. SIGI GRUBNERfltriftnnriiiimnnnnnrififini i’i* ii i i ....,». iatirwmr innoewt* Ctacou JriendAkip £ccietif JJhc.W01*||^/ j t«j;tyk^U*AV.SVAW.VvIn Memory ofAbraham ScheinMaria ScheinHelena ScheinJakob ScheinSymcha H. SchwedSara G. SchwedBronislawa SchwedFeliks SchwedEstera Schein Jezajasz SchwedMaurycy SchwedAlways in Our HeartsMR. & MRS. HERMAN SCHEINMR. & MRS. LEOPOLD SCHEINIn Loving Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsBronislawa and Maurycy AbrahamerEleonora Ernes+yna andGustaw BreitkopfSister, Brothers and Their FamiliesSamuel AbrahamerHenryk and Franciszka AbrahamerHelena and Benjamin BeerADA AND RAFAEL ABRAHAMERIn Memory ofMy Dear BrotherJakob MandelbaumWho Died al Kiddush Hashemin K.Z. Mauthausen on March 27, 1945SIMON MANDELBAUMIn remembrance of My Dear ParentsJeruchem ReichRosa Reichand My Dear FamilySala Safier, Husband and ChildrenRegina Glaser, Husband and Childrenand My Dearest BrotherHerman ReichMANIA MANDELBAUMIn Loving Memory ofOur Dear ParentsJacob and Helen TenenbaumSamuel and Gittla BalsamSisters and BrothersHaskel BalsamPincus BalsamMayer BalsamAdela BalsamSussel BalsamHela BalsamRegina BalsamRose BalsamDora BalsamLUSIA AND HENRY BALSAMVeto Cracoto JrieHiiAhifi £ccietij Jfhc.In Memory ofMy BelovedParents: HENRY and LOLA SEITLERBrother: IGNACY SEITLERSister: REGA SEITLERMR. & MRS. ROMAN SEITLERand FamilyIn Memory ofMv Beloved MotherFela JakubowiczIDA TURNERand Familyi»V*Vi VifAVAWWIn Memory ofMy ParentsJuda and Stefania Rothsteinand My SistersHelen and Efraim BlumTonia and Salomon Hefnerand BrotherSalomon and Zosia RothsteiiAMALIA ALLERHANDIn Cherished Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsFather: Usher Anchel GreenbergMother: Rachel GreenbergFather: Isaac MendelsohnMother; Scheindel MendelsohnMANIA & DAVID GREENBERGIn Loving Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsIn Memory ofJUDA and RACHELand our Dear SistersFRIEDA and CECILIsaac, Michael and Alex InsdorfFamily SpielmanIn Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsHERMAN and FANNY SEIDLERand our Dear Sisters and BrotherSTELLA and ISAAC INSDORFA tribute of honor toOur Parents and SisterFrom SkawinaCHAIM & JAKOB SPIELMANIn Memory ofMy Father — CHAIM EDERSisters — FANNY, LOLA, HELAand Their FamiliesIn Memory ofMy Brothers and SistersIGNATZ, ROMAN, KARL, BERNARD,ROSE, FRANIA, FELA KOHANEand Their FamiliesJACOB A. DEUTSCHERIRVING L. DEUTSCHERand GrandchildrenWILLIAM & ROSA KOHANEnee Eder_ -5 A'XlV 'm"V*-*:*:*:*:*;y * * r >rr:vx :¥•'-V- • ->H■m>:,,... -Y.myWmM..:. \: #>•■' $'5r<?£-.: ^L! nx^Y1. SvS?5S?:S:S:Kiel* Cracvid JriendAkip £ccietij JJhc.tM.$ yy , /.-: THk. v : Jr:i ”#i%®iSSS,!# > i: Hi*In Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsSister and BrotherZygmunt & Regina KleinbergIgnacy KleinbergZofia WienerowaZygmunt & Ernestyna PoranskiJulius Adam PoranskiStepfan KlotzThey Will Remain in Our Memory ForeverHENRYK & HELENA PORANSKIMARTHA KUNTZMARIA KRUPINSKIIn Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsSisters & BrotherSamuel & Victoria KuntzLeon & Dora SterngastEdmund & Felicia ImmergluckHenry & Sabina HaberLeon & Irena KuntzStephania ImmergluckKarol & Jerzy KannengieserYou Are Always in Our HeartsBENO KUNTZIRENA WEINBERGLOLA SCHWEIDTIn Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsSister and BrotherLeon & Dora SterngastDavid & Regina SchenkerSabina SchenkerSara SchenkerMendel SchenkerFela Schenker & Son JehoshuaYou Are Always In Our MemorySIGMUND & EUGENIASCHENKER & SONIn Memory ofMy Dear Beloved FatherHEINRICH LANGSAMVicky LangsamIn Cherished Memory ofOur Beloved FatherROMAN ACKERMANMichael & Vicky Ackermaniiiiiiinnrnnnnnnnnn'niifiiOTfmiTnnnnnnnnnriorici'iViTi'iVi'iriiifinnnnrirrinri'fifiiin'fiiinfiiiTTtTinnnnririrciniifinowuIs>^::>:£IRS' .•>»'^::::^4^-:v.>^:r. ^M&mrsg?- ? assssCraccu Jnenfakip £ccietif J)hc.M4s l MUM-.;. s: f-;.V;:' :*:,:A'A‘AVV>IOCw>>A«V«VlgXM!«%VASvXWkV< *In Memory ofSisters and BrothersRENE KNOBLOCHIn Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsChaim Mayer BulkaBerta BulkaLeopold RolnickiReizel Rolnickiand Our Dear ChildrenLela Rolnicki Tema HauserFELA & HENRY ROLNICKIMIRIAM & MURRAY HAUSERRUEVEN & EDA BULKA-KAMINSKIIn MemoryMatylda StoegerHenry and Sabina StoegerKarol StoegerJoseph StoegerLusia StoegerJulius StoegerChiel LandauIzak StoegerMarcel StoegerMaryla StoegerMayer StoegerMariem LandauMayer LandauEMIL S. STOEGERIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsIGNACY and ROZALIA FALLEKMy SistersErna and Andziaand My BrothersNorbert and MaurycyIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsMOSES LEIB and GITEL GOLDBERGMy SistersAnna and Kaziaand My BrothersJoseph and LazarSZYMON and BRONIA GOLDBERG5min V . v' i *K< \\£x,^ vs\*J ,'~' v ^ vV/ ^V4/,llfiiiigllties* Craccu? JrienctAhiji £ocietu 9In Memory ofHusbandMeyer Samuel PoserIn Memory ofMy Parents and BrothersDavid and EsterNeuman-FelsenIsrael M. Neuman-Felsenand His 2 ChildrenSchifra, SalomonSamuel M. Neuman-FelsenMeyer H. Neuman-FelsenSzyja W. Neuman-FelsenMRS. ROCHELLE POSERIn Memory of Our Beloved ParentsJUDA and MARIAGRAJOWERand SistersLUSIA and RENIADAVID GRAJOWERHANKA GRAJOWER-FUCHSERNA GRAJOWER-NUSSBAUM^ViYAVAW.VIn Memory ofOur Beloved Father and HusbandSeligSon and BrotherSamsonSABINA, EMANUEL, HENRYMANDELBERGERThey Shall Not Be ForgottenIn Memory ofOur Beloved MotherErna KahaneOur Dear BrotherEng. Bernard KahaneMy Unforgettable HusbandEng. Ludwilc GertlerGiven BySUSAN LEHRHAUPT withSister NATALIA KOHN. .-.vx-S«v" : x::Our Father and HusbandRYWKA KUKURUDZChaim Israel FeigelMAX & ERNA HILFSTEINMy MotherIn Memory ofMy Beloved FamilyFather Leon HilfsteinMother Anna HilfsteinBrother Dolelc HilfsteinFamily Wasserlauf from BochniaLeon KlugerNissen Kluger and Familyand Family KennerLivia geb. Rosenzweigand SisterGerda SiegmanEMIL SIEGMANIn Memory ofMy Beloved Parents, Sisters & Brother in LawJoel and Hadasa HolzmanZygmunt and Fela LeinlcramSaba Holzman and Tusia LeinlcramMRS. ROSE WANDA GUNZI*•. A :<• % V*\ £* i v-smt*v vA?"./• * * **?rr* *'v^li'Cv**:-In Memory ofMy Parents7leu> Craccu Jnenfakip £ccieti/ Jfnc.In Loving Memory ofOur Dear ParentsLeopold and Anna Zagorsk!ChrzanowGusta and Rubin BronnerFani and Mozes Erbsman (Irgang)Sister Bronia Erbsmanand All RelativesMURRAY ZAGORSKIMAURICE and SANDRA BRONNERFELICIA AND ABE IRGANGIn Memory ofIn Memory ofMy ParentsThe FamilyDawid SchreiberLieba SchreiberBlonderof PodgorzeJOHN SCHREIBERMAX GARSENaMWi ■' \i :.V:^c/ ,«iiiWMli r^B'<& S'miiMtiffllBliKlieu Ctacou ^tien^kip £ccietu 9WMtYl00"C :x^--yx :•/« Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsArnold FerberElenor Ferberand Our BrotherMoniusFROMERNA RUBINSTEIN—FERBERGIZA ROSENBAUM—FERBERCYLA KRIEGSTEIN—FERBERROSE ROSENBERG—FERBERIn Cherished Memory ofAll The Members ofTHE FAMILY FERBERWho Perished During TheGerman HolocaustThe Rest of The Family Ferber'0 fR *0*0*/KW*;jAVAVAVAIn Loving Memory ofMy ParentsSalomon RubinsteinMaria RubinsteinDR. HENRY S. RUBINSTEINIn Ever Lasting Memory toGusta WienerLola Wienerand our son LeonSAM AND CYLA WIENER«WW»?!M<ow«»u««iWWM]Mpoo*>o»om\WWO«o«oooo»o»»^^ -v; j ^y..am*w^m} ,^iiifevAS.* f ...■:■yv*•» y'rr-x:-:-:•:•;**!N A'b'V..; maaSi. ....'*; •• . t  ; ;.*. .,Veto Crace to JriendAki/i £ccietif J)hc.In Memory ofOur Beloved Parents, Sisters and BrotherIgnaz and Berta DattnerHela, Henia, Mila, Genia, Rena andSabina DattnerHersh and Ester KollanderWilhelm, Freda and Mania KollanderMR. AND MRS. ABRAHAM KOLENDERIn Cherished Memory ofMy Dear HusbandJosef Kacand Two SonsIsrael Kac Hersh KacKilled in Warszaw Ghetto on April 19, 1943In Memory of My Dear MotherRachel Feldman born BurIn Memory of My Dear BrotherChaim FeldmanThey are always in my heartNINA ROSENZWEIG born FELDMAN11f J* VV \ •a::v.j: :jS' sy. • • ;* •.*Jj-A A_A 1 AMVVWiVrtIn Memory ofOur Beloved Parents and SistersHenryk and Salomea WeitzenblumJulius and Teresia HartmannOlga and Valeria HartmannBIANCA AND FREDERICK BAARTHIS SPACE IS DEDICATEDBYMR. & MRS. SOL M. BRANDSTATTERTO HONOR THE DEADANDREMEMBER THE LIVINGSli®'v/  •• >'v •fc;:, ~ -vW1•'-••. \; s v> •••• \> ■■:■; ••••.''•'4'v!^'*^  —Ctaccu Jnenfakip £cc/etij J/hc.In Memory of the Jews from CracowCH. KRAKAUERIn Memory of the Jews from CracowSOL GERSTEL6036 ELIZABETH AVENUENewark, N. J.• AVAVAWkW3n memoryofOur Dear and Devoted Parentsand GrandparentsIsidor Israel MessingerSalomea Sara Messinger nee PinkusfeldMosheh GretzerHanah HochbaumBy Their Children and GranddaughterHENRY MESSINGERISRAEL IGNAC & LUSIA HOCHBAUMnee MESSINGERSHIRLEY ANN HOCHBAUMJn Cherished Mn ^nerianea / v /emorifOur Beloved Son and BrotherRysiu Hochbaum°(Our Brothers and Their FamiliesElias HochbaumHania HochbaumHilda HochbaumMania HochbaumRoman HochbaumMarylka HochbaumISRAEL IGNAC HOCHBAUMLUSIA HOCHBAUM (nee Messinger)n »f r f'n    * n ■    Wei* Craccu JriendAkip £ccktif J)hc.In Memory ofMother—Salomea LuszczanowskaFather—Noe LuszczanowskiBrother—Olek LuszczanowskiSister & Nephew Gizela & Mieciu OgorekFather—Samuel LindenMother—Pepi LindenSister—Regina LindenMR. & MRS. HERMAN LINDENIn Memory of MyFather SZABSE REICHMother MARJA REICHSister AMALJA REICHBrother MGR. MENDEL REICHand his wife NATKABrother in law MEIER MANDELBAUMand his son JANEKMENDELSOHN-GOTTLIEB, INC.RIALTO MILLSNotions, Cotton Goods, Interlinings247 WEST 37th STREET, NEW YORK, N. Y. 10018CHickering 4-3470In Memory ofDear ParentsChaskel Jassy-FinderEthel born Lustgartenand Our Beloved SisterHelen FinderMR. & MRS. MORRIS MYERSMR. & MRS. ALEX FINDERMILA TISHBYPT. ■vv£;* t-K<. 'V^V'' ::SiSS«*i&J* y■KSfih- uxmtes[. XvWlv X***X‘p*-- •. ,,,,,. :,;s ': *"»$*§Craccu JriehdAkijt £ccietif J)nc.A^jViiV.SwivAv! ■In Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsMarkus and Karolina BochenekMy Dear Sisters & BrothersRozalia Lempel — Mania HornHelena, Leizer, Roman, Sijekand My Dearest SonZygmuntIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsSalomon Aron and ReginaMetzgerand Dear SistersTosia Rozia EvaJACOB BOCHENEKHENRY METZGERIn Memory ofLeon NeidSalomea NeidErna NeidMarian NeudHenryk NeidHelena (nee Berger) NeidIn Memory ofMyMotherBertaandFatherAdolf An isJOSEPH ANISANNA & JAN NAJDA.£ :; ;•, * : V, vS£C* /. % X.\ '<*• -iv>0>XvX;X<vx*x-x<\I^Sa^i:fflfiaiiii»£>!vMvam!mL‘>.v!-: :•:'iii§iffi®MiMii®i«tie & Craccto jNenfaki/i £ccie tif J}hc.In Memory ofMy ParentsKalman & Amalia ZuckermanGrandmotherSara ZuckermanSistersGenia, Rose, ReniaBrothersHenry, Chaim, Roman, ZygmuntFRIEDA IMERGLUCKIn Memory ofMy WifeHelaand SonNusiekSAM IMERGLUCKIn Memory of the Jews from CracowIZAK MARGULIES100 CENTRAL PARK SO.New York CityM .-iSi ; f. wi, V,i: ; j? y. ! V i \wyiy/lyAwI'/XfO^v^'.V.VVAYAW.vIn Memory ofMy ParentsJacob & Breindla ImergluckSistersHania Hamer & FamilyEwa & Son RomanBrothersMichal Neiger & Familyand SaloFRED IMERGLUCKIn Memory of the Jews from CracowMARK FELDMANHeto Ctacou ^tien^kifi £ccietif J)nc.^.•iV/AVAVAWIn Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowSAM—BERTIE KRIEGERLOUIS AND MIRIAM GELLER170 GARFIELD PLACEMaplewood, N. J.In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowLARKSPUR HOMES INC.SANDY HILLCOAL & SUPPLY CO., INC.1555 OAKLAND AVENUEUnion, N. J.108 RAILROAD AVENUEPaterson, N. J.. >K   iJ^gim, .as**-:*:*:*:^ . . .yVy^, . . . . v    ..           .•  yMi>'40. v 'N;v<mgsterggw&smmmMLneu> Ctacou? OriendAkip £ocietu 9•• $••??•:•.% *■'.■{■;•. if ’::’ \ V / • \V*f ?;*pp %*%:•In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowREISEN LUMBERS & MILLWORK CO.NEW YORK PLUMBERSSPEC. CO., INC.1070 MORRIS AVENUEUnion, N. J.20 BRUCKNER BLVD.Bronx, N. Y.In Memory ofThe 6,000,000MartyrsIn Memory of the Jews from CracowLOUIS RICHLAWRENCE McCOY COMP.98-50 67th AVENUEForest Hills, N. Y.332 MAIN STREETWorcester, Mass.KWM,e<.»Vm*4AM6U»vX Xv*^c^5te::S//^ Ctaccu /?ien<{Akif2 £ccietif Jthc.||;::^i|^iv « v< .• • *• •.-;' /•• ’. w .• . .•■>.{*.s * A: ;• ■ V. :: .-•■ :; -i. : \-y.i*a*Vi»'«V»VAV.‘ViV/AVAWkW/ft Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowBLUE BIRD MFG. CO.CLIFF HARDWARE CO.5505 ST. LAWRENCE BLVD.Montreal, Que.RAHWAY, N. J.In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowBOLT CONSTRUCTION INC.CONCRETE BLOCK CO.Garfield, N. J.499 CHANCELLOR AVENUEIrvington, N. J.iwiwwiili5^vfxi’lvJSWw. &ifc::Ctaccu Jrien faki/t £ccietij J)nc.■/A>BllEivi'lvlVA\VAVAVI ’In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowDON-ROSE MILLS, INC.JUNIORTOWN205 WEST 39th STREET247 WEST 37th STREETNew York, N. Y.New York, N. Y.In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowS. O. TEXTILE INC.BENJ. BERNSTEIN SONS, INC.209 WEST 37th STREET230 WEST 38th STREETNew York, N. Y.New York, N. Y.Veto Ctaccto JrieiutAkip £ccietif JJhc..x.VkVAVAWS.V.1In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowOAK FLOORING CORP.STUART'S FURNITURE & INTERIORS576 SO. 21st STREETIrvington, N. J.2045 YONGE STR.Toronto, CanadaIn Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowSCHNEIDER & FALK INC.A FRIEND7&Wa^lifilSVeto Ctaceto JriendAkip £ccietif Jfttc.^.ViV.VMVAVkIn Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowBLT BUILDING CORP.HYGRADE MILK & CREAM CO., Inc.975 E. 19th STREETBrooklyn, N. Y.In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowCENTER CONSTRUCTIONROOSEVELT DISTRIBUTORS68 MAPLE PLACEKeyport, N. J.2172 BENNET RD.Philadelphia, Pa.Veto Craccu jtienttAhip £ccietu Jfham'AV.VMW.WIn Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowBANK OF NORTH AMERICADAVID WELD116 FIFTH AVENUENew YorkMASSACHUSETTSIn Memory ofThe Martyrsfrom CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowH & N CONSTRUCTIONMORRIS EDERBEN HYMAN & VITO NARDELLIo n n 11 f> n^vy^vwwMwvyww><i w«^>ortO<»fwv>oc><wvMWMwwa^ft00cw>flo<w>o«v><wwwwwvM%ftn>Wtftrto<>o<>ooQOOftoc^i'AV.WA ......In Memory of the Jews from CracowREDNOR & KLINE INC.MORRISVILLE, PA.KEYS, MARTIN & CO.In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowWHITEHALL OVERSEAS CO,In Memory of the Jews from CracowAGFA-GEVAERT, INC.SPRINGFIELD, N. J.I.CC-V-SOIFER BROS. INC.New York, N. Y.In Memory of the Jews from CracowCHANEL TEXTILE51 FIFTH AVENUENew YorkIn Memory of the Jews from CracowSEIFER HARDWRAE CO., INC.343 CORTLAND STREETBelleville, N. J.t\\< V? ,’ ^rnmmmWet* Ctacciv JnendAki/t £pcietif JfhcIn Loving Memory ofDora and Herz FensterYetta KleinFromCLARA AND RAYMOND FENSTERIn Memory ofJacob and Helena HauptmanGERARD HAUPTMANIn Memory ofMy Parents,Brother and SisterM. MARKOWITZ (Orgler)In Memory ofOur ParentsRENE AND JOSEPH LITTIn Memory ofOur ParentsDr. Schilim and Clara YungZBIGNIEW YUNG-JAROCKIIRENA YUNG-NUSSBAUMIn Memory ofOur BelovedHusband and FatherMeyer Samuel PoserMRS. ROCHELLE R. POSERand Son Isidor I. PoserIn Loving Memory ofRachel, Sally, Jehuda, Oscar Sperlingand Max FriedlanderVERA AND JOSEPH SPERLINGIn Memory ofMy Dear HusbandDavid StorchHis Brothers, Sisters with FamilyFor Remembrance of My SistersDora Mania Fela Erna with FamilyRESIA STORCH MULLER®3S*■v.v.VAvMvi /!v!\v.v!v,‘v!v,\V\y**V*>vXv|*X*!vfwvXvI\*^/•'••• VWtfyl*■' {V f SJk& P^... ¥.mo. \: 4&f! ?  =•?:*: \. Wy  RKvv^    #■ im ^jr / m 9 a 9 ^ h^9 a *m j m a w . m m j ^a -r m a t m m i a , mt ' jffilt; X%^X»X,^X*X*?‘?$Xyx$X^y>^XftX*fo»v?ffX«i^»xy?*$8ffilll^lCracou? JrieiutAkift £ecietif %c.In Memory ofMy Beloved Parents & BrothersNaftali and SabinaAdolph and Moris EisnerROMAN ELSNERIn Memory ofMy MotherM. GenendelMy Sisters and BrothersFamily S. PemperFelek SchwedFRANCES PEPPERIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsMax and Maria Kemplerand My BrotherDolek KemplerJUDITH BILLYSIn Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsSalomon & Jacheta WeilJacob & Francine Wroclawskiand Our Sisters & BrotherYou Are Always in Our HeartsHENRY & BIANCA WEILM£M-.£‘£*I*IOCCOSx^*X*Xiu*f~i‘Aj^&*y*hvX*Ii1': .•. * \'AY/.VMW.V.In Cherished Memory ofMy Father, Mother and SistersSzymon Fassler Klara FasslerMalcia Fassler Pepa FasslerROBERT GOLDBERGJn Wemory ofMy Dear ParentsMoses & Cylia NlchternMy Sisters and Brothersand My Beloved WifeRenaSALO NICHTERN*-Qn (tdeioved ^ffidentory.Dear Family and ParentsMarcus & Helen EichnerIRVING EICHNERJn a ended ld/]emoruOur Beloved Mothers:Elka HilfsteinRosalia Ringelheimand Brothers:Hamek, Max and LeonEVA AND MAX WITEK°f■■.'rwwy«■ ■ fr'niTfftn’nnTinnnti'nYiiiVi' ‘'nnniinnririfl'fiiiiijiiijijHeu> Ctactu Jrmdikiji £ccietu jfncIn Memory ofMy First HusbandSamuel KeinerOur Dearest ChildrenSarunia and Ludwikand My Dear MotherRyflca DunnerGISELA DUNNER-GOLDBERGERIn Loving Memory ofOur Dear ParentsMichael and Adela VogelhutIda and Moses HeitlerBrother and SisterMoniek and Amelia VogelhutSisterHalina HeitlerRUNIA AND HENRY VOGELHUTIn Cherished Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsRachela MineGabryel MineIn Memory ofMy Beloved and Dear HusbandWolf AdlerFRANIA ADLERIn Memory ofOur Beloved Parents and SisterSamuel, Lanka and Bertha RottenbergBERTHA HABER-ROTTENBERGiW/AVAVAVil ’In Memory ofDr. David & Rose BulwaLeon BulwaLYDIA WOLFnee Weinheberprimo voto: BULWAIn Loving Memory ofOur Dear OnesRUTH AND ARMIN STEIFIn Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsFather—Moshe Natan SwimmerMother—Feiga SwimmerFather—Abe SteinerMother—Regina SteinerJUDITH & HENRY SWIMMERIn Memory ofMy Beloved AuntJETTI BARBERDAVID WOLFffilSilfi%u Cractto Jnenfakift ^ccietif J)hc.i. f ?>.;• vIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsAnna and Emil WeindlingCECILE INSDORFIn Memory ofOur FatherBerel Gittelmanand Our AuntEthel HoffmanFANNY AND HENRY EISENIn Memory ofOur BelovedParents and BrotherIRENE AND ARTHUR GROSSIn Memory ofMy Family That PerishedROSENBACH I. ARI960 Ave. Paulista, St. PauloIn Memory ofOur BelovedAbraham Tyras Markus TyrasAnna Tyras Regina TyrasMoses Tyras Henry BernhajmDavid BernhajmWho Will Always Remain in Our HeartsIRWING & LILLIAN TYRASIn Eternal Memory ofThe BelovedAunts and UnclesHALINA SILBER—BLUMENFRUCHTWho Perished with Our 6 MillionsBrethren in The Nazi HolocaustIn Cherished Memory ofMy BelovedParents: Karolina & Leon David Leibowicz(Rubinstein)Brothers: Mendel & Jacob Kopel Leibowicz(Rubinstein)Inscribed by Their Daughter & SisterHANIA LEIBOWICZ now Ann RubinIn Memory of MyParentsGrandparents and RelativesSTANLEY SCHNITZLER\}XX'ites‘iIn Memory ofOur BelovedParents and Family ^wlWei* Craccto Jrienfaki/i £ecietij J}hc.ANN & MAX KANDELIn Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsLEOPOLD & SYDONIA SCHEKIrene HirschfeldGeorge SchekIn Memory ofOur Uncle, Aunt and CousinMAREK, EMILIA & FELICJA BIEBERSTEINMr. & Mrs. George SchekMr. & Mrs. Milton HirschfeldIn Loving Memory ofThe Parents and Brother ofPaula FishmanalsoTo The Beloved Memory ofAbraham, Chaja, Regina, Esther and HindaFishmanMR. & MRS. DAVID FISHMAN.W.VAV.wjuajl. » « » .‘iVivIvl‘lvXw.Vil *In Memory ofMy First Wife & SonLola and SimonWho Perished at The Hands of NazisDAVID WOLFIn Cherished Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsAnna Potok (Selinger)Leon PotokBy Their ChildrenRENA JACOBSONSALEK POTOKIn Memory ofLejzor and Sarah Baumel andKarl and Deborah GutsteinThe Parents ofMR. & MRS. FRED GUTSTEINIn Cherished Memory ofMoses LeserMy Beloved Fatherand Unforgettable SisterMina LeserROSE HOLLANDERmi i: a‘: v V") T,x->x::-SjiSwSw>>»Ki'■,**" *.•.•••••.• • ••• VA'.'iVAwy*.* »VrAVAV.V.VA*. CA JTC* J&/OMn WAV.TBlwOC*.* m iMsaiii.:-K!»>:*:¥s:*SWe tv Cracci* JrienvfAhifi £ccie tif JJhc.In Memory ofour Beloved Husband and FatherSimon Rafael HuppertFANNY HUPPERTand Son BILLYIn Memory ofOur ParentsJutta & Moritz FrotinerElla & Wolf Fadenand My BrotherRysiek FadenDAVID S. & HALINA FROTINERIn Loving Memory ofMy BrotherMarcel MuszynskiLieutenant in Tadeusz KosciuszkoFirst Aircraft DivisionDied in Action, 1944MARYLA SINGERIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsLotti and Moses FeuersteinSister Regina and Brother MayerSTEFA BLASENSTEINVj^VVAWAWuvOIn Memory ofFamilies Kleinberger and GrafKLEINBERGER—GRAFIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsIgnacy & Regina Gassnerand My Dear SistersSydonia and DuniaBLANKA SILBERSTEINIn Memory ofABRAHAM and FELADORTHEIMER-STERNGASTHENRY DORTHEIMERIn Memory ofOur FamiliesLOLA & ARNOLD BORKHtto Craccu? jMeHitAki/t ^ccietif Jtnc.* ** * »'«'«'«'«'«'»'»'«'«V ■* aVmV^WWS^i '*'•.'**V.~»VtVAVw'.'.'.V.V.'^AA^AAAVA^'A'. > -/« Memory ofMy ParentsSzaja & Sara WiesenfeldBrothers—Moniek, Bernard, Max, Benjaminand Sister IdaABRAHAM WIESENFELDIn Memory ofMy Dear ParentsRoza and Pinkas RutheFROMMARYLA FEILERIn Memory ofOur Beloved Husband & FatherWOLF OFFMANWho Died in Mauthausen Feb. 1945STEFA JOELSONHARRIET SOLZTo The Memory ofTheir ParentsA A^A»V* &VVa!A V‘WIn Memory ofrmiBeloved GrandmotherRyfka Laja WarechMAX BERGMANIn Memory ofOur Beloved Parents and RelativesANNA & HARRY STERNBERGIn Memory ofOur ParentsBerish Lipperman Kalman SchwecherFela Lipperman Schema SchwecherBrothers & SistersIgnac Lipperman Jankiel SchwecherROSE SCHWECHERCHARLES SCHWECHERIn Memory ofOur Beloved Parents and RelativesMR. & MRS. IRVING BADNERBLANCHE & SIMON ZWERNVeto Craceu> 'Jrien^kip £ccietu J)^AAAAJ>*« a * M »V»V»WW>Maaaaaa«In Memory ofMy ParentsIn Memory ofMy ParentsMarkus & Regina ScharfCecilia and Emil GoldenbergSister: Mania Birnbaum & Her FamilyED GOLDENBERGBrother: MoniekOSCAR SCHARFIn Memoriam of A Iways In My Heart,Dear SonsAbraham and Moses AronMotherBERTA SPIELMANIn Memory ofOur BelovedPARENTS and BROTHERSLEON AND WILLIAM TROPPIn Memory ofOur Beloved ParentsIZAK and ROZALIA HUPPERTFRANIA, REGINA AND KAROLAIn MemoriamIn Sweet Remembrance of Our Beloved SisterVeraSIEGFRIED GERAD and FamilyIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsSzymon and Sara HilfsteinBrotherIzidor HilfsteinSisterStela HilfsteinDAVID HILFSTEINIn Memory ofOur ParentsMax and Laura KrupnikMenachem-David and Scheindl Perla KshenskyTheir Children and GrandchildrenOur Beloved SonDaniel KshenskyMARKUS AND BERTA KSHENSKYnee KrupnikWOOOtWWyMWOOOOOOOWWWWWWOOOOOOOOMMOti^OWOOWWOOOOOMOOilStWCOWCOOOWW}"WMTleuf Cracvi* Jnewfakip £ec/eti/ J/hc.In Cherished Memory ofOur Beloved Parents and SisterMaurycy and Rozia Leibel-BetteilSalusia Leibel-BetteilJACK L. BETTEIL and FamilyCESIA BRAUNHUT and FamilyIn Memory ofMy Father Joseph Mendel SchlesingerMother Hinda SchlesingerMy Brothers Abraha mand Rafaeland my Sister CarolaMy Niece Inka and My Brother in-Law JuliusDAVID SCHLESINGERIn Memory ofOur DaughterJanina FeigenbaumThe ParentsMR. AND MRS. JACK FAGENIn Memory ofToni WimmerAmalie FeltscherDr. Joseph SchreiberMaryla SchreiberGenia KaufmanMRS. POLA FELTSCHER■VjuUW/. vXiVVVVwV ’In Memory ofMyParentsRubin & Bela DorembusEDUARDO DOREMBUSIn Memory ofOur BelovedParents and RelativesHENRY and EUGENIA RADWANIn Memory of My BelovedFather—Leon RosenbaumMother—Sabina RosenbaumSister—Maria RosenbaumHENRY ROSSIn Memory ofMy Beloved ParentsAbraham & Beila Lundnerand SisterRozia LundnerLOLA FRIEDEL*:3r-r'crtVrWr^Wori'noooon 1V0n     •*w^m.my.y.rmmi>*nSMHnlpn&In Memory of ParentsSAM GOLDBERGER INC. FURS245 W. 29th St., N. Y. C. 10001Ifleu Cractti JrienMi/t £ccktif J/hc.In Memory ofHenryk WinterHelena Reiss Peppa ReissZosia Reiss Leon ReissMR. & MRS. M. REISSIn Memory of the Jews from CracowG. J. SHEPARD48 Haven Terr., Parlin, N. J.In Memory of the Jews from CracowHARRIET JOYCECompliments of Blanche FischerIn Memory of the Jews from CracowZLATA MUNZER42 West 47th StreetIn Memory of the Jews from CracowA FRIENDIn Memory of the Jews from CracowDR. JACK A. SCHUMAN, DDS98-120 Queens Blvd., Forest Hills, N. Y.In Memory of the Jews from CracowARTHUR SCHAFFER930 Sheridan Ave., Bronx, N. Y.iiOOCOOteMtoMM«i«OOOMOOO0M6«OO£l$9OMOOMOOO»OOl»»M«$£ftM,OC4«OOO«OMOO6O0&9ftMOOOOOMOOOMo3< ' 41jm>■}X:'r Vv \ .>•i Jt v. '<<*.*$r'SW%tto Ctactto ^riend^kip £ccieti) JJttc.In Memory of the Jews from CracowGUILD CONSTRUCTION CO., INC.421 Brookside Drive, Farmingdale, N. J.In Memory of the Jews from CracowHILLSDALE, INC.In Memory of the Jews from CracowCUTE MISS COATS, INC.520 Eighth Avenue, New York 18, N. Y.In Memory of the Jews from CracowA FRIENDIn Memory of the Jews from CracowGISELE IRON WORKS INC.41-47 Peel Street, Paterson, New JerseyIn Memory of the Jews from CracowMAZZOLA BROS. BISC. CO., INC.1657 61st Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.In Memory of the Jews from CracowHELMAR FABRIC CO.In Memory of the Jews from CracowPINE BROOK BLDG. SUPPLYRt. 46, Pine Brook. N. J.In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowFIOTEX EXPORT CORP.ARZEE SUPPLY CORP. OF N.J.350 Broadway, N. Y. C.In Memory of the Jews from Cracow35 Franklin Turnpike, Mahwah, N. J.In Memory of the Jews from CracowWELLESLEY BUILDING CORP.RANDELL STUDIOS1311 Brightwater Ave., Bklyn., N. Y.In Memory of the Jews from Cracow95 Avenue B, New York, N. Y.In Memory of the Jews from CracowWOHLWORTH BERGMAN CO., INC.PROSPECT FLOOR SUPPLY CO., INC.16 Court Street, Brooklyn, N. Y.439 E. 162nd Street, Bronx, N. Y.j'jXCfcY.mms®mIn Memory of the Jews from CracowWeu> Craccu JriendAki/i £ccietif jfhc.BIRNBAUM & WILLNERManufacturing Furriers352 Seventh Ave., N. Y. C.Compliments of Blanche FischerIn Memory of the Jews from CracowSOCKOLOFF BROS., INC.503 Ogden Ave., Mamaroneck, N. Y.In Memory of the Jews from CracowDIANE BUTTON CO., INC.In Memory of the Jews from CracowIn Memory of the Jews from CracowBIENENFELD GLASS WORKS, INC.50 Bethpage Rd., Hicksville, L. I.In Memory of the Jews from CracowSURREY-ELECTRIC SUPPLY2432 Rt. 22, Union, N. J.In Memory of the Jews from CracowJAY M. HALPERTIn Memory of the Jews from CracowBIRCH LUMBER CO.