DAVID AND SYLVIA STEINER YIZKOR BOOK COLLECTIONSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARYNO. 14199Kam ianets -Podilskyl Memorial BookKamenetz-PodolskTHE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY - NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSTHE STEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARY PROVIDESON-DEMAND REPRINTS OF MODERN YIDDISH LITERATURE©2003 THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY ANDTHE NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERMAJOR FUNDING FOR THEYIZKOR BOOK PROJECT WAS PROVIDED BY:Harry and Lillian Freedman FundDavid and Barbara B. Hirschhorn FoundationDavid and Barbara MarguliesThe Nash Family FoundationHarris RosenDavid and Sylvia SteinerRuth TaubmanOriginal publication dataAUTHOR Blatman, Leon S.TITLE Kamenetz-Podolsk : a memorial to a Jewish community annihilated by theNazis in 1941 / editor, Leon S. Blatman.DESCRIPT 133 p. : ill.; 24 cm.SUBJECT Jews -- Ukraine -- Kam'ianets'-Podilskyl -- History.Kam'ianets'-Podil's'kyi (Ukraine) -- Ethnic relations.Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945) —Ukraine — Kam'ianets'-Podilskyl.THIS BOOK MEETS A.N.S.I. STANDARDS FORPAPER PERMANENCE AND LIBRARY BINDING.PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.K AAAENETZ. POCXXSKa memorialto a city annihilated by the Nazisedited by Leon S. BlatmanNew York, 1966KAMENETZ-PODOLSKA Memorial to a Jewish CommunityAnnihilated by the Nazisin 1941Editor—Leon S. BlatmanPUBLISHED BY THE SPONSORS OF THEKAMENETZ-PODOLSK MEMORIAL BOOKNEW YORK, U.S.A.1966Table of ContentsPageFROM THE EDITOR   5KAMENETZ-PODOLSK   7by 1. A. Bar-Levy (Weissman)A CITY THAT WAS   49by Leon S. BlatmanThe City I Knew in My Youth  50“Maccabee” Zionist Sport Club   58Zeire-Zion, Zionist Labor Party  61Professor Friedlander’s Relief Mission   67Pinchos Krasny, Minister of Jewish Affairs   76The Wedding at the Cemetery   86WHO’S WHO AMONG THE KAMENETZER   89Zvee Scooler  90Morris Kaplun   92Leon S. Blatman  94Samuel and Louis Drachler   96Morris Schleifman     98Aaron Ashman   100IN MEMORIAM   103Solomon Dorfman   104Joseph Blatman   106David Schleifer  108Israel Goldman   110Zalman Fradkin   111Scholom Altman   112J. (Schika) Saltzman   113Meyer (Munia) Zack   1142Mathis Sigal   115Malka Glassman   116P. Wolfenson   119The Kaplun Family  120Chaim Wolfenson       122The Drachler Family  124Israel Drachler   126Benjamin Rosenblatt    129PHOTOGRAPHS“Kadima,” Zionist Students Organization 1918      _ , 10“Kadima,” Zionist Musical Club 1917     11‘‘Hatchia^’ Zionist Youth Club 1920   13Chalutzim from Kamenetz-Podolsk on the way toPalestine 1923   15Celebration of Palestine Week 1918  17Celebration of Balfour Declaration 1920   18Zionist Leaders in Kamenetz-Podolsk 1920   19Kamenetz-Podolsk Delegation at Zionist Conferencein Mohilev-Podolsk   23Chalutzim from Kamenetz-Podolsk on the way toPalestine 1920   26Chalutzim from Kamenetz-Podolsk in Kriat Anovim   27^‘Haschomer Hazoir” 1923   29The Blatmans Building Their Home in Tel Aviv 1922   32The Leff Family in Camp in Germany  35Government High School for Boys   37Avner Korman Killed in Battle by the Petliurovtziunder Grinin, May 1919   39Mechel and Rose Kaplun Killed by the Nazis   42Motia Kaplun Killed in Battle under Stalingrad  45Chalutzim from Kamenetz-Podolsk in Chernowitzon the way to Palestine 1923   51Organizers of Textile Employees Union in 1917   533Government Technical High School   55Zeire-Zion Party Card   59Marinskaia High School for Girls   62Certificate by University Students Council   65Professor Israel Friedlander and Dr. M. Leff   67Turkish Bridge   69Post Street   72Credential by Sport Club ‘‘Maccabee”   77Bulvarnaia Street   79'‘Hazomir” Membership Card   83Teachers Union Card   85Maurice Kass   102Kamenetz-Podolier Relief Organization   128Benjamin Rosenblatt and Family   129A Group of Maccabee Jewish Sport Club Members   132A Refugee from Kamenetz-Podolsk   132Goldberg from Kamenetz-Podolsk   133The children of Boris Jurist  133Michael Neiser and family   1334From The Editor• • •Since the end of the SecondWorld War, Memorial Books de-dicated to cities annihilated bythe Nazis, were published in Israeland in other countries. In 1953this editor was approached by theIsraeli representative of the “En-cyclopedia of the Diaspora” to edita volume “Podolia,” as a memo-rial to all the cities and towns ofthat region. For many reasonsthe project was abandoned.In 1965, in Israel, a committeeof people originally from Kamen-etz-Podolsk and surrounding townspublished a memorial book inHebrew, dedicated to their hometowns. When the book was re-ceived by Kamenetzer in NewYork, it became obvious that toofew could read the book in Hebrew. The idea of issuing a memorialbook “Kamenetz-Podolsk” in English was revived. The main reasonwas to give the children and grandchildren of the compatriotsfrom Kamenetz-Podolsk a chance to learn how their ancestorslived before coming to America, a chance to read about the historyof Jews in Kamenetz-Podolsk before, during, and after the Rus-sian Revolution of 1917, about the life there under the Sovietsand, finally, about the destruction of Kamenetz-Podolsk by theNazis.Originally it was planned to issue a book of about 500 pages,well illustrated in color, in a deluxe edition. Unfortunately, theresponse to our appeal for funds was such, that the editor himselfhad to do all of the writing and all of the work connected withthe publishing of this book. The lack of funds made it necessaryto revise the book to its present size.I wish to single out a few people for special thanks in makingthis book possible. In the first place, thanks go to each subscriberLeon S. Blatman5and to the following larger contributors for memorial pages:M. Kaplun, Mrs. Sylvia Blatman, S. Drachler, M. Schleifman, A.Glassman and I. Wolfson.Special thanks to my wife, Sylvia, who was the first to en-courage me in undertaking this work and was generous in lettingme spend our few free evenings in preparing the book forpublication.Leon S. Blatman, Editor6KAMENETZ-PODOLSKI. A. BAR-LEVY(Weissman)I. A. BAR-LEVYAN EDITED AND FREE TRANSLATION FROM THE HEBREWBY LEON S. BLATMAN7It is the duty of our generation to build monumentsto the memory of Jewish communities destroyed by theNazis. The city of our birth, Kamenetz-Podolsk, is memo-rialized by this book.A memorial book ''Kamenetz-Podolsk'^ in Hebrew waspublished in Tel-Aviv, Israel, in April 1965, by the followingcommittee:I. A. Bar-Levy (Weissman)Uri Michaeli (Pressman)W. D. RechterBen-Zion ShilmoverChaim Schrig (Schreiberman)Jacob Sharir (Shreier)81PodoliaThe region Podolia (Gubernia) of which Kamenetz-Podolsk is its main city, occupies 3610 square viersts. (Avierst is about a kilometer). To the north and east ofPodolia were regions which bordered with Great Russia;to the west was former Austria (Galicia) and to the south,Bessarabia (now Rumania). The river Dniestr separatesPodolia from Bessarabia for a distance of 415 viersts. Fromthe side of Podolia a number of rivers flow into the Dniestr,among them the Smotrich, Ushiza, Liadora, Morapa. Theriver Boog separates Podolia from the Kiev region; itstributaries are Googik, Ikra, Rub, Snibuda. All are on thePodolian side.The earth in Podolia is rich and black. In some partsin the south the earth contains lime, phosphates, buildingstones and other minerals. The climate is warm; theaverage temperature around Kamenetz-Podolsk is 86 de-grees. Podolia had a population of 3,544,000 with only247,000 city dwellers. The density of the population—96per square vierst—was the highest in European Russia.The majority of the population, Ukrainians—81% ; theJews comprised 12% ; the rest were Russians, Poles, Mol-davani and others.Podolia had 17 cities, 120 towns and thousands ofvillages and hamlets. Podolia is mainly agricultural, pro-ducing all kinds of grain, vegetables and fruits. Among theindustries, sugar reflneries with 293 such establishmentsoccupied first place. There were many flour mills, graindistilleries, wineries, textile mills and other factories. Thecountryside produced not only enough for the populationbut also for export. The main products of export weregrain, fruits, flour, sugar and alcohol.In 1905 export amounted to 3,037,000 rubles. Trans-portation in Podolia consisted of 1213 viersts of railroad910Musical Club “Kadima” in Kamenetz-Podolskin 1917tracks; other transportation was by boats, mainly on theDniestr and on paved and unpaved roads.2,168 schools, including 119 High Schools, with 16,000students comprised the school system of the region. Theregion. Gubernia, was divided into 12 districts.The settlement of Podolia goes back to a very earlyera. According to the Greek historian, Hiroditus, differenttribes were known to live in Podolia before the Fifth Cen-tury, B.C. When the Roman Emperor, Adrianus, con-quered Germania and Rumania, Podolia also fell under hisrule. After that, for about five hundred years, Podolia wasruled by different barbaric tribes. In the beginning of theSixth Century, A. D. Slavic tribes drove out the natives ofPodolia and settled there.From the 14th Century until the second division ofPoland in 1793, Podolia was under the jurisdiction of Lith-uania, Poland, Turkey, and Russia.11oLaIn 1793 Podolia, as well as other districts, was annexedby Russia and remained under the czars until 1917, whenit was declared a part of an independent Ukrainian state.There is a division of opinion on when the Jews firstsettled in Podolia. Some historians believe that Jews cameto this part from Poland or other Western European coun-tries after the Exodus of Jews from Spain. Others are ofthe opinion that Jews came to Podolia from the Crimea orfrom the land of the Chosars on the Volga. Jews may havecome from Palestine by way of Sophia to Kiev, and whendriven out from Kiev by Vladimir Monomach in 1120,settled in Podolia. There is evidence that in 1220 Podoliahad Jewish settlements. In those early days, Jews wereengaged in business, leasing land for agricultural purposes,and had a great number of craftsmen and tradesmen. Dur-ing the 30-year war (1618-1648) many German Jews cameto Podolia. Among them were Rabbis and families re-nowned for their knowledge of the Scriptures. During thereign of Lithuanian and Polish princes over Podolia, theJewish population there grew and was prosperous. In gen-eral, Jews in Podolia at that time were treated better thantheir brothers in other lands. With improved economicconditions, the Jews devoted their spare time to the studyof the Bible and Talmud and produced a number of Rabbisand Scholars.The Rabbis of Nemerov, Tulchin, Bar and Megbishwere famous throughout all of Podolia.But this was the calm before the storm. The situationwas changing for the worse. The Ukrainian Kozaks start-ed a revolt against their Polish landlords, but the victimswere the Jews. The bands of Ataman Bogdan Chmelnitzkywere murdering Jewish men, women, and children, mostof them innocent of any crime against the Ukrainians.There was a small number of Jews who did the dirty workof oppression imposed by the Polish Pani (landlords). ThePolish landlords treated the poor Ukrainian peasants mis-erably and even prevented them from freely practicing12Zionist Youth Organization ‘‘Hatchia’’ in Kamenetz-Podolskin 1920their religion. The Polish Pani hired Jews to enforce theirrules. As a result of the revolt entire Jewish communitieswere annihilated by the Ukrainians. Many Jews wereforced to convert to Christianity. Others succeeded in es-caping across the borders to foreign lands. Thus the Jewishpopulation of Podolia was reduced to a fraction of theirformer numbers.During the Seventeenth Century, Jews in many landswere looking for a Messiah, who was about to come andrescue the “Chosen People” from their miseries. The Mes-sianic movement spread through Podolia, bringing hopeinto the hearts of the believers. L^ater, it became clear, thatthe Messianic movement, as represented by Shabsa Zvi andJacob Frank, was false and against the Jewish religion.Life of Jews in Podolia, as elsewhere in the diaspora, wascompletely disrupted. Only by the middle of the 18thCentury a change came over the Jews of Podolia, when a133new religious movement, Chassidism, was started by IsraelBal-Shem-Tov.A new era, the so-called “enlightenment” was broughtabout by Western European Jews. In the 19th century, itpenetrated and took roots in Podolia. It brought an endto the cultural separation of Jews from the surroundingworld. Jews began to learn modern sciences and languages,read world literature and participate in the cultural lifeof the nations among whom they lived. Jewish authors inHebrew, Yiddish and Russian wrote about secular subjects,spreading the “enlightenment” among the Jewish masses.Formerly Jews studied only the Bible, the Talmud, andcommentaries. Now, they read also modern literature.Among the writers of the “Enlightenment” era in Podoliawere Isaac Satanov, Menachim Mendel Lapin, author andtranslator, Ben-Ami (Mordecai Rabinowitz), who wrotein Russian, and many others. At first, just a few indi-viduals here and there learned a foreign language, such asRussian or German, and enjoyed the knowledge of themodern times. The talented among them were translatingbooks into Hebrew and Yiddish. Before long, Jewishauthors brought out original secular books in Yiddish andHebrew. Others wrote in Russian, because the numbersof Jews learning the Russian language grew larger andlarger. This change affected the educational institutionsamong the Jews. Besides the old “Cheder” and “Yeshiva,”where only religious subjects were taught, new modernHebrew schools came into being. There, Hebrew was taughtby new methods and the curriculum included other subjectsthat would give the students a rounded general and Jewisheducation to prepare them for a life in the new surround-ings.With the “Enlightenment” came new ideas about thereturn to Zion. Religious Jews for centuries prayed forreturn to Zion and wished each other to be in Jerusalemby next year. During the 19th century groups known as“Lovers of Zion” were organized in many lands of the14Chalutzim from Kamenetz-Podolsk on the wayto Palestine in 1922diaspora. These groups were doing something for actualreturn to Zion. Later they were transformed into branchesof the Zionist Organization.Modern Hebrew literature was full of encouragementfor the Jewish youth to return to Palestine to try to rebuildthe ancient land. By the end of the 19th century and thebeginning of the 20th, the pro-Zionist literature includedthe writings of many authors, poets, and philosophers.Among them were many from Podolia, such as I. Berdi-chevsky, Prof. Echaskiel Kaufman, Eliesor Steinman, Prof.Zvi Sharfstein, S. Z. Blank, Abraham Rosen, MordechaiMichaeli, M. Poznansky, David Fogel, Isaak Schnor, S.Span, B. Kruha, and A. Ashman.151Kamenetz-PodolskFrom the history of Kamenetz-Podolsk, we know thatthe city was in the 14th century under the reign of theGadamin of Lithuania. From the end of the 14th to theend of the 18th century the city belonged to the Poles. Atone time in the 17th century the Turks took over the cityand later were driven out. After 1793 Kamenetz-Podolskbelonged to Russia.Historical data indicates that Jews were there in 1447.At times, Jews were driven out of the city, but Jewish settle-ments remained in nearby towns. The economic and politi-cal status of the Jews influenced the economy of the city.At one time Jews were allowed to own only old houses.They were prohibited from building new houses and couldlive only in the suburbs (Folvarki). Eventually, Jews couldlive in every part of the city, own and build houses, new orold.The census of 1893 showed that the population of Ka-menetz-Podolsk consisted of 40,134 persons, among themUkrainians 32%, Jews 50%, Poles 16% . Before the 1stWorld War the population grew to 60,000, half of themJews.The old city of Kamenetz-Podolsk was built on anisland surrounded by the river Smotrich.On the other side of the river Smotrich were the suburbsPolski Folvarek, Russki Folvarek, Podzamcha, Zinkovetz,and Karvasari. By crossing the New Bridge, built in 1870,one could reach the suburbs—the Novy Plan, Russki Fol-varek, and Polski Folvarek. By crossing the Turkishbridge, built in the 17th century, one reached the Pad-zamcha. This last suburb derived its name from the fort(samok) built by the Turks. There were other roads, paths,and smaller bridges by which the suburbs could be reached.In the early years of the Polish reign the suburb Kar-vasari served as the Ghetto of Kamenetz-Podolsk. The16Palestine Week Celebration in Kamenetz-Podolsk in 1918Jews were allowed to leave the Ghetto during the day to goto work in the city, but had to return in the evening and belocked up until the next morning.In the 19th century, when Jews were free to live inthe city and comprised 50% of the population, the Karva-sari became the home of the very poor Jews. The censusof 1847 showed only 752 Jews living in the Karvasari; in1897 there were 720 persons. When Kamenetz-Podolskwas proclaimed the capital of Podolia (Gubernsky Gorod),Karvasari lost the status of a town and became a suburbof the city.The city had only stone houses of 2, 3, and 4 stories withstores and offices on the ground floor facing the streets.In the center of the old city were a few taller buildings ofwhich the police station was the highest. Above the policestation was a tower, serving as a lookout station for thefire department. The city clock, seen from quite a distance,was also housed in this tower. On both sides of these muni-cipal buildings were small parks with benches for peopleto rest. These parks also served as the meeting place fortradesmen looking for jobs. Besides these little parks, thecity had large parks, near the bridges; one known as the“New Boulevard” and the other as the “Old Boulevard.”17Celebration of Balfour Declaration in Kamenetz-Podolskin 1920There was a third park, stretching from the new bridge tothe Ruski-Folvarek and known as the “Path” (Dorojka).The suburbs were full of gardens and with the parks gavethe city a picturesque, green appearance.The population of Kamenetz-Podolsk consisted of Poles,Ukrainians, Jews and Russians. In the small towns thepopulation was exclusively Jewish and in the villages 100%Ukrainian. The different religions of the population in thecity were Jewish, Greek-Orthodox, Catholics and Luth-erans. The Lutherans were a small minority, mostly Ger-mans. The Poles were the Catholics, the Ukrainians andRussians were Greek-Orthodox. In Kamenetz-Podolsk theJews comprised 50% of the population. But when thepopulation was much smaller, the city at one time housedalmost 10,000 Jews. This was during the time of the Chmel-nitzki pogroms, when Jews from many towns sought refugein Kamenetz-Podolsk, a fortified city, into which the banditsdared not enter.The exact number of Jews in the city was not knowntill the middle of the 19th century, when a census was con-ducted for the first time. The 1847 census showed only18Scholom Altman with Zionist leaders in Kamenetz-Podolskbefore leaving for Palestine in 19204,629 Jews and the 1893 census—13,866 Jews out of a popu-lation of 36,951. The same census showed 18,211 Greek-Orthodox and 4,150 Catholics. Four years later in 1897 theJewish population increased to 16,211. Figuring the naturalincrease the city probably had 60,000 people before thestart of the 1st World War. During the war, the popula-tion grew to about 100,000 due to the thousands of Jewishrefugees from the towns near the Galician border, drivenout by the Czar’s government (1915-1916). Then again,Jews from many towns settled in Kamenetz-Podolsk (1917-1920), when Ukrainians made pogroms on Jews. The pop-ulation also increased during the war due to the fact, thatin Kamenetz was the seat of the high command of GeneralBrusilov. But after the bolsheviks permanently occupiedthe city, the population began to decline (1920). It was dueto the fact, that Jews were escaping from the bolshevikregime to America, Canada, Brazil, and Palestine. Othersleft the city to settle in Kiev, Odessa and Moscow, wherethey had better economic and educational opportunities.The city’s decline was also due to the designation ofVinitza, instead of Kamenetz-Podolsk, as the capital ofPodolia. The census of 1923 showed a population of only33,172 persons in Kamenetz-Podolsk with 50% Jews. Again19a decline is shown in the census of 1926 when the popula-tion was only 31,000 (about half Jews). It is figured thatwhen the Nazis slaughtered the Jews in Kamenetz-Podolskin August 1941 there were about 10,000 left of them. Thisfigure included the Jews of the city, those of surroundingtowns and about 6,000 Jews brought from Hungary, Bel-gium, Holland, and Rumania.2Till 1914 Kamenetz-Podolsk was without a railroad.Connections with near and far places, with central Russia,with industrial and cultural centers of the country was byprimitive transportation to the nearest railroad station. Toget to a railroad the people of the largest city in Podoliahad to travel by horse and wagon in the Summer and byhorse and sled in the Winter. No question, that the absenceof a railroad was costly for the city. Merchandise receivedfrom or consigned to Moscow, Kiev, Odessa, Warsaw, andPetrograd was transported in this manner. This was veryexpensive and affected the economy of the city. In the citywere two forwarders: the All-Russian transportation andInsurance Company under the management of S. Bath (whocame to Kamenetz from Berdichev) and the South-Westerntransportation company with Abraham Berenson and Men-achim Moishe Lichtman at the head.These companies exacted very large commissions forhandling merchandise received from out of town, chargedhigh percentage for credit, extra for storage, for security,etc. The companies assisted business with loans, securedwith the consigned merchandise. Those who were not deal-ing with manufacturers at sources of supply, depended onthe yearly fair at the town of Yarmolinetz, 60 miles fromKamenetz-Podolsk. To this fair, conducted from June toAugust, came owners of factories, their managers or agentsfrom many parts of Russia. Business deals were conductedfor agricultural products of Podolia and for the industrialoutput of factories in Russia, Poland, and even from abroad.20Kamenetz-Podolsk did not have industries for lack of arailroad and raw materials, such as coal and iron. The geo-graphical position, being near the border was not favorableeither for the development of heavy industry.What was produced in Kamenetz-Podolsk was mainlyfor local consumption. The few factories in the city were:a beer brewery belonging to the Kleiderman family; a fewtobacco and cigarette factories; two plants for making arti-ficial mineral water (seltzer water); two cotton factories;a few fiour mills and some other smaller enterprises. Theonly one, which could be classified as a heavy industrialplant was the Kramm’s iron foundry, run by a German.The city was the administrative center of the region(Gubernia) where the following were found: the office ofthe Governor, the district and city courts, treasury andinternal revenue departments, administrative offices of thesecret and city police, educational institutions — 6 highschools, a few grammar schools and a Junior high school,a religious (Greek-Orthodox) seminary (a University after1917), hospitals, theaters, etc. The city armories housedfour battalions of infantry and a Cossak cavalry regiment.3As in most cities in the Ukraine, where Jews were al-lowed to dwell, they were engaged in business and trades.The first census of 1847 gives the following statistic: 70Jewish wholesalers, 389 retailers (2278 persons, includingthe families.) Of the retailers, 270 were selling clothing,shoes, hats, etc., 119 more selling food products. A total of1750 Jews (6,300 including their families) were engagedin business. Jews were also in the majority among crafts-men and tradesmen. The census showed 713 tailors (1562with their families); in food production 115 persons; lock-smiths 108. There were no figures given for carpenters,engravers, house painters, shoemakers and others. It waspresumed that at least 500 Jews were in such trades.The 1847 census gives the number of government em-ployees as 679 (131 women, 548 men); 119 professionals21and 304 Government pensioners. None of the above wereJews, as no Jew was allowed to be a government employee.The majority of Jews were in business or in trades, themajority of gentiles were the customers.The Christian customers consisted of Government em-ployees, the police, firemen, the military, teachers, priests,landowners and peasants from nearby villages. Of coursethere were also Jewish customers and business also benefitedfrom Jews from nearby and from far towns, when theycame to Kamenetz-Podolsk to deal with banks, with gov-ernment offices or for other reasons. There were 3 banksin the city—1. the Government bank2. the Union bank3. the All-Russian business and trades bank.Among the bank advisors were a few Jews, but Jewswere never elected as directors. Jews were appointed astemporary advisors because of their knowledge of the eco-nomic conditions in the city. Their advice was needed,when it came to granting loans by the bank.Substantial businessmen and owners of big estateshad no difficulty in obtaining loans from banks, but smallretailers, tradesmen and lower government officials couldnot get anywhere with bank officials. They had to dependon usurers, paying excessive rates and bonuses for loans.To some extent this situation was alleviated by co-operative banks. One such bank was established by land-lords, owners of estates, high government officials and richbusinessmen. Officially, this establishment was open to allwithout discrimination. But there were no Jews in themanagement, and Jews, as a rule, were neither stockhold-ers, nor managers. Loans to Jews were never granted.For this reason the second cooperative bank was estab-lished. The membership consisted of Jews and the bor-rowers were Jews. There was also a Credit Union withcentral offices in Moscow and Petrograd. The local branchwas managed by a Jew. But the conditions for a loan and22Zionists from Kamenetz-Podolsk at the conference inMohilev-Podolsk in 1920the collateral required were not easily met by many. Therestill remained a great number who patronized the usurers.In 1912 another Credit Union was founded locally by Jewsand Gentiles. There was no discrimination in membership,and it proved to be of great help to the small businessmen.4In Kamenetz-Podolsk, as in other Ukrainian citieswith a 50% Jewish population, the Jews spoke Yiddish.Only by the second half of the 19th century the use of otherlanguages, especially of Russian, became common amongthe Jews. The census of 1847 showed only 99 Jews, among16,112 who spoke another language besides Yiddish. By1897 fully 24% of the Jews interviewed spoke Russian inaddition to Yiddish. Many Jews in Kamenetz-Podolsk readHebrew and Yiddish literature. Some of the well knownwriters who lived in Kamenetz-Podolsk in the 1860’s and1870’s were Sholom Jacob Abramowitz (Mendele MocherSforim) and A. D. Gitlover. Some distinguished Jews wereborn in our city: Baron Ginzburg was born in 1857, as23plain David Ginzburg; among others were Professor FishelSchneierson and Menachim Poznansky. Among those whobecame known writers in Israel but lived in Kamenetz-Podolsk in their youth were Schloimo Schpan (graduatedhigh school and attended University in Kamenetz-Podolsk,born in Yarmolinetz), Aaron Ashman (born in Balin, stu-died and worked in Kamenetz-Podolsk) and AbrahamRosenzweig (Rosen) was a Hebrew teacher in Kamenetz-Podolsk.5The Turks reigned in Kamenetz-Podolsk during the17th century and this gave the Jews a chance to be in con-tact with cities of the Ottoman Empire, like Kushta,Smyrna and others. Some Jews from Podolia sent theirsons to those cities to study under famous Rabbis. Becausethe Messianic movement of Shabsa Zvi was very strong inTurkey, the boys from Podolia were influenced by thismovement and brought home the teachings of the falseMessiah. Later the false Messiah Jacob Frank gained manyfollowers in Podolia. Lanzkorinin, Satanov and other townsnear Kamenetz-Podolsk became the centers of the “frank-ists.” They were opposed by the orthodox Rabbis, who sus-pected Jacob Frank of being in sympathy with Christianity.The Jewish masses, who suffered from the Gaidamacksduring the revolt of the Ukrainians against their Polishoppressors, were eager to follow the teachings of JacobFrank. The Jews hoped that Messiah was coming to savethem from further sufferings. The Polish clergy utilizedthe inner fight between the Talmudic Rabbis and the “frank-ists.” Using the schism as an excuse, the Polish clergy triedto discredit the Talmud and the Rabbis. Bishop Dombrow-ski of Kamenetz-Podolsk ordered a public debate betweenthe Rabbis and the “frankists.” The Bishop ruled in favorof the “frankists” and ordered to bring books of the Talmudto Kamenetz-Podolsk, where over 1000 Talmuds (Schoss)were burned publicly in front of the cathedral. Neverthe-less, the “frankists” lost their popularity and Jacob Frank24was discredited among Jews, as Shabsa Zvi was discreditedbefore bim. Soon another religious movement was startedby a man, wbo was born in Okup, near Lanzkorinin in tbedistrict of Kamenetz-Podolsk. Tbe new movement wasCbassidism originated by Israel Bal Scbem Tov. Tbe newmovement became popular very fast and it seemed as ifevery Jew was now a cbassid. Tbe cbassidim were dividedinto followers of different Rebes (leaders). “Dynasties”of Rebes were established in many towns and cities of theUkraine, Galicia and Bukovina. Each Rebe was a descend-ant of the Bal-Schem-Tov or of his original disciples. The“dynasties” of chassidic Rebes continued from father to sonor to son-in-law. The chassidic movement was very strongfor a century and spread to many parts of the diaspora, butin the 20th Century it began to die out.6Jews in many places became indifferent to cbassidismwith its strict orthodoxy and mysticism; some were veryantagonistic and conducted campaigns against the Chas-sidim and their Rebes. These anti-chassidim were calledmisnagdim. By the middle of the 19th century the numberof misnagdim grew enormously and brought a new eraamong the Jews of Russia including those of Podolia. Thiswas the beginning of the “enlightenment” among the Jewsof Podolia.The political situation of the Jews in Podolia since theannexation of the region by Russia in 1793, deteriorated.The freedoms Jews enjoyed under the Poles were gone.Under the Czars the Jews were not allowed to settle invillages, to own or farm land, a percentage “numerousclosus” was established for Jews seeking entry into RussianHigh schools and Universities; most of Russian cities wereoutside the “pale,” the small territory where Jews wereallowed to dwell; many other economic, cultural and politi-cal restrictions were imposed on Jews. Nevertheless, new25Chalutzim from Kamenetz-Podolsk on the way to Palestinein 1920ideas, a new way of life began to infiltrate among Jews ofPodolia, as elsewhere in Russia. The dissatisfaction withthe old traditional education, with the cheder and yeshivagrew among Jews. In Kamenetz-Podolsk, as in many othercities in the Ukraine, Jewish families began sending theirchildren to Russian schools. Jews began to learn Russianand even foreign languages and to read world literature.New ideas penetrated into formerly secluded Jewish life.Jewish and non-Jewish parties gained a foothold amongJews in Kamenetz-Podolsk, as such inroads were made else-where. The younger generation had a new approach toJudaism, divorced from Chassidism or Misnagdism. Butassimilation, like that of Germany or Poland, never madeheadway in Kamenetz-Podolsk. The Jews here did not con-sider themselves as Russians of Moses’ religious persuasion,but only as Jews.7With the start of the 20th Century, Jewish nationalismand Zionism became very strong among the Jewish popu-lation of Kamenetz-Podolsk. There were small societiesknown, as “Lovers of Zion” (Chovevei Zion), later thesegroups were organized, as branches of the Zionist Organi-zation. They came into being after the 1st Zionist Congressin 1897. In Kamenetz-Podolsk the Zionists grew strongunder the able leadership of David Schleifer. He was not26Chalutzim fram Kamenetz-Podolsk in Kriat Anovimsatisfied with having a large organization in the city, butsaw to it, that Zionist organizations were started in everycity and town in Podolia. Under Schleifer the Zionists be-came a formidable political party and the work of theZionists embraced general Jewish welfare and educationalactivities. Among Schleifer’s co-workers were Israel Gold-man and Israel Drachler, who were delegates to regionalZionist Conferences and to World Zionist Congresses. Untilthe Czarist Government drove the Zionists underground,Kamenetz-Podolsk became the Zionist Center for the entireregion. To a conference in Kamenetz-Podolsk underSchleifer’s leadership came such outstanding Zionists asDr. S. Bondarsky, Dr. Bernstein-Cohen, Menachim Schen-kin, Mark Nudelman and others. Schleifer was delegatedto the conference in Minsk and Israel Drachler to the con-ference in Helsingsford (1906). To the 8th World ZionistCongress in Hague (1907) the Zionists in Kamenetz-Podolsk sent Drachler. At the next Congress in 1909 twodelegates, Drachler and Goldman represented the Zionistsof the city. To what extent the local Jewish populationwas influenced by the Zionists can be judged by the way thememorial for the founder of Zionism, Dr. Theodor Herzl,was conducted in Kamenetz-Podolsk when a telegram an-nouncing his death reached our city. The sad news becameimmediately known in every part of the city and in nearby27towns. Notices were posted that a memorial service wouldtake place in the evening in the Grand Synagogue. Hoursbefore the start of the services the surrounding streets werefilled with men and women—there were no more seats inthe synagogue. Not only Zionists, but people of otherparties and non-party men and women came to pay respectto the memory of the great Jewish leader. Even the “in-telligentzia,” those who always looked at Zionists as dream-ers, were there. All Jewish stores and shops were closedas a tribute to Dr. Herzl’s memory. Representatives ofthe local government were seated alongside the local Zion-ist leaders during the impressive and dignified services.8The great debate in Zionist circles about substitutingUganda for Palestine found expression also in Kamenetz-Podolsk. There was a minority, the future “territorialists,”who were for Uganda, but the majority remained Zionistsfor Zion only and against any other territory.The debate about Uganda was in full swing, when thefirst Russian Revolution took place in October 1905. Underpressure. Czar Nicolas the Second agreed to grant a consti-tution. A parliament, “the Duma” would be elected by thepeople in a democratic way and freedoms would be grantedto everyone without any discrimination. Jews were amongthose who felt that at last they would become first classcitizens. Unfortunately, the happy days of the Revolutiondid not last long. The Czarist Government reneged onthe granted freedoms. To divert the attention of the peo-ple, the government blamed the Jews for all the miseriesand resorted to pogroms, utilizing the “black hundred” ofthe “Union of Russian people.” Under the direction ofthe secret police, riots were started in many cities, maimingand killing Jews, and plundering Jewish property.In Kamenetz-Podolsk, where Katzapi (Russians fromcentral regions) were seldom seen, quite a number of them28suddenly appeared. During the market day the Katzapistarted a riot inciting the peasants, who came to sell theirproducts, to loot the stores and kill Jews. Most of thepeasants hurriedly left the city for their homes in the near-by villages, the rest were chased by the local police, as wasordered by Governor Ehlers, a liberal. The “Hagana” wasprepared to step in and stop a pogrom, but it became un-necessary, when the Katzapi disappeared, as suddenly asthey came to the city. Damage was slight in stores and ina few homes near the market place on the Novy Plan.In the early days of the Revolution the Socialists Partiesappeared from the underground and started a propagandacampaign to get members. Their propaganda was aimedat the poorer working class and at the youth of all classes.Open air meetings were arranged in the little parks in thecenter of the city at the end of the working day. InKamenetz-Podolsk were very few native socialists, butpropagandists from other parts of Russia, came and weretrying to get converts. Kadets and Octiabrists, Anarchistsand Social-Democrats, Socialist-Revolutionists and JewishBundists competed for votes to the “Duma.” Poale-Zionistsand Zionists appealed to the Jewish population. To theZionists came new people bringing new ideas. They29preached Social Justice in the diaspora, as well, as in Pales-tine, when it will be a Jewish State. A young fellow, camefrom Odessa to Kamenetz-Podolsk, ostensibly to lectureabout Jewish literature and culture. He was dark withpenetrating black eyes, dressed in a tunic, as worn byRevolutionists. Although quite young the stranger wasvery impressive. He was Chaim Greenberg, in later yearsa world renown Zionist leader. Although he did not namethe party, it was obvious that he was talking about theZeire-Zion program. In the late 1920’s Chaim Greenbergcame to America, where he united the American Zeire Zionwith the Poale Zion and became the spokesman for theUnited Labor Zionist front.9The Helsingsford Zionist convention in 1906 stressedthe need for cultural activities by Zionists. When IsraelDrachler returned from that convention the Kamenetz-Podolsk Zionist organization worked out a program in con-formity with the Helsingsford resolution. Efforts weremade to improve and strengthen the Blavstein school forgirls. A Jewish non-party club was organized to serve thecultural needs of the Jewish population. Among otherthings the Jewish club started a library and before long itcontained 2000 volumes in Hebrew, Yiddish and Russian.Another project of the Zionists was the improvements inthe government subsidized Talmud-Tora, the school on thePolski-Folvarek. Under the pressure of the Zionists thecurriculum was changed to include the study of the Russianlanguage, arithmetic and other subjects. A workshop wasstarted and the students had to wear a uniform. Poor stu-dents were provided with uniforms free and lunches weregiven free to all students. The Jewish free kitchen (Hach-nusis Horchim) was another target of the Zionists, and heretoo improvements took place. The party work consisted ofcultural undertakings, propaganda and collections for Zion-ists Funds. Kamenetz-Podolsk was under the jurisdiction30of the Odessa Zionist Committee with M. M. Usishkin atthe head. In 1907, the Odessa Committee sent to Kamenetz-Podolsk the well known writer and Zionist A. M. Borochov.Under his direction the Kamenetz-Podolsk Executive Com-mittee was reinforced with representatives from the follow-ing centers: from Balta Menachem Altman; from Zvanitz-Scholom Altman; from Vinitza—Zvi Isarson; from Dini-vetz—Joseph Blank and from Kamenetz-Podolsk—DavidSchleifer, Israel Goldman and Israel Drachler. With theassistance from the central committees in Odessa and withhelp from Vilno the Zionists in Kamenetz-Podolsk achieveda high degree of efficiency. By 1908 the Zionist work inKamenetz-Podolsk was considered of the highest in thecountry. Jewish Cultural work was not neglected either.In 1908 the poets Schimon Frug and Leib Jaffee came fromOdessa to deliver lectures about Jewish literature; fromVilno came the noted Zionist Dr. Daniel Pasmanik, thenGorelick, the editor of “Dos Yiddische Folk.” The last onewas popular not only with the Zionists but also with anti-Zionists. Because Gorelick wrote in Yiddish, Bundists,Poale-Zionists and others came to his lectures. By 1909 theattitude of the police toward Zionists changed. On a tipfrom the higher ups the police decided to stop the work ofthe Zionists. During Passover (1909) the police raided theoffice of the Zionist organization and confiscated all docu-ments and correspondence. The secretary Goldman wasrequested to translate everything into Russian. Then a lawsuit was instituted against all members of the Zionist exe-cutive committee.The case came up in 1911 in the district court in Ka-menetz-Podolsk. D. Schleifer, the brilliant lawyer, whowas the head of the Zionist committee defended the accused.The members of the Zionist executive committee werefound not guilty, but the court also ruled, that the Zionistorganization was not legal in Russia. From now on allZionist activities had to be stopped. Without an organiza-tion, the cultural work started by the Zionists was contin-ued for a while by inertia and then died out. The libraryleft from the defunct Jewish Club became the struggle point31The Blatman family building their own house in Tel-Avivin 1922between the Yiddishists and the Hebrewists. A noted vic-tory for the Hebrewists was won, when the famous Zionist,publicist and orator, Vladimir Jabotinsky came to Ka-menetz-Podolsk. His lectures about Hebrew literature andculture attracted so many, that a large crowd remained out-side the theatre, because all seats were sold in advance.Jabotinsky received an ovation after he finished his lecture.He invited a defender of Yiddish to come up on the stageand debate the subject. Nobody took up his challenge. Thesecond lecture was even more successful. The explanationgiven in private by the Yiddishists, that to debate in publicwould expose the identity of the leftists was not takenseriously. Everybody knew, that the secret police had adossier of anyone even remotely connected with a subver-sive political party. The Zionist idea was kept alive bydifferent means. The police was paid off to overlook Zion-ist celebrations disguised as weddings, engagements orbirthday parties. Every year a Palestinian Week was cele-brated which culminated in a Purim Ball. It looked though,as if nothing was being done by Zionists and there washardly any hope for a new generation of party members.3210Because our city was so near to the Austro-Hungarianborder it was one of the first to feel the impact of the 1stWorld War in August 1914. On the 5th of August anAustrian military detachment crossed the border and anHungarian cavalry unit with artillery reached the city in theafternoon. With the excuse, that the city did not surrenderat once the enemy bombarded the city of Kamenetz-Podolskfor 3 hours. The Russian military and civilian administra-tion evacuated the city beforehand, and the mayor finallysucceeded in surrendering the city. The enemy’s militarycommand imposed a contribution of 100,000 rubles in gold,silver or jewelry. A self-appointed committee of prominentJews were going from door to door trying to collect thenecessary sum. It looked though that the needed contri-bution would not be collected on time. There was fear thatthe city would be bombarded again, and many inhabitantsleft the city for nearby towns. Although the collected con-tribution fell short of the goal, the enemy commandant didnot order reprisals. Instead he told the mayor to returneverything to the donors. This was a gift from EmperorFranz Joseph, of Austria, whose birthday was that day.Two days later the Austrians withdrew into Galicia,and Russian military detachments pursued them. The firstdetachment of Kozaks on entering the city, mercilessly beatevery Jew, who happened to be in the street. The fightingfront was in Galicia, at times far from our city and at timesvery near. The danger of occupation was so great that in1915 all High schools were evacuated to other cities andwere not returned till a year later. The Jews from citiesand from towns near the fighting front were exiled deeperinto Russia. It was common knowledge that circles closeto the Czar were corrupt and sympathized with the enemy,a fact which in a way was responsible for the overthrowof the Romanovs. Nevertheless, Nicolas Nicolaievich, theuncle of the Czar and Supreme Commander of the Armyordered all Jews driven out from their homes near the front.He blamed the Jews for the defeats of the Russian armies33on all fronts. Hundreds of thousands of Jews became up-rooted, homeless refugees, driven deep into Russia and Si-beria. Jewish organizations in Petrograd, such as “Ecopo,”“Oze” and “Ort” started a campaign to help the refugees.It happened that some of the leaders of these relief organi-zations had leftist affiliations. As a result the representa-tives sent to help the refugees often were members of illegalJewish socialist parties. The administrator to help therefugees in Podolia, who came to Kamenetz-Podolsk, wasa lawyer from Vilno, Elihuhi Gumener. An able adminis-trator, a member of the Jewish Bund, Gumener surroundedhimself with anti-Zionists, with Yiddishists, who playedpolitics in the distribution of relief. Among the co-workersof Gumener in Kamenetz-Podolsk was the Poalei-Zionist(former Zionist) Israel Drachler, the Bundists, S. Bogradand Feivel Morgenstern and the Socialist-Zionist MoisheSister (now Dr. Sister is a lecturer and Bible researcher inIsrael). Although the Socialists hardly had a followingamong the Jews, Gumener was a formidable enemy to theZionists. They pursued an anti-Zionist policy in distribut-ing the funds from the central organizations. They parti-cularly discriminated in Jewish School education.Nevertheless, the Zionists grew stronger among therefugees and among the local Jewish population. The mainreason was that the youth had Zionist sympathies. It start-ed with the refugees from Zwanitz, who settled in Kamen-etz-Podolsk and with a number of newcomers from smalltowns. They started a campaign of Hebrew educationamong the youth in Kamenetz-Podolsk. Groups of youthswere secretly studying Hebrew in the evenings. New secretZionist student societies were organizing. They studiedthe Hebrew language, Jewish History and literature; therewas even a secret group of “chalutzim” who were preparingto leave for Palestine after the war. After the 1917 Revo-lution all these secret Zionist groups appeared on the Jew-ish political arena and received support from 90% of thepopulation. Two leaders emerged from among the refugeeson the Zionist horizon—Sholom Altman and Joshuha Saltz-man. Another newcomer was Zalman Fradkin, who turned34The family Left brought to America from a camp in Germanyby the efforts of Mr. and Mrs. L. Blatmanthe local Zeire-Zion into the strongest political party inKamenetz-Podolsk. Among others, who were politicallyactive in Jewish affairs after the Revolution were AaronAshman, A. Rozenzweig, Mendel Goldstein, Meyer Zack,Israel Bashirovker, Jacob Schreier, M. Sigal, 1. Weissman,Leon S. Blatman and Ettia Lerner.A group of religious Jews, members of synagogues,under the leadership of Leib Kleiderman, were organized as“Achdut Israel.” They generally supported the Zionistsagainst the Jewish Socialist parties in Kamenetz-Podolsk.11Jewish schools, other than cheders and yeshivas, madevery little progress in Kamenetz-Podolsk till after the 1917Revolution. In 1900 the Schecter school for boys wasstarted, but existed only a couple of years. In 1902 theBlavstein school for girls was founded. After strugglingfor 10 years this school also closed. The Talmud-Tora onthe Polshi Folvarek was not considered much by the Jewishpopulation, being more of a charitable than educationalinstitution. During the 1st World War two Hebrew schools35“Toshia” and “Moledet” were organized with the help ofthe educational organization “Tarbut.” Among those activein those educational projects were A. Ashman, A. Rozenz-weig, I. Bashirovker, C. Schreberman, Leizer Malamud(Lamed) Wolf Blickstein and others. Two kindergartenswere under the supervision of Ettia Lerner and Bath-Scheva Hess.But the most important educational institutions startedin 1915 illegally and doing excellent work after the Revolu-tion were the “Beth-Am” and the “Kadima.” Besides theireducational value these institutions played also a politicalrole, being pro Zionist and pro Hecholutz. The Yiddishists,the Jewish Socialists also organizeed a kindergarten and aschool in Yiddish, but these schools were dwarfed by thepro Hebrew movement emanating from thee “Beth-Am.”The “Beth-Am” was started by a group, which eventually,as Chalutzim, went to Palestine. They founded the Kvutza“Kriat Anovim” under the leadership of Schika Saltzman.After the 1917 Revolution the “Beth-Am” attracted hun-dreds of young boys and girls. There were groups ofyoungsters from 12 to 18, who studied Hebrew, Jewishhistory and related subjects. A group of advanced studentscalled “the University” were taking courses of higherHebraic learning and literature under the tutorship ofLeizer Malamud (Lamed). In 1916, a group of High schoolstudents founded a secret Zionist society “Kadima.” Ayear later the “Kadima” enrolled, as members, almostevery student in the city and became an important part inthe Zionist network in Kamenetz-Podolsk. Among thefounders of the “Kadima” were the brothers Jacob andIsrael Brandman. Because they had a musical education(at the Petrograd Conservatory of Music) and were tal-ented, it was natural for them to start a musical branch of“Kadima.” During the first 3 years of the Revolution theorchestra and choir of “Kadima” became the pride of theZionists. Regardless of what regime prevailed in the city,“Kadima” gave musical concerts to which Jews and non-Jews came. On June 27, 1920 “Kadima” gave a concert inhonor of the visiting delegates from the American Joint36Governmeiit Boys High School in Kamenetz-Podolskin 1914Distribution Committee. Professor I, Friedlander, EditorMaurice Kass and Dr. Leff were quite impressed; they weresurprised to find in the Ukraine, after years of pogroms, amusical group like “Kadima” with such high standards.After the bolsheviks occupied the city in November,1920 the majority of “Kadima” members escaped to Pales-tine. There they gave concerts for “Gdud Havoda” inTel-Aviv and in Petach Tikva. Interesting to note, that oneof the founders of “Kadima” Uri Michaeli (Pressman)after working for years for the Histadrut, occupied an im-portant position in civil aviation in Israel.Those of “Kadima” who remained in Kamenetz-Podolsk were persecuted by the bolsheviks, as counter revo-lutionary.During the first three years of the RevolutionKamenetz-Podolsk was under the rule of Ukrainians of theRada, under the Germans in the time of Getman Skoropad-sky, under the Petliura Ukrainians and Poles and under theBolsheviks. Due to the changes in the regimes the popu-lation suffered. For months at a time commerce was at astandstill, at other times the farmers did not bring anyagricultural products to the city and the population was37at the brink of starvation. But the Jews suffered morethan others. During the changing of regimes not onlyJewish property was in jeopardy, but Jewish lives were ingrave danger. At times the outrages of soldiers took theform of pogroms when Jews were killed and maimed.Pogroms in Kamenetz-Podolsk and nearby towns and citiestook place during the change over from Petliura to thebolsheviks and vice versa, during occupation by bands ofindependent Atamans, pogroms were also perpetrated byGeneral Denikin’s soldiers, never by the Red Army. Thebiggest pogrom in Kamanetz-Podolsk occurred in June1919, when Petliura’s army returned from exile in Galicia.72 innocent Jews were murdered, many more wounded andmillions of Jewish property destroyed or stolen. Pogromsduring Petliura’s regime were due to the weakness of thegovernment and indifference or design of military com-manders, who looked for a scapegoat for their inability todefeat the Red Army. The Ukrainians and the Denikintzikilled Jews with the outcry: “Kill Jews and save theUkraine (or save Russia) from Jewish bolsheviks.” It ispossible that the Red Army did not make pogroms becauseof a stronger discipline and due to the fact that many Jewsserved in that army not only as privates, but also as officersup to the highest ranks.When a regime stayed for a while and the fightingfront moved further from the city it looked as though thisregime was destined to remain permanently; life in thecity then became more or less normal. The scars from thefighting and from pogroms did not heal completely, butwere not too visible. In Kamenetz-Podolsk at such periodsJewish community life proceeded at an accelerated pace.Under the new laws of National-Personal Autonomy theJewish population elected a democratic community council(Kehila). This representative body took over a number offunctions formerly the province of the local or centralgovernment. The Kehila had supervision over cultural.38Avner Korman killed in battle with Petliura’s pogrom bandunder Orinin May 1919educational, spiritual and philanthropic institutions of theJewish population. The Kehila was also the representa-tive of the Jews in dealing with local or central govern-ments. If the form of N.P.A. would have remained itwould have given the Jews of the Ukraine an autonomyunequaled in the history of Jews in any country at anytime. Jewish political parties fully realized the impor-tance of the Kehila and were active on the political arena,trying to get more and more supporters for their programs.The minority parties tried to offset the power of the Zion-ists in the Kehilas; some parties played up to the Govern-ment of the moment. Jewish socialist parties, being mi-norities without representation in the Kehila, did exactlythis in Kamenetz-Podolsk. During the bolshevik regime39they helped to abolish the democratically elected Kehilaand during the Petliura regime they conspired with theMinister of Jewish affairs, Pinchos Krasny, to hinder thework of the Kehila.13After the Revolution, as during the Czar, one Jewishorganization had to remain secret and underground. Thiswas the Hagana—the Jewish self-defense. In Kamenetz-Podolsk as in many cities in Russia, the Hagana was start-ed after the pogrom in Kishinev in 1903. In 1905, whenpogroms were organized in many places, the Hagana inKamenetz-Podolsk was ready to defend the Jews frombands of hooligans. Luckily the Hagana did not have togo into action—the abortive riot in Kamenetz-Podolsk didnot develop into a pogrom. During the pogrom years 1918-1920 the Hagana was revived and reorganized. A greathelp in this was the Auxiliary Police. The city govern-ment inaugurated a voluntary Auxiliary Police force topatrol the city streets at night. The Auxiliary Police func-tioned under the Ukrainian and under the bolshevik re-gimes. Many young Jewish men, acting as Auxiliaries,were also secret members of the Hagana. This gave theHagana a chance to train the members in handling offirearms and even to secure additional arms and ammuni-tion. These were kept in hiding, and thus the Hagana wasprepared to stop a pogrom by a small band.14Late in May 1919, when the city was under the bol-sheviks, the Hagana was called into action. Rumors, leakedfrom the Revkom, circulated that a band of Ukranianscrossed from Galicia into Grinin, where a pogrom is immi-nent. It was late in the evening when the members of theAuxiliary Police were called to assemble at the centralplaza in front of the Revkom. A Red Army officer asked40if those present were willing to go to Orinin to stop a po-grom. Those present, about 80-90 men, all Jews, volunteeredand were joined by about 50 Red Army men with 2 piecesof artillery and a few machine guns. Only about 8 milesfrom the city“ the marchers on Orinin” ran into a barrageof small arm fire. There was no other way left but to fight.It seems, it was a Petliura military detachment, which wassent to occupy the city, stripped of Red Army defenders.The pitched battle did not last long, but the Gaidamacks, notknowing the strength of the enemy, and having heavylosses, retreated toward Galicia. It turned out that 60Gaidamacks had been killed and an unknown numberwounded. Only one Red Army soldier and one memberof the Hagana, Abraham Korman, were killed and a fewAuxiliary Policemen lightly wounded.The Red Army did not send reinforcements and thebolsheviks evacuated the city. It became clear that thebolsheviks, in desperation, trying to hold back the enemy,tricked the Jews to go with them and fight the Gaida-macks. Realizing that the Ukrainians were advancing witha large military force, the Hagana decided that resistancewould mean slaughter of all Jews in the city. The hope,that under Petliura we would not witness a repetition ofthe deeds of Gaidamacks like under Bogdan Chmelnitzky(1648) was baseless. It was enough to remember theslaughter of Jews in Proskurov under Ataman Semosenko(Petliura’s General) in February 1919 not to expect a mir-acle now. The Gaidamacks entered Kamenetz-Podolskwithout meeting any resistance, and immediately starteda pogrom which lasted 3 days. Seventy-two Jews werekilled, many injured and millions of dollars of Jewish pro-perty destroyed. A number of Jews tried to escape to thenearby towns, but many were overtaken on the roads andkilled. Among those who managed to escape was AlexanderChomsky, the son of the richest druggist in the city. Alex-ander Chomsky was an assimilated Jew, did not belong toany political party and served as an Auxiliary Policeman.As such he took part “in the march on Orinin.” Whenthings quieted down and the Petliura Government settled41Mechel and Rose Kaplun killed together with their twoteenaged daughters by the Nazisin Kamenetz-Podolsk, Chomsky came home. Before longhe was arrested and put on trial before a military tribunal,as a bolshevik. He was accused of being with the RedArmy fighting against the Gaidamacks. Mr. Alter, aprominent lawyer defended Chomsky. He pointed out that,like many other Auxiliary Policemen, Chomsky fell for thebolsheviks’ proYocation,” that Chomsky believed that they,the Policemen, were going to stop a pogrom in Orinin per-petrated by a small band of irregulars. Alter brought tocourt some of the leading Jews, Ukrainians and Poles, ascharacter witnesses for Chomsky. In his summationAlter called for a court-martial of the commander, whoallowed a Petliura regiment to kill innocent Jewish menand women as revenge for the defeat of his regiment by a42handful of Jewish Policemen. Nevertheless, the courtfound Chomsky guilty and sentenced him to be shot. Anappeal to Petliura, who happened to be in Kamenetz-Podolsk, freed Chomsky. An investigation of the “marchon Orinin” and of the pogrom in our city was ordered, butnothing ever reached the public on these subjects.15Delegations from nearby towns and from far citiesarrived in Kamenetz-Podolsk seeking relief for the pogromsufferers. Our city was the largest Jewish community ofthe Ukraine liberated from the bolsheviks, and the Ministerof Jewish Affairs of the Petliura Government was now inour city. The Kamenetz-Podolsk Kehila organized a reliefcommittee and tried, as much as was possible, to help thosewho suffered from the pogroms. In the meanwhile, thenews of what happened to the Jews in the Ukraine spreadthroughout the world. Jews in many countries wereorganizing relief for the sufferers. One of the first toreach with such help was a delegation of the AmericanJoint Distribution Committee. In February 1920 Judge H.Fisher and Max Pine from America came to Kamenetz-Podolsk. Two months later a relief mission of the “Joint”(Professor I. Friedlander, Maurice Kass and Dr. Leff)came to Kamenetz-Podolsk and transferred a sum of moneyto the local relief committee. After a few sessions with thelocal relief workers, who explained the situation in nearbycities and towns, the delegation decided to travel to asmany places, as possible to study the needs of the suffererson the spot. Traveling from town to town the delegatessaw the unbelievable misery in which the Jews lived afterthe pogroms. They visited the cities Mogilev-Podolsk,Staro-Konstantine and Proskurov. This last one still hadnot recovered from the slaughter of Jews a year before.Meanwhile the Red Army broke through the Ukrain-ian front and Red Army patrol were in the vicinity. Un-able to proceed to Kiev or Odessa the delegation returned43to Kamenetz-Podolsk. From here it was decided to goback to Warsaw and receive further orders from NewYork. The delegation split into two groups: one car withProfessor Friedlander and Dr. Cantor left early July 5,1920; the rest of the delegation stopped for an appointmentwith the War Minister. There they were informed thatFriedlander and Dr. Cantor were killed by a Red Armypatrol near the town of Yarmolinetz. The Americans leftby a different route for Poland. Four months later the RedArmy occupied Kamenetz-Podolsk. The bolsheviks confis-cated the relief funds and distributed the relief suppliesamong the peasants of nearby villages.16During the first years of the 1917 Revolution, when theUkraine was soaked in Jewish blood, when over 100,000Jews were killed in pogroms, when the Petliura Gaiga-macks were as barbaric as those of Bogdan Chmelnitzki,there were also happy interludes for the Jews.In Kamenetz-Podolsk among such happy days wasMay 12, 1920, when the Jews of the city celebrated theBalfour Declaration.For the occasion the city was decorated with white andblue banners, with flowers and oriental rugs hung from thewindows and balconies. A big parade was organized inwhich thousands of school children, men and women passedthe reviewing stand.The leading Zionists and Kehila executives, representa-tives of the local and central governments addressed thecitizens of the city. The Petliura cabinet was representedby the Minister of Education, Professor Ogienko and bythe Minister of Jewish Affairs, Pinchos Krasny. Therewere diplomats accredited to the Ukrainian Governmentand other important personalities. Orchestras played the“Hatikva” and groups of children sang Palestinian songs.44Motia Kaplun, an officer in the Red Army killedin battle under StalingradThere was hope that the Jews would sooner or later gettheir land—Palestine. Another happy day was the de-parture for Palestine of the first group of Halutzim.The Hecholutz in Kamenetz-Podolsk was started a fewyears before the actual departure for Palestine. In 1917,thanks to the efforts of Leon Blatman, a number ofChalutzim were allowed to work on the farm on his almamater, the technical high school, under the supervision ofthe school agronomist. Later the Chalutzim rented a farmwhere they did all the agricultural work; a group of thechalutzim went to Cherson to work on the farms of Jewishcolonists; some of the Chalutzim went to Odessa wherethey received theoretical instructions from agronomistA. Zussman. On arrival in Palestine the Chalutzim fromKamenetz-Podolsk founded the kvutza “Kriat Anovim”;45the success of that Kvutza is due to some degree to thepreparations the Chalutzim received in Kamenetz-Podolsk.17In November 1920, the Red Army drove the remnantsof the Ukrainian Army and the Petliura government intoexile in Galicia, Poland. Kamenetz-Podolsk was now per-manently under the bolsheviks. During the second WorldWar the city was temporarily occupied by the Nazis. Evenbefore the bolsheviks took over Kamenetz-Podolsk in 1920the majority of Jews fled from the city, knowing very wellthat the bolsheviks would bring ruin for the Jews economi-cally, spiritually, culturally and politically.During the first years of occupation of Kamenetz-Podolsk by the bolsheviks Jews from the city were escap-ing to Rumania across the Dniestr River 15 miles awayor to Galicia an equal distance from the city. From therethe refugees from Kamenetz-Podolsk went to Palestine, tothe United States or Canada. Some Jews would disappearfrom the city, leaving everything to be confiscated by thebolsheviks or stolen by the peasants. Other Jewish fami-lies traveled to big cities, like Moscow, to settle there. Op-portunities in large cities were better than in Kamenetz-Podolsk. The bolsheviks designated Vinnitza as thecapitol of Podolia and transferred all important institutionsfrom Kamenetz-Podolsk. Before the start of the secondWorld War the Jewish population of the city dropped toabout 10,000, a fraction of the number of Jews in 1920.18Just before the Hitler Army invaded the Ukraine manyJews from Kamenetz-Podolsk succeeded in leaving the cityand going deep into Russia or Siberia. When the Nazisoccupied the city they herded the remaining city Jews andalso Jews from surrounding towns into the Karvasar, where46they established the Ghetto. From Rumania, from Hun-gary, from Belgium and Holland the Nazis brought train-loads of Jews who were put into the ghetto together withthe native Jews. During the 27th, 28th and 29th of August1941 all Jews from the Ghetto in Kamenetz-Podolsk wereassembled on the Podzamcha and executed. The bodieswere buried in deep trenches and the earth smoothed over;no signs were left that thousands of Jews were buried there.After the end of the Second World War the Kamenetz-Podolier Relief Committee in New York was in touch withhundreds of people from Kamenetz-Podolsk, who werescattered in many places in Russia and Siberia. Tbe biggestwork of the New York Relief committee was to find rela-tives in the United States or Israel for the survivors inRussia and in the Ukraine. For a number of years visitorsto Russia were not allowed to travel into Kamenetz-Podolsk.Most of the survivors from Kamenetz-Podolsk settled inthe city of Chernovitz, formerly in Bukovina, now annexedto the Russian Ukraine. In 1963, a former Kamenetzer,now living in Colombia, South America visited the citywhere she was born; another visitor to Kamenetz-Podolskwas a former Kamenetzer now living in New York. Bothbrought the sad news that Kamenetz-Podolsk was com-pletely ruined and not rebuilt by the Russians. The oldcity was not fit for people to live in and those who returnedto the city are now on the Novy Plan and in other suburbs.The Jewish inhabitants consist only of old pensioners andmost are not originally from the city of Kamenetz-Podolsk.47A CITY THAT WASLEON S. BLATMAN49The City I Knew in My YouthOf all the cities in the Ukraine, Kamenetz-Podolsk wasconsidered one of outstanding beauty. The river Smotrichflows around the old city like a belt, forming an island,which was connected by bridges with the mainland. Ap-proaching the city, which stood deep in green of parks andorchards, one would be reminded of a painting of a medievaltown on one side and of a modern city on the other. Thenewer suburb of Kamenetz-Podolsk, the “Novy Plan,” wasbuilt in a geometrical pattern with wide, clean, tree-linedstreets.The old city, however, was full of old minarets andchurches, ruins of medieval forts, new and old stone build-ings with narrow streets and large paved squares.Kamenetz-Podolsk, the largest city in Podolia, was, inmany ways, unchanged since the Turks. The region bor-dered on the west with Galicia (old Poland, then Austria,and again Poland, till Russia annexed it after World War11); to the South was Bessarabia (Rumania); to the northand east were provinces (Gubernias) of Cherson, Kiev, andWolin. Podolia had other cities with large Jewish popula-tion, like Proskurov, Vinitza, Mohilev-Podolsk, Bar, andJmerinka, and hundreds of smaller towns with 100% Jewishpopulations. The thousands of villages were 100% Ukrain-ian with here and there a few Jewish families. As a rule,the Czars banned Jews from living in villages, but someJews remained, particularly those whose ancestors livedthere for generations.Kamenetz-Podolsk, the old city, was on a high cliff,formerly a fortified Turkish city, surrounded by a highstone wall. Parts of the wall, with gates, minarets, andfortification are still standing. The view from the “NovyMost,” the modern bridge connecting the city with thesuburb, Novy Plan, was magnificent. The river was farbelow like in a canyon, with a sheer drop of hundreds offeet on both sides. Only in a few places, the straight walls50Chalutzim from Kamenetz-Podolsk on the wayto Palestineleft enough room on the banks of the river for small dwell-ings, where the poor of the “dolina” lived, or narrow openspaces which were used as bathing beaches.Crossing the Novy Most, one could walk for two milesto the left through the “new boulevard” to the suburb“Polski Filvarek” or for three miles to the right throughthe Park “Proresnaya Dorojka” to the suburb “Russki Fil-varek” with its magnificent villas (Datchas). Going straightahead from the bridge into the suburb, Novy Plan, onewould see modern buildings of high schools and governmentoffices, the Pushkinsky Theatre, palatial homes with formalgardens and apartment houses. The main street led to thebusiness center, where “fairs” were held; farther on wasthe race track “skatchka,” and the railroad station.On the other side of the old city was the “old boulevard”and the Turkish bridge leading to the suburb, Podzamcha.This old bridge was really a tremendous stone wall, builtcenturies ago by the Turks. In the center of the wall wasa gate, an opening the size of a 5 story building, throughwhich the waters of the river flowed in the form of an arti-ficial waterfall, connecting the western and eastern sidesof the river Smotrich.From the Turkish bridge the road led for 15 miles westto the Galician border and for the same distance south to51the river Dniestr and the border of Bessarabia (Rumania).The castles and fortification could be seen for a few milesfrom the bridge. There were rumors that a tunnel underthe fortification led all the way to the river Dniestr, but no-body dared to go further than a short distance inside it.In Jewish history, Kamenetz-Podolsk is of some interest—first, because of the martyrdom of the Jews of Podoliaduring the insurrection of Bogdan Chmelnitsky, when po-groms similar to those perpetrated by Petliura’s army tookplace in the Ukraine. Second, because Kamenetz-Podolskis of importance during the time of Shabsa Zvi and JacobFrank. Kamenetz-Podolsk is also of interest as the placewhere Chassidism of Baal Shem Tov was born. At the startof the First World War, the population of Kamenetz-Podolsk was about 60,000 with 50% Jews, 25% Poles andthe rest, Russians and Russified Ukrainians.The city was not rich, but did not suffer from the pov-erty (among Jews) of Galician or Luthuanian cities. Ofcourse, Kamenetz-Podolsk had its quota of the poor, under-privileged and chronically unemployed. But the majoritymanaged to provide for their families.Under the Czarist laws, Jews were not allowed to holdany government jobs. Like elsewhere in Russia, no Jewcould be employed as a teacher, or by the banks, by therailroad, or in the post office, in telegraph or telephoneoffices, in the courts, or in any capacity by municipal, re-gional, or state subdivisions, including the police. Jewswere not allowed to serve even as janitors or jail guards.Starting with the Governor’s palace, and down to thehome of the jail Warden’s, officials were provided withquarters in addition to their salaries. The city’s gentilepopulation, which consisted in its majority of officials, didnot have to worry about its daily bread. The city had noindustry. Industrial workers (non-Jews) could find em-ployment only in a few places, such as at the electric station,at the railroad, at the iron foundry, in some of the print-ing shops, at the beer brewery and at flour mills. You could52Organizers of Textile-Employee’s UnionAmong them: M. Wasserman, who took part in organizing a strike againsthis father’s business, Michael Kaplun, Morris Kaplun, Israel Nesis, NachmanYakor, Carver, Presman, and the fiancee of Nesis, Lora Cogan.not find a Jew at such occupations, as janitors, water car-riers (by horse and wagon) chimney sweeps etc. But Jewscomprised 90% of house painters, shoemakers, carpenters,tailors, watchmakers, etc. All the storekeepers were Jews.There were a few non-Jewish retail establishments, likeCook’s shoe store, Winiarski’s book shop, Juravliev’s linenshop and the Cooperative Department Store.But most of the retail and wholesale business was inthe hands of Jews. The business establishments were inthe centre of the old city; there were small and large stores,some of them were not inferior to stores on the main streetsof Petrograd, Moscow, Kiev or Odessa. The owners ofhotels, restaurants, movie houses, drug stores, the local pressand private banks were Jews. Some Jews would engagein the export of agricultural products, were trading withfarmers at the weekly and yearly fairs or traveled throughthe villages buying grain, fruit or vegetables. There weresome exporters who dealt with the owners of large estates,buying from them grain, livestock, forest and poultry.53A special Jewish occupation was the brokerage, thego-between, the “mekler.” When a Jew from the provincecame to Kamenetz-Podolsk, because a son was to appearbefore the draft board he would be helpless without a mek-ler. The proper mekler would make contact with the mili-tary doctor, with a member of the staff and arrange thingsfor a price. If one had business in the courts, or some othergovernment office, a mekler could facilitate the transactionand help cut the red tape. To reach a high police official,even in the secret police, to influence any official or to peti-tion the Governor one was advised to do it with the helpof the proper mekler. At times one would approach a mek-ler who knew the top mekler who really knew the topofficial. There were commercial meklers who helped inbusiness transactions with the owners of large estates. Itlooked, as though a large percentage of Jews in Kamenetz-Podolsk were meklers. And the local expression was, thatmeklers, “luftmenchen” make a living by “pulling ribbonsfrom the air.”But discounting businessmen and meklers the majorityof Jews in the city worked hard to earn a living. They werethe tailors, the shoemakers, the carpenters, the housepaint-ers, the printers, the tinsmiths, the barbers, the cobblers,the furriers, the watchmakers and others engaged in trades.They worked for themselves, employing a helper or two.Only the printers like Landwiger, Weinbaum, Konigsberg &Fitterman had dozens of employees. Among the profes-sionals, like doctors, pharmacists, dentists, lawyers, mid-wives and private tutors, the majority were Jews. To roundup occupations we must mention the Jewish clergy: afew orthodox Rabbis, (the Government-appointed RabbiOcksman did not perform the duties of an orthodox Rabbi),the schochtim, (slaughterers of fowl and cattle for koshermeat), the custodians of the synagogues (shamosim) and afew others. A great number of Jews in Kamenetz-Podolskwere religious, but the city, nevertheless, was not under thedomination of the orthodox Jews. True, the stores andshops were closed on Saturdays, but one could hardly seeJews dressed in “kapotas” and “shtramlach” and wearing54Kamieiiic^Poddsfei. ‘ Szkota Technic^a,Technical High School in Kamenetz-Podolsk in 1909long, curly sideburns (payas), a sight frequently seen eventoday in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. Modern dressed, cleanshaven Jews could be seen, often smoking a cigarette onSaturdays. Jews went to the theatre and to the movies onFriday nights and Saturdays and, of course, high schoolstudents went to classes, where they had to write on Satur-days. Only on High Holydays did everybody go to thesynagogue; this included doctors, some of whom would ridein their cars till a block or two away from the house ofworship, then walk.Young Jews would talk in Russian in public, althoughthe majority spoke Yiddish at home.Among the older generation were many chassidim, fol-lowers of the Zinkover, Gusatiner or Chortkover Rebes.The local Rebe, Naftultzi was not popular, except amongthe poorer working Jews. Youngsters, not accepted in localhigh schools on account of “the norma,” studied with privatetutors, usually following the curriculum of the schools.These so called “extern!” sometimes succeeded in enteringinto higher classes or would pass an examination for theentire course of the high school. In such cases they couldenter the university, if they were lucky in the drawing and55their names came up among the 10% of Jews to be admittedto a University.The city’s school system had nine high schools: theboys high school, the technical high school, two high schoolsof commerce, two high schools for girls, the greek orthodoxseminary, the pension for Christian girls and the city’s jun-ior high school. There were also a number of grammarschools and Ganitsky’s music school. In 1918 the UkrainianGovernment established the Kamenetz-Podolsk University,temporarily using the facilities of the technical high school.The Jewish educational institutions consisted of a num-ber of traditional cheders, of private Hebrew teachers andof the government subsidized Talmud-Tora. There wereat one time two modern Jewish schools, Blavstein’s for girlsand Schectman’s for boys. They did not get enough supportand after a few years were forced to close. As a rule Jewishhigh school students did not continue their meagre Jewisheducation obtained in cheders. For a while it looked, asthough a generation devoid of Jewish education was grow-ing up. There was the danger of assimilation and, what ismore, russification by Jews of the local Ukrainians. Thiswas something the Czarist government welcomed. But afew years before the first World War a nationalist andZionist movement sprung up among Jewish high schoolstudents. Groups were formed to study in secret Hebrewand Yiddish, Jewish history, Jewish literature and Zionism.The city library and school libraries were sufficient untilthen, but now the Jewish library became popular among theJewish youth.Cultural needs in the city were filled by the localpress: Podolsky Krai, a progressive organ and “Podolianin,”the voice of the government and the extreme right, werethe two local newspapers. Papers from other cities,like Kiev and Odessa, were received and sold in fairlylarge numbers. Books and periodicals were available in thebook stores of the brothers Banvelman, Kaplun and Winiar-sky. There was a small group of Ukrainian intellectualsaround their club “Prosvita,” but Jews had little contactwith them. Like the Jews, the Ukrainians had to conduct56their activities in secret. Other cultural needs of the citywere fulfilled by a repertory theatrical company at the citytheatre. Opera companies—Russian and Italian—visitedthe city for a few weeks every Winter. Concerts by out-standing artists and by symphony orchestras were givenoccasionally at the Pushkinski Dom. The circus came totown every Spring. Jewish theatre was not allowed, exceptby special permit from the Governor. Such rare occasionswere usually turned into Zionist events. The great Kamin-sky with her company gave a few performances in 1912coming all the way from Warsaw. After each performancethere were cries “Heidot” and singing of the “Hatikva.”The city had four movie theatres, the largest “the Gigant”featured vaudeville. Roller skating was tried, but did notbecome popular. Horse racing on the city track “skatchka”was only for the rich gentry. Life was quite placid inKamenetz-Podolsk, except for such events, as a visit byaviator Utochkin in 1911. He flew his homemade Aeroplaneover the “skatchka,” landed to take on a passenger andafter a few turns over the city landed again. Another eventwas the visit of the Czar Nicholas the Second in 1913, cele-brating 300 years of the rule of the Romanovs.Till the start of the first World War progress cameslowly to Kamenetz-Podolsk. Automobiles were few, therewas no electric tramway, like in other Russian cities, elec-tricity was limited and the railroad was finished just beforethe War. The War and the Revolution of 1917 brought anupswing in the economic, cultural and political life of thecity. After 3 years of Revolution, civil war and pogromsKamenetz-Podolsk was finally occupied by the bolsheviksand became part of the Soviet Ukraine. Half of the Jewsof Kamenetz-Podolsk managed to escape abroad and manytraveled and settled in the larger cities of Russia. The de-cline of Kamenetz-Podolsk was accelerated by removing theimportant institutions to Vinitza which was made the capi-tal of Podolia. Kamenetz-Podolsk, a second class provincialcity was destroyed by the Nazis at the start of the SecondWorld War and the remaining Jews were annihilated. Thiswas the end of the Jewish community in Kamenetz-Podolsk.57The Jewish sport club “Maccabee”From the first World Zionist Congress on the leadersof the movement advocated the formation of Zionist sportclubs. They suggested the name “Maccabee” in honor of theBiblical Heroes.Such clubs were organized in Germany, in Austria andin a few other Western European countries. The feebleattempts to have such clubs in Russia were abandoned, whenthe Czarist Government declared the Zionists as subversives.But the idea to have eventually such sport clubs wasvery much alive among the Zionist student organization“Hachover.”In 1915, in Odessa, where I was studying at the time, Imet Jacob Granowsky, who, after the Revolution was thehead of “Maccabee” in Russia. Granovsky seemed almostfanatical on the subject of Jewish sport clubs. He wouldsingle out a student from the province and explain to himthe program of “Maccabee.” He would rationalize, that inOdessa and in other large cities nothing could be done for“Maccabee,” because the secret police has its agent in everyhouse-in the janitor. Granovsky would point out that thesecret police in the provincial cities and towns was not toosophisticated and could be easily bribed. Who would payattention to a group of Jewish youths practicing gymnas-tics, riding bicycles, playing ball or engaged in otherphysical exercises?I would listen to Granowsky and his enthusiasm wouldbecome contagious; I even promised to do whatever wouldbe possible on my return to Kamenetz-Podolsk for vacation.Before I could start preliminary work Granowsky was ar-rested and exiled. After the Revolution I was too busywith Zeire-Zion work and other activities. In 1918, I metagain Granowsky in Odessa, who was supervising the “Mac-cabee” all over Russia and the Ukraine. He rememberedme and my promise to start a “Maccabee” club in Kamen-etz-Podolsk. I decided to do it this time on my return home.58Party Card of a member of “Zeire-Zion” in Kamenetz-PodolskI called a meeting of young people, most of them highschool students. Together with Isaak Schweitzer, SchimonDrachler, the Brothers Schoimer, T. Tackgaus and myyounger brother Schmiel we started the Kamenetz-PodolskZionist sport club “Maccabee.” A drive among boys andgirls brought the formation of a number of groups of dif-ferent ages to be engaged in sport activities. It took di-plomacy and persuasion to secure the right to use theoutdoor sport field of the Government High School for boys.Using the completely equipped athletic facilities of theschool’s field the different groups were drilled in simplegymnastics, in marching and ball playing. A former athlete,a Czech, stranded in the city, was engaged to supervise theathletic activities. He was a prisoner of war, but in peacetime a physical culture instructor.Now came the problem of raising funds to cover theexpenses of the club. But this was soon solved by Takgaus,who had a simple formula. He would arrange dances andcharge admission. The “Takgaus dances,” soon known as“talcum balls” had no resemblance to the usual balls in ourcity. A ball at a high school would take weeks of prepara-tions. It consisted of a musical part, a literary part, a free£9buffet and dancing. Takgaus simplified all that—^he pro-vided the hall, the orchestra, spread some talcum on theparquet floor and let the participants entertain themselvesby dancing and talking to each other.During the first Summer the “Maccabee” club becamevery popular. Boys and girls would enjoy the free member-ship, where they played games, became experts in gym-nastics, arranged walks into the woods and picnic in thefields. The teenagers of “Maccabee” were soon part ofZionist celebrations where they exhibited their skills inathletics. The pride of “Maccabee” was the soccer team.Practice and matches took place on the field of the “scatch-ka,” (the horse racing track) on the Novy Plan. In theSpring of 1920, the city was jointly occupied by the Petliuraand Polish military detachments. A match was arrangedbetween the soccer team of the Polish Army and the “Mac-cabee” team. There were so many spectators, it looked asif half of the city came to watch the soccer game. The“Maccabee” team won, but the victory turned almost intotragedy. The Polish soldiers could not stomach the factthat the Jews won and started a riot. Thanks to theUkrainian staff officer who witnessed the game, the riotwas nipped in the bud. He called on the Ukrainian militarypolice to stop the riot before it developed into a pogrom.In the fall of 1920, the work of “Maccabee” was termi-nated by order of the bolsheviks who declared the sport clubas a nest of counter-revolutionists.60The Zeire-Zion (Labor-Zionist) Party inKamenetz-PodolskThe 1917 Revolution brought into the open Jewishpolitical parties which, until then, were operating secretlyand illegally.From the start, the majority of the Jewish masses sup-ported the Zeire-Zion and Zionist Parties. This becameevident when over 90% of the Jews voted for these partiesin local city elections and in elections to the Kehilla (Councilof the Jewish Community). The same results were shownin elections to the all-Ukrainian Rada (Parliament) and tothe Founding all-Russian Congress, which the bolsheviksdissolved by force.In Kamenetz-Podolsk, the Kehilla president was theZionist M. Zack and the administration was in the hands ofan able executive, the Zeire-Zionist, Z. Fradkin.During the first three years of the Revolution, Kamen-etz-Podolsk was under Ukrainian anti-bolsheviks regimes:first the government of the Rada in Kiev, then the Getman’sregime with the help of the Germans; finally, the govern-ment of the Directoria (dominated by Petliura). Only inthe spring of 1919, the local bolsheviks seized power inKamenetz-Podolsk for about 6 weeks, then in 1920 theSoviets took over and that ended the civil war.Under the Constitution of the Rada, which gave na-tional personal autonomy to minorities, the local Kehillaadministered Yiddish and Hebrew schools, and other cul-tural institutions, the Jewish Hospital and Home for theAged; the Kehilla was also issuing birth and death certifi-cates, wedding licenses, etc.Zeire-Zion and all other Jewish political parties sup-ported a free democratic anti-bolshevik Ukraine. But theUkrainian government in Kiev ignored the fact that Zeire-Zion was a major Jewish party and when it came to Jewishaffairs, dealt with the smaller Jewish Socialist parties, likePoalei-Zion, Bund, etc. This was only because the majority61Marinskaia Girls High School in Kamenetz-Podolsk in 1912in the government were socialists. When the Petliuragovernment under the pressure of the Red army retreatedall the way to Poland (Galicia), some local Jewish Socialistparties conveniently forgot their allegiance to the Ukrain-ian government. In Kamenetz-Podolsk, the Bund, PoaleiZion, etc. used the bolsheviks to destroy the Kehilla and takeover its functions. In 1919, during the six weeks of thebolsheviks’ occupation, the Messrs. Guminers, Bograds andCompany were reigning supreme over the Jewish Com-munity.On the return from Poland, in June 1919 the PetliuraGovernment settled for a few months in Kamenetz-Podolsk,waiting for the liberation of Kiev. Among the ministrieswas the ministry of Jewish Affairs with Pinchos Krasny asMinister. He ordered the requisition of the Zionist Clubbuilding. Then Pinchos Krasny appointed as heads of theministry’s departments the same Jewish Socialists, who,only a few weeks before had destroyed the Kehila and co-operated with the bolsheviks. Again, Guminer, Bogradand Company held the power over the Kehilas, which beganfunctioning in Kamenetz-Podolsk and in all cities and townsliberated from the Red Army. The Kehilas ignored the62Jewish minister, the Guminers and Company, wheneverthey could proceed without them.The Zeire-Zion in Kamenetz-Podolsk still cut off fromthe central committee in Kiev, had to assume the functionsof a temporary central committee. In mid-summer of 1919a conference of Zeire-Zion from all liberated territorieswas called in Kamenetz-Podolsk. The conference was heldin the city hall and was addressed by representatives of theUkrainian Government. Of course, Pinchos Krasny wasaware of the conference, but was not invited. In fact,among the resolutions at the conference was one condemn-ing Pinchos Krasny, as a self-appointed usurper. He camefrom the miniature Folks Party, which did not have evena branch in Kamenetz-Podolsk or in any city in Podolia. Iwas in an unpleasant position, as Chairman of the Confer-ence. The next morning I had to face Pinchos Krasnyagain, because with the approval of my party, I occupiedan important though a non-political position in the Jewishministry.A memorandum, pertaining to the political situationamong the Jews in the Ukraine and a demand that a Jewishminister should come from a major Jewish party, was pre-sented in the name of the conference to the Directoria (Pet-liura. Prof. Schwetz and Makarenko). Z. Fradkin who hadan audience with Prof. Schwetz, was assured that, as soonas Kiev would be liberated and the Rada (Parliament)would begin to function again, a new government respon-sible to the Rada would take over from the Directoria.Then a minister of Jewish Affairs would truly repre-sent the Ukrainian Jewry. For the time being, we wouldhave to contend with Pinchos Krasny. A few months later,the Zeire-Zion received an invitation to participate in the“Derjavna Narada” (Government Advisory Council), whichwas to serve instead of the Rada until elections to a newRada after liberation.Our party sent a delegation of three: Z. Fradkin, Dr.Halpern, and Leon S. (Schloimo) Blatman.63The “Narada” took place on the main floor of the oldGovernor’s House. Each Ukrainian, Jewish, Russian, andPolish party (except communist) was represented. In addi-tion the Ukrainian clergy, the Army, the independentUkrainian Guerrilla bands, the University, and the Direc-toria were represented. The diplomatic corps consisted ofa few Polish civilian and military representatives andUkrainian diplomats accredited to, but not recognized by,many European countries. Among them was Margolin, (aJew) who tried unsuccessfully to represent the Ukraine inFrance.When the usher examined our credentials, he asked, ifwe wanted to be seated with the other Jewish delegates. Wedeclined and took places near Prof. Ogienko, the dean ofour city’s university. After a while, the formal greetingswere over and Makarenko in the name of the Directoriagave the report of the Government. As in the past, therewere promises of a bright future after the liberation: theUkraine would be a free democratic country. The nationalpersonal autonomy for minorities would give the Jews, Rus-sians and Polish citizens a chance to enjoy more privilegesthan in any other country. The 100,000 Jewish victims ofpogroms were dismissed with the explanation that it wasthe work of bolsheviks, who infiltrated into the Ukrainianarmy. The Government gave the Jewish ministry a sub-stantial sum of money to help the pogrom sufferers. Decla-rations by different delegations ensued. The Jewish Social-ists made watered-down statements with hopes, that theUkraine would be the Socialist Paradise, in contrast to themiseries of communist Russia. Finally came the declarationof the Zeire-Zion.For almost half an hour, Fradkin kept the audiencespellbound with his brilliant speech in excellent Ukrainian.He pointed out that millions of Ukrainian Jews were sup-porting Zeire-Zion and Zionists and were anti-communists.Even the Jewish Socialists were against the Bolsheviks.Notwithstanding, the Ukrainian army was crimson fromthe blood of Jews killed in pogroms. The Ukrainians were64*7 ,‘y... .,y ,»<H50Efi!u». Li  ...,—Pa^a (.'Tyir-,;npe;icT: B , ;, .{B in 3 i;? '■rTB-TOK..,.-_   *V-f ^ ♦cs>» JCMTMfNU »•- V •»,;| ’<•«1?>5 na t.   Certificate by Students Council of Kamenetz-Podolsk Universitykilling with the cry; “Kill the Jewish Bolsheviks.” Therepresentative of the Directoria, who knew better, perpet-uated the lie that the bolsheviks were the guilty ones. Itwas enough to mention the infamous Ataman Zeleny, whosebandits killed thousands of Jews, and who were proclaimedto be real Ukrainian patriots, it was time to make an end tothis pretense. Fradkin demanded court-martialling theguilty ones and a policy that would make pogroms impos-sible. Unfortunately, the Red Army appeared, as the saviorof innocent Jews from the Ukranian pogrom makers.Jewish youth, instead of fighting the Communists wereforced to flee and join the Red Army to avenge the killingsof innocent Jews. The Jews were in a dilemma: in theorythey are for a free Ukraine, but fears of pogroms stop onlywhen the Red Army drives out the Ukrainians from citiesand towns.The pittance given to the Jewish Minister was less thana fraction of the sums extracted from the Jews by theArmy, as voluntary contributions. Millions were neededfor rebuilding the ruined Jewish population and they wouldhave to come from Jews at home and abroad. If theUkrainian Directoria could not find a way to control and65discipline its army, the Jews of the Ukraine and from for-eign lands were willing to organize a Jewish Legion, likeJabotinsky did in Palestine, fight the pogrom makers toprotect their lives and property. With the exception ofthe Jewish Socialists and the Russian delegates, the assem-bled applauded Fradkin’s speech.The Guminers and the Bograds now used the moneysPetliura gave the Jewish Minister to suppress Hebrewschools and other institutions, to buy off small Kehilas intowns so that they obey their directives and look to the Jew-ish Minister for a hand-out. In Kamenetz-Podolsk theZionist and Zeire-Zion, with the cooperation of religiousand impartial groups, organized a relief committee tocounteract the committee set-up, as an adjunct to the Jew-ish Ministry. Soon the representatives of the AmericanJoint Distribution Committee arrived in Kamenetz-Podolskand a program of helping the sufferers was set-up underthe leadership of Jacob Schreier. In the meantime, the RedArmy was pushing back the Ukrainian Army towardsGalicia (Poland) and by November 1920, the last outpost,Kamenetz-Podolsk, was occupied by the bolsheviks. Thework of Zeire-Zion practically stopped. The leaders andhundreds of its members fled to Rumania and Poland, andfrom there to Palestine and to America.66Professor Israel Friedlander’s Relief MissionThe border with Galicia (Poland)only 15 miles away from Kamenetz-Podolsk was opened in 1920 after beingsealed since the start of the FirstWorld War. After an absence of 6years mail started arriving from a-broad and a few former residents ofKamenetz-Podolsk came from Americato see what happened to their relatives.These, so called “American delegates”brought money and visas also for oth-ers than relatives. This started thelegal exodus of Jews from the city.Later on, under the bolsheviks, peoplesecretly were escaping to Rumania orGalicia where they met the “dele-gates” and proceeded to America andelsewhere.The American Joint DistributionCommittee which had an office in War-saw sent a delegation to Kamenetz-Podolsk. They had tosurvey the situation in the Ukraine and ascertain the reliefneeds of the Jews who suffered from the pogroms, ihemission arrived in May 1920 and consisted of ProfessorIsrael Friedlander, Maurice Kass and Dr. M. Leff. Thethree delegates represented different parts of AmericanJewry. The “Joint” was composed of the American JewishCommittee (rich and influential Yahudim, descendants ofGerman Jews) and the Peoples’ Relief (a number of organi-zations of Eastern European Jews in America). To avoidthe sending of relief missions by different organizations,the “Joint” agreed to include in its mission the delegate ofthe Federation of Ukrainian Jews of America. This dele-gate, Mr. Maurice Kass, the editor of the Jewish Newspaper“Die Welt” in Philadelphia, was a man in his late fifties, ahighly intellectual, literary personality, a person close to themasses. He was an excellent choice to bring relief to theProfessor IsraelFriedlanderDr. M. Leff67sufferers in the Ukraine. Professor Israel Friedlander,although the choice of the Yahudim, was a personality, towhom the Ukrainian Jews immediately felt a kinship. Hewas a man who understood the psychology of the EasternJews, who really felt their sufferings and was ready to helpnot only with money, but with deep sympathy. He showedhumility and understanding of the tragedy of the Jews inthe Ukraine, even though he, himself, was brought up inentirely different surroundings. Professor Friedlander, aman of the book, an historian and teacher, a deeply reli-gious man and a Zionist became a friend to every personwith whom he came in contact during his travels in theUkraine. Dr. Leff was willing to take the risk involved ingoing with the relief mission to see, as a physician, in whatway medical help could be brought to the people in thatcountry.Mr. Kass spoke Russian and Yiddish, but now wasneeded knowledge of the Ukrainian. This was one of thereasons the mission needed a secretary who could also actas interpreter in dealing with the officials. Mr. JacobSchreier, the head of the Kamenetz-Podolsk relief commit-tee, recommended me for the position, because I did someresearch of the pogroms and was familiar with the situationin many cities and towns. I also had command of Ukrai-nian, which I studied at the local University. An itinerarywas worked out which would bring the mission into thelarger cities, like Proskurov, Staro Konstantine, Mohilev-Podolsk, Bar, Zhitomir, Berdichev. It was planned to pro-ceed from there to Kiev or Odessa, whichever would beliberated first. We arranged stopovers in smaller townsbetween the cities. I introduced the Americans to the WarMinister, who supplied us with the necessary documentsand notified all military and civilian authorities about ourpending visits. We were assured we would get full co-op-eration. On our arrival in a town a welcoming committeewas ready to meet us, present reports of what had hap-pened in each town during the past two years and preparedplans, as to how to alleviate the urgent needs in food, cloth-ing, medicine, etc. The relief mission stopped in every63Turkish Bridge in Kamenetz-Podolsk in 1905town on the way to Proskurov. The Americans went tosee for themselves the conditions under which the Jewslived, especially in the poorer neighborhoods. They couldnot believe their eyes, when they saw the poverty, the squal-or, the misery of these unfortunates.We finally arrived in the city of Proskurov. This wasthe place where the Gaidamacks of Ataman Semosenko onlya year before slaughtered in cold blood hundreds of Jewson the pretence that they were suppressing a bolshevik re-volt. The investigation ordered by Petliura absolved theJews of any complicity and no proof of a communist upris-ing could be found. Dr. Liser, the head of the Kehila inProskurov and our host for the night, told us what hadhappened in his hometown in February 1919. Dr. Liser’sson, also a doctor and recently from London, told us howhe could not get any of his father’s letters into the “LondonTimes.” The editor could not believe the facts the olderLiser described in the letters to his son. Now the son cameto see his parents and friends and planned to have a talkwith the editor of the “Times” on returning to London. Mr.Kass, a newspaper man, informed us that news of the po-groms were arriving from Moscow, but the American Press69dismissed it, as communist propaganda. He promised topublish in his paper the work of the secretary of the dele-gation, who based his figures and stories on the documentsfrom the Ministry of Jewish Affairs.Dr. Liser had a report of conditions in Proskurov andof some nearby towns, like Feldstin, Zinkov, Michaelpole,Derajna, Chan, Staro-Konstantine and others. The delega-tion expected to proceed north toward Jitomir and Berdi-chev, but could only go as far as Staro-Konstantine. Wepassed a few towns, where the reports turned in by theKehilas showed, that no place escaped the pogroms duringthe past two years, and that the need for relief was stag-gering. On arrival in Staro-Konstantine we were advisedto turn back. The city assumed that certain indescribablelook, that unmistakable attitude that happened in everycity before a retreat by one army and before the occupationby another. Usually this was the time when a pogrom onJews by one of the armies would start. Jews were runningin search for places to hide, or were leaving for anothersafer town. We were told that the Red Army under MarshalBuddenny defeated the Ukrainians in a few battles northand east of the city and was proceeding west on all fronts.We left Staro-Konstantine, but instead of going southtoward Kamenetz-Podolsk, the delegation decided to goSouth-East. We wanted to visit as many towns, as werestill accessible on the way to Mobilev-Podolsk. The militarysituation was changing from day to day, it seemed, evenfrom hour to hour. The Americans showed unusual cour-age and determination to do the best under the circum-stances. The Federation of Ukrainian Jews in New Yorkgave Mr. Kass a few hundred letters from its members torelatives in the Ukraine. On arrival in a city or town Mr.Kass would turn over the letters to the local relief commit-tee for distribution. Now we were anxious to leave theletters in the towns near the front before the Red Army cutoff communications with the outside world. ProfessorFriedlander made arrangements for each relief committeeto get funds from Kamenetz-Podolsk. We knew that reliefmoney was expected in Kamenetz-Podolsk from Warsaw,70sent with the American delegate, Dr. Cantor. We finallyarrived in Mohilev-Podolsk, where the river Dniestr sepa-rates the Ukraine from Rumania. This city, like othertowns where we stopped on the way, was tense with expec-tations of a pogrom from retreating Ukrainians.A meeting of the Kehila with our participation wasarranged by its president, the student Yampolsky. Thisable young fellow in a few well-chosen words, appraisedthe Americans about the situation in the city and the sur-rounding towns. Like all over the Ukraine, the need forrelief was great. During his talk Yampolsky in veiledlanguage let it be understood that another pogrom inMohilev-Podolsk would be met with resistance from the wellorganized Hagana. He made the remark, that this is notProskurov—“for one Jew murdered, two Gaidamacks wouldbe killed.” As if in answer to Yampolsky’s words a reportwas received that an incident happened while the Kehilawas in session. A Gaidamack on horseback was passingthrough the deserted streets. When he noticed a lonely Jewhurrying toward a house the Gaidamack raced toward himand started to beat him with a whip. Suddenly a shot rangout and the Gaidamack fell dead from his horse. Immediate-ly a band of about 30-40 Gaidamacks galloped through theempty streets, stopping only to pick up the dead soldier. Afriendly peasant reported that it was Ataman Tutunik’sband, bivouacked outside the city. From talks with theGaidamacks the peasant learned that they were waiting forthe Americans to leave to start a pogrom. Other rumorsbrought the news that the Red Army broke through thefront in a few places, and the road to Kamenetz-Podolskwas not passable. Yampolsky closed the meeting and beganarrangements for us to cross the Dniestr into Rumania.There we would try to reach Kamenetz-Podolsk by way ofthe city of Chotin. Within an hour word was received bytelephone from Bukarest that the Americans may cross theriver, they may include the Polish chauffeur and their secre-tary. Professor Friedlander suggested we stay overnight,as there was no danger for the city, as long as the Ameri-cans were still there. In the morning word was received71Post street in Kamenetz-Podolsk in 1913that the Gaidamacks were still waiting a few miles from thecity, but that the Red Army did not advance towardKamenetz-Podolsk and the road was passable. Dr. Lefffashioned from a sheet, a white flag, which was attached tothe automobile on one side with the large American flag onthe other side. It was decided to confront the Ukrainianband and try to persuade them not to molest the Jews inMohilev-Podolsk. As a precaution I was given Dr. Leff’sspare uniform so that it would look as if there were noother witnesses, but the Americans. We bid farewell to therepresentatives of the Kehila and left Mohilev-Podolsk. Afew miles from the city we encountered Tutunick’s band.Having been coached by the delegates I addressed the Ata-man and his troops in Ukrainian. I explained that a bolshe-vik, a traitor, hiding in the city shot the innocent Gaida-mack, who peacefully was passing through the main street.I told them that the city commandant and the chief of policeare of the same opinion and are searching for the murderer,although it’s most likely that he escaped from the city. Wewant them to know, that the American Government willnot tolerate any further pogroms on Jews in the Ukraine.I called their attention to a speech recently made by Pet-liura, who said, that any Ukrainian making riots, menacing72or hurting Jews is a traitor to a free, anti-bolshevikUkraine. I pointed out, that they are needed right now atthe front to fight the bolsheviks and should leave the peace-ful Jews alone. I told them, that the war Minister a fewdays ago, gave us passes and told us that he demands co-operation from every commander of an Ukrainian militarydetachment. But the best argument was Professor Fried-lander’s peace offering. He handed the Ataman 10 fivedollar gold pieces, which were, as I explained, to buy cigar-ettes for his soldiers.The Ataman talked in whispers to his troops for a fewminutes, then addressed us. He assured us that he and hissoldiers were only interested in fighting the bolsheviks andnever intended to harm the Jews. Now, that they haverested they will be on the way to the front to fight for theliberation of the Ukraine. He thanked us for the presentand after shaking hands with each of us told us to proceedby way of Murovani-Kirilowzi and Dunaievitzi to Kamen-etz-Podolsk. This way we would avoid bolshevik patrols.We hoped for the best for the Jews of Mohilev-Podolsk andleft the Tutunick band. Toward evening Professor Fried-lander stopped the car; it was time for the evening prayers(Mincha-Maariv). He said them quietly, facing the East.Regardless of the religious feelings the rest of us, even thePolish chauffeur, were grateful to Friedlander for praying.We were not sure whom we might encounter on our way.We stopped in Murovani-Kurilowtzi where the scars of warand pogroms were visible in the shabby clothing, worn byJews, but mainly in the faces of the people. The entiretown came with the local committee; they cried with joythat American Jews did not forget them: “if only we couldall go with you to America now” . . .We traveled in the darkness and quiet of the Summernight, that did not betray the dangers lurking only milesaway. People were being killed on both sides in a civilwar, Jews were listening in the stillness of the night, afraidthat another pogrom might break out. We traveled withoutany incidents until we arrived in Kamenetz-Podolsk, not73suspecting that before another night would arrive, one ofus would be dead.Before I went to my home, Professor Friedlander toldme that I should be ready to leave with him for America.My feeble excuses, that it’s hard in such times to leave thefamily, that I want to finish my education, that I have topublish my book about the pogroms the Professor brushedaside, reminding me that any Jew in Murovani-Kurilowitzior anywhere else in the Ukraine would be happy to changeplaces with me. I rushed home to get ready to leave forAmerica, to be with the family for the last few hours ofthat night.In the morning I learned that another American, Dr.Cantor, arrived with money for the local relief committeeand with instructions for the delegation of the J. D. C. toreturn at once to Warsaw. Information at the Warsawoffice of the J. D. C. had it, that the Petliura army wouldnot be able to hold out much longer and that the Red Armywas ready for an advance into Poland.I said good-by to my family and to the many friendswho came to wish me god-speed on my trip to America. Ihurried to the home of Kleiderman, where the Americanswere staying. Professor Friedlander was in good spirits,he even told me not to worry about my book, he’d help mepublish it in Yiddish and English, he’d see that I finish myeducation in Engineering and for the Fall he’d take mealong to Palestine for a visit.It was decided for the delegation to split: one car withProfessor Friedlander and Dr. Cantor would leave at onceby way of Gusatin and the rest of us would follow in anothercar, as soon as we’d finish our visit to the War Ministry.The War Minister was at the Front and the General incharge immediately asked us to come to his office. Insteadof Yiddish, usually used between us, Mr. Kass spoke in Rus-sian and I translated into Ukrainian. The General assured74US that the situation was not as critical as the Poles liked topaint it. He was positive, that there would not be any fur-ther retreats. He assured us, that there would not be anypogroms, because Petliura sentenced a number of anti-Jewish agitators to be shot. Mr. Kass was very emphaticin explaining that the American and European public opin-ion would not accept the Ukrainian explanations. It wasnot infiltrated bolsheviks who made pogroms. The Ameri-cans now saw the results of pogroms and learned on thespot the true facts. In the middle of our conversation anofficer came in and whispered something to the general.The General vividly shaken told us that he received very sadnews. A Red Army patrol ambushed and killed ProfessorFriedlander and Dr. Cantor near the town of Yarmolinetz.The patrol of the Buddeny cavalry did not pay attention tothe American Flag or the J. D. C. uniforms which wereunlike the Ukrainian or Polish. The Polish chauffeur wasseen running into the woods. The Jews of Yarmolinetzbrought the bodies to town for burial. The General assuredus that there was no imminent danger for Kamenetz-Podolsk, because the main force of the Red Army was beingpushed back; only isolated patrols slipped through theUkrainian lines. Nevertheless, he advised us to leave byway of Grinin to Galicia. There we met the chauffeur of theFriedlander car, who told us in detail, how Professor Fried-lander and Dr. Cantor were assassinated in the morning ofJuly 5th, 1920.We proceeded to Warsaw; there Dr. Leff was givenanother assignment by the local office; Mr. Kass went toSweden to try to get permission to enter the Ukraine byway of Moscow and I left for Paris and New York. I hadthe sad mission to describe to the widow and children ofthe late Professor Friedlander the details of the last fewweeks of his life, when I traveled with the Professor in theUkraine, till the fateful July 5, 1920, when he was brutallyassassinated.75Pinchos Krasny, the Minister of Jewish AffairsThe History of the National Personal Autonomy andthe selection of the Jewish Ministers to administer thisautonomy is described in the book by the first Minister ofJewish Affairs, Dr. Silberfarb.I will tell about the last Jewish Minister in the Ukraine.It was when Petliura’s cabinet was in Kamenetz-Podolskfrom June to November 1919. Unlike the other three Min-isters of Jewish affairs, who were delegated by their partiesfor the post, Krasny became Minister by accident. PinchosKrasny was in charge of the general department of theJewish Ministry under Revutsky. When the PetliuraGovernment fled from Kiev in January 1919 under thepressure of the bolsheviks, Revutsky handed his resignationto Petliura. As a temporary, acting Minister Revutskyleft Pinchos Krasny. All the central committees of Jewishpolitical parties remained in Kiev and Petliura could notget a candidate approved by one of the Jewish minoritysocialist parties, as was done in the past. On the way towardexile in Poland, Petliura’s government could not be withouta Minister of Jewish Affairs: it would look very bad diplo-matically. It was at the time when in America and inEurope news of the pogroms by the Ukrainians arousedpublic opinion. A Minister of Jewish Affairs, a member ofthe cabinet, would be the best proof, that Petliura’s Govern-ment was not responsible for the pogroms. There was notime to consult Jewish leaders and Petliura appointed Kras-ny in place of the resigned Revutsky.Since 1918 the Ukrainian Jews suffered from pogromsby the Petliura Army, by independent Ukrainian partisansunder the leadership of self-proclaimed Atamans and bythe army of General Denikin. Krasny, now the Minister ofJewish Affairs, was confronted with the dilemma: shouldhe resign and leave the government or should he remainand do whatever is in his power to prevent further pogromsand alleviate the suffering of the pogroms’ victims? Thisproblem tortured every politically minded Jew. All Jewish76* !^a«i8Hsip>-Jto/50(iKKiii Ot^miCoioaa CspelicKitXiCredentials by Kamenetz-Podolsk branch of Federation ofJewish Sport Clubs “Maccabee”political parties were for a free, anti-communist Ukraine,but this was in theory. In practice every Jew knew thatthe Ukrainians were killing innocent Jews, including thosewho were anti-communists and were for a free Ukraine.It went so far that Jews, remaining anti-bolshevik, werewaiting for the Red Army to liberate them from theUkrainian pogrom makers.This problem was acute in Kamenetz-Podolsk and inparts of Podolia and Wolin, where the retreating army ofPetliura staged the worst pogroms, like those in Proskurov,Feldstin, Kitaigerod and others. After a short stay inGalicia the Ukrainian Army returned, and again startedpogroms on Jews. On return to the Ukraine the govern-ment stayed temporarily in Kamenetz-Podolsk. The firstact of the Jewish ministry was to requisition the building ofthe Zionist Club for its offices. It could be, that Krasnywas not even informed of that, because a number of thingswere done in his name by Mr. Dankner, the very efficientGeneral office manager. Dankner recruited a staff for theoffice among young Jews in Kamenetz-Podolsk. The writer77of this, because of being proficient in Yiddish and Ukrai-nian, was asked to serve as assistant to Dankner, an impor-tant but non-political post. During the next few months Ihad an opportunity to study Pinchos Krasny and the peoplewith whom he surrounded himself. Nobody cared aboutthe politics of the staff workers, f.i., we all knew that Mr.Messer, the manager of the cultural department was a com-munist and was waiting for an opportunity to skip over thefront to the bolsheviks. Volodia Nirenberg from Pros-kurov, a student and ardent Zionist was working listed assecretary, but really being chauffeur for Krasny. Krasnywas very careful about the politics of the policy makers withwhom he surrounded himself. His confidential secretaryand advisor was Mr. Tumim, a distant relative and memberof the Folks-Party, who was together with Krasny activein the party in Kiev. When Tumim was not available,Dankner did the work of the first secretary, but I doubt thathe enjoyed the same confidence. Once, when Tumim andDankner were dispatched to Kazatin to see if they couldprevent a pogrom there, I was in line to perform Dankner’sduties. I had to see Krasny in his cabinet on official busi-ness. During those few days I went to Krasny for signa-tures, with questions about some papers and to answerinquiries pertaining to some matters. At all times Krasnyremained the silent, non-communicating, serious man. Dur-ing the months that Krasny spent in Kamenetz-Podolsk hewas known to very few Jews in the city; he was very seldomseen anywhere in an unofficial capacity; even some of theoffice workers hardly ever saw him. His appearance wasdignified—a handsome man in the forties with a blackHerzlian beard, somberly dressed and unsmiling he lookedmore the Minister than many of his colleagues in the Cabi-net. Dankner, a bachelor himself, told me, that Krasnywas never married, came from a middle class businessfamily in Kazatin, was a very effective speaker at meetingsin Kiev, and was in high esteem by the intellectuals, Jewsand Ukrainians alike.In Kamenetz-Podolsk Krasny did not show any signsof a changed policy toward Zionists and Zeire-Zion. From78Bulvarnaia Street in Kamenetz-Podolsk in 1910the very beginning Krasny made contact with the leadersof the Jewish Socialist parties, although he probably wasappraised of the fact that they hardly had any followers.He befriended the lawyer Jacob Kreiss, a non-party man,who was a friend of some socialists. Krasny appointed Mr.Kreiss, as head of the General Department of the Ministry,a position Krasny held under Revutsky. Tumim called to-gether a number of tradesmen, small shopkeepers andturned the meeting into an organizational assembly of anew branch of the Folks-Party and Mr. Kreiss was electedthe head of this newly born party. Now Krasny at last hada semblance of a party to support him. Although it wouldhave been preposterous to claim that he had a mandate fromthe Folks-Party to be Minister.Dankner was moved up as a special secretary. I waselevated to DankneFs place. In a way, Kreiss became mysuperior, although he hardly ever spent any time in theoffice.With the help of Jacob Kreiss, a Jewish MinisterialCouncil was established. The Council consisted of the Di-rectors of the Ministry’s departments and a few consultants.79The leaders of the Jewish Socialist Parties received appoint-ments at the Ministry: Israel Drachler, as director ofEducational Department; A. Gumener, as director ofCommunity (Kehilas) department; Bograd, as director ofRehabilitation Department. Besides the above, Broitman,Alter, Pistrak, and a few others were made members of thecouncil, where policy was decided. It’s worthwhile to noticethat Drachler, Guminer, Bograd and company were thesame group which collaborated with the bolsheviks only afew weeks before, when the Red Army occupied the city.These representatives of the Jewish Socialist Parties, whonow professed fidelity to the Petliura regime and acted asstaunch anti-bolsheviks, nevertheless helped the bolsheviksto abolish the legally elected democratic Jewish CommunityCouncil (Kehila). Under Petliura’s regime, by the law ofthe National Personal Autonomy, the Kamenetz-PodolskKehila was functioning again. Under the leadership ofMunia Zack, a Zionist, and Fradkin, a Zerire-Zion, theKehila reaffirmed the non-cooperation with Pinchos Krasny.The Kehila in Kamenetz-Podolsk went further, it as-sumed temporarily the functions of the Central Committeeof Communities (Kehilas) until Kiev would be liberated andthe elected committee would resume its leadership ofUkrainian Jewry. A circular letter was sent to Kehilas incities and towns to ignore the Jewish Ministry, to communi-cate with the Kamenetz-Podolsk Kehila in all communalmatters. The Kehila was also responsible for organizing arelief committee to help the pogrom victims.Naturally, the Ministerial Council of Pinchos Krasnytook counter measures to hinder the work of the Kamenetz-Podolsk Kehila. Krasny received from Petliura’s Govern-ment funds to help the pogrom victims as well as smallersums for Jewish education and for other communal needs.Using the money, as bait, the Jewish Socialists of the Min-istry tried to get Kehilas in smaller towns to deal with theMinistry, instead of the Kamenetz-Podolsk Kehila. OnlyYiddish schools received subsidies, ignoring the fact, thatHebrew schools and “evening classes” for the study of80Hebrew had the majority of students. In many ways, theJewish Socialist parties received direct and indirect sub-sidies.A relief committee to help the pogrom sufferers wasfounded at the Ministry of Jewish Affairs. Again Krasnyappointed, as members of this committee the same people,who served on his advisory council. This relief committeesent instructors into the provincial towns and cities to or-ganize the distribution of relief funds. In each place theinstructor would seek out a Jewish Socialist or just an anti-zionist and appoint him as head of the local relief committee.Krasny himself had little time left for doing the workof a Minister of Jewish affairs, namely work to strengthenthe National Personal Autonomy. Instead he was busydealing with the different members of the cabinet and withthe higher military officers trying to prevent pogroms,wherever a threat of such occurred. And the threat ofpogroms happened daily: first, in recently occupied placesunder the excuse of weeding out Red Army sympathizers,in reality arresting just Jewish men and women. Second,during a retreat when an excuse was needed for the defeatat the front. The usual thing was to blame the Jews insupposedly helping the Red Army. The excuse for a pogromwas stupid, when the Jews were accused in helping the Redsto surround the Ukrainians and force the retreat. In allhonesty, it must be admitted that the higher military eche-lons used every measure at their command to avoid pogromsduring the last few months in their struggle with the RedArmy. A great influence in this direction was exerted bythe Galician-Ukrainian intellectuals, who joined Petliura’sArmy. But above all, Pinchos Krasny deserves credit forhis unceasing efforts to prevent pogroms by using his posi-tion, as a member of Petliura’s cabinet.How the Jewish Ministry saved Jewish lives can be seenfrom the following incident. Krasny personally was notinvolved, but his subordinates, acting as though they wereauthorized by him, rescued a Jewish boy, practically, fromthe firing squad.81In the spring of 1919, the disorganized Ukrainian Armywas fleeing toward Poland (Galicia), to escape from the RedArmy. The high Ukrainian Command was directing themilitary unit, wherever possible, to go westward throughUkrainian villages, avoiding Jewish towns and cities. Theofficers school, with a few hundred well-equipped and disci-plined cadets, was allowed to enter Kamenetz-Podolsk onthe way to Galicia.In the city, ready to be evacuated remained some highofficials of the Petliura Government. Nevertheless, theatmosphere in the city was uneasy. Jews were afraid thata minor incident would start a pogrom. It was on a Fridayevening when a tall handsome, blonde, blue-eyed Gaidamack(Petliura’s soldier) stopped me with an offer to sell memilitary equipment. I immediately thought that it mightbe a provocation to accuse me and the Jews in general ofbuying Government supplies and corrupting the soldiers.I took out my documents and told the soldier, that as astudent of the Ukrainian University, I would not dream ofbuying government property. The soldier, in turn, took outhis documents showing that he too was a student of theUniversity of Kiev; that he was originally from the townof Megbige and was a cadet, but also a Jew. His name wasDavid Brandman. I told him that he was joking, probablyfound the documents, because it is unlikely for a Jew to bea cadet of Petliura’s officers’ school.Brandman rummaged through his papers and broughtout a photograph of himself with another student. I im-mediately recognized Wolodia Nirenberg from Proskurov.Brandman told me that I could recognize his likeness fromthe photograph and that the other student is his cousin. Iinvited Brandman to our house. In the presence of myparents, Brandman related an almost incredible story.He arrived in Proskurov to visit his cousin while Seme-senko’s pogrom, the slaughter of Jews, was in progress.Nobody touched him, because his appearance was so un-Jewish. Brandman went to the railroad station and hoppedinto a departing train. He was appalled by the sight of82Membership card of ‘‘Hazomir” dramatic club inKamenetz-Podolskinnocent Jews, young and old, being hacked to pieces byGaidamacks. Then and there he decided that Jews mustjoin the Ukrainian Army, and that will stop pogroms onJews. He talked to an officer on the train, who turned outto be the Commandant of the officers’ school. He enrolledBrandman in the school as a cadet, promised to send him ona recruiting mission to get Jews into Petliura’s army. Aftera couple of weeks’ training, Brandman with the rest of thecadets was sent into a battle with the Red Army nearVinitza. Two days later, Brandman and three other cadetswere decorated for bravery by Petliura himself.Brandman showed us Petliura’s citation. After supperBrandman left to join his military comrades. Soon afterhe returned. While we talked, the Ukrainian-military andcivilians in a hurry left the city. It seemed that the citywas surrounded by a detachment of the Red Army. Duringthe next few weeks, dressed again as a student, Brandmanstayed in our house. The bolsheviks stayed only a fewweeks.After the Red Army evacuated the city the Ukrainiansagain occupied Kamenetz-Podolsk, starting their advancetoward Kiev. Brandman decided to leave for his hometownto decide, whether to rejoin the officers’ school or not.83In the morning, a stranger, a Jew came to our housewith a short message: “Your friend, David Brandman wasarrested at the railroad station.” The witness saw an offi-cer talking to a student, who was surrounded by soldiers,as if under arrest. The student suddenly called out inYiddish: “Tell Blatman that David Brandman is being ledaway to be executed!” I immediately contacted VolodiaNirenberg; in Pinchos Krasny’s limousine we drove to therailroad station. There the military commandant talked tous only when we insisted that we were representatives ofthe Minister of Jewish Affairs, a member of Petliura’s gov-ernment. His story was short: the Commandant of theofficer’s school on the way to the front spotted a deserter, acadet who had the audacity to say, that he is on the way torejoin his military school. The prisoner insisted, that hewas left behind in Kamenetz-Podolsk when an unannouncedevacuation took place. Now, the deserter is confined in themilitary prison and, probably, will be executed in a coupleof hours, after a court-martial.We immediately went to the military prison, which wasin the building of the “Belanowskaia” School on the PolishFolvarek. Again, showing our documents, we insisted thatwe represent the Jewish Minister and demanded postpone-ment of the court-martial. We insisted that Brandmancould prove that he, as a soldier, with a medal from Pet-liura, was not a deserter.The senior officer had to admit that he had no written,only an oral report and assured us that Brandman’s casewould not be hurried. We then secured the assistance ofJacob Kreiss, my boss, at the Ministry. Kreiss called theMinister of Justice and, after an exchange of letters be-tween the Jewish Ministry and the War Ministry, Brand-man’s case was transferred to Civilian Jurisdiction. Final-ly, Brandman was released in my custody.Needless to say, the case never reached the court,because the commandant of the school could not be reached.Later, it was officially established, that the officer was killedin action at the front. The case of David Brandman was84Membership card of Teacher’s Union in Kamenetz-Podolskclosed. Who knows how many Jewish lives were saved dueto the intervention of Pinchos Krasny, as Minister of JewishAffairs?AThe Wedding at the Cemetery(This story is authentic. It was verified by talking toa number of people [including A. Melman], who werepresent at the event.)While Kamenetz-Podolsk was, in many ways, equal tothe progress of the 20th Century, in other respects it re-tained the superstitions of the middle ages. One of suchsuperstitions is manifested in the following event:In 1916, during the First World War, in the city ofKamenetz-Podolsk, an epidemic of typhus was out of con-trol. The few doctors, who were not mobilized into theArmy, were helpless to cope with thousands of sick anddying people. There were no medicines for the civilian sickand no available hospital beds, which were all occupied bysick and wounded soldiers from the nearby front. Allnurses were mobilized and none left for the city. The gravediggers could not prepare enough graves for the dead.In such atmosphere, not only superstitious, but rational,lucid people were ready to try anything to break the epi-demic. Someone started an old tale, that if a couple shouldbe married within the gates of the cemetery, the epidemicwould cease.The superstitious among the Jewish population starteda search and found a boy and girl willing to get married atthe cemetery. It is not hard to assume that the young, poorcouple lured to have their marriage ceremony performedat the cemetery were of low intelligence. They were prom-ised wedding presents and in no time, all arrangements forthe wedding were ready. The rabbi, against his betterjudgment, agreed to perform the marriage ceremony insidethe gates of the cemetery in the presence of a large crowdof wedding guests. As was the custom at every wedding,here too, the names of the donors and the amounts of thepresents were publicly announced.86The new couple collected a sizeable amount and de-parted to an apartment provided by a Mrs. Melman, whopad a vacancy in her house. The wedding ended with themusic playing the traditional “Freilachs/’ but it is hard tobelieve that anybody actually danced at this sad wedding.It seems, that in spite of the hopes that the weddingwould end the typhus epidemic, no improvement was no-ticed. On the contrary, the next year in addition to thetyphus, the region was swept by the “Spanish Flu,” killinghundreds of the city’s population. At the time, thousandsof war prisoners were coming back from Germany, Austria,and Hungary. Many were sick with the influenza, but withsuperhuman effort, were dragging themselves to reach theirhomeland. It was pathetic to see them arrive in Kamenetz-Podolsk, kneel and kiss the ground of their motherland,then fall over dead.Kamenetz-Podolsk in the first quarter of the 20thCentury reached to high cultural standards, and in the sametime was still deep in superstitions, as shown by the storyof the Wedding at the Cemetery.87WHO IS WHOAMONGKAMENETZER89Zvee ScoolerZvee Scooler is the most dis-tinguished personality to cometo this country from Kamen-etz-Podolsk. He is a celebritywidely known for his activityin theatre, radio, television andJewish cultural life.Zvee came to the UnitedStates with his family when hewas thirteen years old. As aYeshiva student at the RabbiJacob Joseph School he contin-ued his studies of the Bible, theTalmud, and the Hebrew lan-guage, excelling in thesestudies as well, as in Englishand the other required highschool subjects.Joining the Jewish Art Theatre as a young man, Zveeproved to be a born actor. He displayed great talent andrare acting versatility playing a wide range of parts fromyouths to bearded men. After his triumphs on the Yiddishstage, Zvee felt the challenge of the English Theatre andBroadway. Here again he met with success. He acted inthe hit shows “She Loves Me Not,” “We Americans,” “For-ward March,” and “The Theatre of Peretz.” Currently heis playing in “Fiddler on the Roof.” His performance inthis show has received the critical acclaim of the New Yorkpress, both English and Yiddish.Zvee has had numerous television appearances, and hehas played in both Yiddish and English movies, the mostcurrent being “The Pawnbroker” and “Andy.” As thebrilliant “Grammeister” on radio station WEVD’s Sundaymorning “Forward Hour,” he has endeared himself to theJewish radio audiences, young and old.Zvee Schooler90Zvee has always been intensely interested in makingJewish culture a living heritage for young people. First,as a Hebrew teacher, then as camp director of Camp Kin-dervelt, he inspired countless young people to learn aboutJewish Culture and to study Jewish and Hebrew. He is alsoactive in many cultural and charitable organizations, givingfreely of his time and talents.Zvee Scooler’s warm outgoing personality makes every-one who comes into contact with him feel, as though, he hasgained a friend.91Morris J. (Moische Yoina) KaplunMorris was born in Kamen-etz-Podolsk to very religiousparents and received a tradi-tional Hebrew education. Toget a secular education Morrisstudied in the evenings whileworking during the day. As ayouth he joined the secret So-cial - Democrat - Poale - ZionParty. He took part in found-ing the Yiddish library and inorganizing the textile employ-ees. The First World Warinterfered with his plan totravel to France to studyagronomy. With the occupa-tion of Kamenetz-Podolsk byMorris J. Kaplun the Red Army in 1920, Morrisleft the Ukraine and went into the textile business. Beforethe start of the Second World War, Morris, his wife andson came to New York where he successfully continuedin business.His practical work for Palestine started in 1933, whenMorris was on a visit there to investigate the textile busi-ness. Instead of doing business with Palestine, Kaplunbecame a large contributor to the upbuilding of the coun-try. His first deed was to plant a mile of trees. Duringthe 1948 Liberation War, Kaplun sent an ambulance toIsrael for the Mogen David Adorn. Since then, he donatedthree more ambulances. In 1959, Morris and his late wifeBetty, endowed an auditorium for 180 students to the TelAviv University and established a scholarship fund of$10,000.His biggest contributions in Israel have been made sincethe death of his wife and of his only son. In memory of hiswife, Kaplun built a Youth Center in Kfar Ata. In mem-ory of his son, the young distinguished scientist. Dr. Saul92Kaplun, the father recently dedicated two institutions: atthe Tel-Aviv University, the Institute of Applied Mathe-matics and Space Physics and at the Jerusalem University—the Institute of Applied Mathematics and TheoreticalPhysics.In recognition of his devotion to Israel, the Labor Zion-ist Farband gave Morris Kaplun a testimonial dinner. Thelarge auditorium of the Hotel Pierre was filled with hun-dreds of his friends. Kaplun, who has been buying IsraeliBonds every year on this occasion purchased $20,000 inbonds; following his example the assembled bought $80,000more.93Leon Solomon (Schloimo) BlatmanLeon, born in Kamenetz-Podolsk, studied in Highschools and at the Universityin Kamenetz and in Odessa. Hecontinued his education uponarrival in New York in 1920,at C.C.N.Y. (engineering) andat L. I. University (pharmacy)and since graduation still prac-tices his profession of phar-macy.Since early youth, Leonshowed a talent as an organizerand ability in writing andpublic speaking. In 1912 heorganized a secret studentZionist society. After the 1917Revolution, Leon became veryactive in the Zeire-Zion party,founded the Zionist sport club“Maccabee,” and was secretary of the students council(Rada) at the local University. In 1919 he worked at theministry of Jewish Affairs under Pinchos Krasny; a yearlater, as secretary to the late Professor Israel Friedlanderof the J.D.C. Leon left for America. In New York he wasassociated with the poet Menachem Boreischo in the pub-licity department of the Joint Distribution Committee.While studying at C.C.N.Y., Leon wrote for the JewishNewspaper “The Day” and was a contributor to the Zeire-Zion party magazine “Far’n Folk.” In 1923 he marriedSylvia Rosenblatt, bought a pharmacy and settled in Brook-lyn.Writing became Leon’s hobby. For many years he wasa contributor to a number of pharmaceutical publications;for seven years he was editorial board member and featurewriter for “1199 Drug News.” He also wrote two booksand for a year was editor of the “Hudson Herald” in NewMr. and Mrs. Leon S.Blatman94Rochelle. At the end of the Second World War Leon found-ed the Kamenetz-Podolsk Relief Organization of which hewas president for three years. In 1952 the Blatmans movedto New Rochelle, where they opened a pharmacy.Sylvia Blatman (Rosenblatt) was born in Kamenetz-Podolsk to religious, but modern parents. The Rosenblattswere of the first to join the Zionist organization andbrought up their children in the Zionist spirit. As a childSylvia belonged to the “Hatchia” and to the ‘‘Beth Am,”where she studied Hebrew. She finished her secondaryeducation in Kamenetz-Podolsk and in New York she sup-plemented it by taking courses at Hunter College. All hermarried life Sylvia is working side by side with Leon in thepharmacy. Due to her magnetic personality and her waywith people Sylvia gained hundreds of friends in New Yorkand in New Rochelle.In New York, as in New Rochelle, Sylvia is active inHadassah, where she held many important offices and whereshe is a life member. Together with Leon she was veryactive in the Kamenetz-Podolsk Relief and was responsiblefor bringing the Leff family from a concentration camp toAmerica.The Blatmans are very proud of their daughter Flor-ence, their son-in-law Alex and their three grandchildren.95Samuel DrachlerIn 1915 the Drachler familywas exiled from their home nearthe Galician border by the Czar-ist government. The family set-tled in Kamenetz - Podolsk,where the older son, Louishelped the father in business,while the younger son, Samuel,continued his education.Samuel joined an illegal Zion-ist youth group and after the1917 Revolution became veryactive in a few organizations.He helped organize the sportclub “Maccabee” and played onthe football team. He showed talent in acting in a newly-formed dramatic society, even directing a few plays. Hejoined a Chalutzim group planning to leave for Palestine,but was prevented from fulfilling his plan by the Rumanianpolice, while illegally crossing the border.In May 1919, as an auxiliary policeman, Samuel tookpart in the “March on Orinin” where in a pitched battlewith a Petliura’s military detachment, his friend, AvnerKorman was killed.When the Drachlers came to Canada, Samuel and Louishelped organize a branch of the Labor Zionist Farband.After 5 years in Canada, Louis and Samuel came to NewYork. Here they were engaged in a number of businessventures. Samuel tried to continue his theatrical hobby byattending the Dramatic School of Modern Art. He alsoenrolled in the Jewish Teachers Institute.In 1940 Samuel, who was already married to Lottie,settled in New Jersey, where he was engaged in poultryfarming. In 1951 Mr. and Mrs. Samuel Drachler visitedSamuel, Lottie, andLouis Drachler96Israel and their relatives there. On their return, the Drach-lers intensified their work for Israel. Lottie Drachler be-came the chairlady for the Israeli Bonds of the LakewoodLeah Rosenstein Branch of the Pioneer Women. Lottiedistinguished herself by work and leadership. In recogni-tion for their community work and activity in the BondDrive, a testimonial dinner was given for Mr. and Mrs.Samuel Drachler and Mr. Louis Drachler. The Drachlersproved to be worthy of the Zionist Tradition of the family.97Morris SchleifmanMorris and Celia Schleifmansteam laundries.Morris and Celia, both na-tives of Kamenetz - Podolsk,were married there shortly af-ter the 1917 Revolution. YoungMorris displayed business abil-ity, but when the bolsheviksoccupied the city, he realizedthat there was no future for anaspiring businessman in Kam-enetz - Podolsk. Morris andCelia managed to escape toAmerica.In New York, Morris openeda small hand laundry and afteryears of hard work succeededin enlarging his enterprise.Eventually, Morris became theowner of a five story building,where he had one of the largerDuring the Second World War two of the four sons ofthe Schleifmans served honorably in the American ArmedForces, while the younger sons continued their education.After the war, Schleifman sold his business and went intoreal estate in Rockland County, where he made his homefor some time in Congers.From the early days in New York Morris became veryactive in Branch 15 of the Jewish Labor Zionist Farband.He showed ability in leadership and became an outstandingspeaker for the organization. In recognition of his workthe Farband celebrated Morris’s 50th birthday with a ban-quet to which many members and friends came to pay theirrespects.Morris is responsible for a number of projects for theHistadruth and is also very active in the Kamenetz-PodolierRelief organization, of which he is now the President.98Morris is also a charter member of Rockland County Chap-ter of B’nai-B’rith. Celia and Morris are very proud oftheir four married sons and grandchildren. Celia Schleif-man won recognition among the Pioneer Women for heractivities in the New York and Spring Valley chapters ofthe Zionist Women Labor Organization. Together withMorris, Celia is working for the Kamenetz-Podolier ReliefOrganization, which is now building a clinic in Israel inmemory of the Kamenetzer, who were annihilated by theNazis.99Aaron AshmanAshman was born in Balin, atown not far from Kamenetz-Podolsk. His traditional Jewisheducation was supplemented byprivate tutors and attendinglectures at the University inKamenetz - Podolsk. Here hespent the first three years of theRevolution of 1917. While work-ing as a Hebrew teacher, Ash-man was engaged in culturalactivities and was a dynamicforce in turning a great numberof the youth in Kamenetz - Po-Aaron Ashman dolsk into Hebrew activists. Hewas also occupied in organizingthe Hagana to fight the Petliura pogrom bandits. He wasone of the heroes who went to the nearby town of Orininand fought a pitched battle with a Petliura regiment, whichwas believed to be making a pogrom in that town. Althoughthe Hagana had only a small contingent at the time, never-theless, they killed sixty Petliura soldiers with only oneJewish casualty. Two weeks later the Petliura army en-tered Kamenetz-Podolsk and made a pogrom with dozensof Jews killed and maimed.During his youth Ashman wrote, but did not publishhis literary efforts. Only after 1921, when he settled inPalestine was Ashman recognized as a writer. In timeAshman became the outstanding Israeli playwright, whosedramas, comedies and other plays were staged by the “Ha-bima” and “Heohel” in Israel, in America, Argentina andCanada. Two of Ashman’s works, the triolog “This Land”and “Saul’s Daughter” won prizes in Israel and in othercountries.Ashman translated from Yiddish into Hebrew Men-dele’s “Menachem Mendel the Dreamer” and “The Travels100of Benjamin the Third”; also some of the works of SholomAleichem and other classics.Ashman achieved recognition among writers, especiallyfor his work on the copyright law.101Maurice Kass, editar of “Jewish World” in Philadelphia. In 1926Kass, together with Prof. Israel Friedlander and Dr. M. Leff, cameto Kamenetz-Podolsk, as a relief mission of the J.D.C. Kass alsowas the delegate of the Ukranian Jews of America.102INMEMORIAM103Solomon DorfmanSolomon was bom in 1897 toa rich family, owners of a milland wholesale dealers in flour.Before entering the Commer-cial High School, Solomon re-ceived a traditional Jewisheducation and was tutored inRussian privately.As a youngster Solomonjoined a secret students’ Zion-ist Society, and even then heshowed inclination to conserva-tism, ability to compromise andthe gift of diplomacy. Duringthe First World War, Solomonlived in Elizavetgrad when hisschool was evacuated to thatcity. There Solomon’s interestin Zionism was further influ-enced by the renown Zionist, the Engineer Tiomkin, whowas also the teacher of religion at Solomon’s school. Afterthe 1917 Revolution, Solomon was studying at the Techno-logical Institute in Ekaterinoslav. There he joined theStudents Zionist organization “Hechover.”In 1919, Solomon married his childhood sweetheartNunia Sadetsky. When the bolsheviks occupied Kamenetz-Podolsk the Dorfmans escaped to America. During theeconomic struggle of the flrst immigrant years Solomontried real estate. Later he developed a fair insurance busi-ness and during the Second World War became successfulin textiles. The Dorfmans gave their two daughters aJewish education in the tradition of their parents.During all their years in America, the Dorfmans wereactive in the Brooklyn Jewish Center, Nunia was also activeSolomon Dorfman104in Hadassah. Solomon and Nunia were very active in theKamenetz-Podolier Relief organization from the very timeof its founding. At first he was the treasurer and the lastfew years before he died, Solomon was the president of theKamenetz-Podolier Relief.105Joseph Blatman (1874-1942)Joseph Blatman and familyJoseph’s father, Sholom Blatman was a distillery ownerand an influential “chosid” in Kamenetz-Podolsk. WhenJoseph was a young child, his mother died, and he went tolive with his aunt and uncle, the “shochit,” in Smotrich. Itwas expected that Joseph would take over his uncle’s posi-tion, but after receiving his “Smicha” Joseph went intobusiness. He married Frima Koifman from the villageVerbovetz and they opened a kosher restaurant in Kam-enetz-Podolsk.Joseph incurred the displeasure of his father when hedenounced “chassidism” and joined the Zionist organization.It was Frima’s ambition to have her children become pro-fessionals, and each of her children graduated from highschool and some from the University. After the 1917 Revo-lution, Joseph, who was active in Zionism before, became amember of the Zeire-Zion party, was elected to the citycouncil and to the Kehila.By 1921, when his older son was in Rumania and thesecond one in America, Joseph decided that it was time tofulfill his Zionist dream: He took his family to Palestine.106Joseph, with the help of a few young men from Kamenetz-Podolsk, built with his own hands his house in Tel-Aviv.When he was digging a well in the yard a landslide killedhis younger son, Simcha, a 15 year old student of the highschool “Herzlia.” The shock was too much for the motherand after a few years in Palestine the Blatmans left forBrazil. But Joseph was not happy in that country and by1934, he and Frima were back in Tel Aviv. Now Josephwas busy managing his married daughter’s property inPalestine and taking part in the communal life in Tel-Aviv,where he died in 1942. After the end of the Second WorldWar Frima joined her daughter’s family in Rio de Janeiro,where she died in 1961.The ambition of Joseph Blatman was fulfilled—^he livedand died in the land of his dreams, in Eretz-Israel.107David SchleiferDavid SchleiferSchleifer was born in 1863 to poorparents in Kamenetz-Podolsk; he grad-uated from local high school. He workedhis way through college and studiedlaw at the Charkov University.On becoming a lawyer Schleifer re-turned to Kamenetz-Podolsk. Here hewas married and began a very success-ful law practice. He became known forhis Zionist activities, which he startedwith the “Bilui,” as a student.After the first Zionist Congress, Schleifer organizedfive branches of the Zionists in Kamenetz-Podolsk, absorb-ing the former “Lovers of Zion.” Working unceasingly inthe city and in the province Schleifer succeeded in turningthe Zionists of the district into a political power among theJewish population. At a conference in Kamenetz-PodolskSchleifer was elected to head the Zionists of the region andto cooperate with the Odessa and the Vilna Zionist Com-mittees. As a leader among Zionists of Russia Schleiferwas delegated to Zionist conferences and to World ZionistCongresses. During the first few years after the 1905 Revo-lution the Russian Government changed its attitude toZionists—from friendly to hostile. In 1909 the local policeraided Schleifer’s home and office and confiscated all papersconnected with his Zionist activities. All members of thecity and the district Zionist committees were put on trial,as subversives. Schleifer in a brilliant defense gained theacquittal of the accused, but they were prohibited fromfurther Zionist work. The organization ceased to exist andSchleifer devoted his energies to Jewish community work.In 1914 Schleifer moved to Kiev; there again he becameknown as a Zionist, as an able lawyer and leader in com-munity affairs. After the 1917 Revolution Schleifer wasagain in the forefront of Zionist and general Jewish activi-ties. He was a delegate to the Convention of Ukrainian108Jews, to the conference of Kehilas, to Zionist conventionsand was elected as a member of the Kehila in Kiev. Recog-nizing his abilities the Government appointed Schleifer, ascity Judge.In 1918 when the Denikin’s army occupied Kiev thecounter revolutionary soldiers of General Denikin celebratedtheir temporary victory with a pogrom on Jews. Amongthe hundreds of innocent victims was David Schleifer, whowas brutally murdered. At the age of 55 the brilliant careerof David Schleifer was suddenly ended.109Israel GoldmanIsrael GoldmanBorn in Orinin, Goldmancame to Kamenetz - Podolskwhere he received the tradition-al education in Cheder andYeshiva. He also studied Yid-dish and Russian. Growing upin the home of his grandfatheryoung Goldman was exposed toZionism, which he practiced allhis life. Goldman wrote poetryand published a volume “Idealof Life.” In recognition for hiswork for the community andfor Zionism Schleifer appointedGoldman secretary of the cityand district Zionists commit-tees. Goldman contributed to newspapers and wrote acolumn for the Odessa newspaper “Good Morning.” Laterhe became the manager of the city office of “Eko,” helpingJews to immigrate to North and South America. He wrotea series of articles about the lot of Jews forced to immi-grate. In 1914, Goldman settled in Kiev where he was(underground) manager of the regional office of the Jew-ish National Fund. After the 1917 Revolution Goldmanwas elected president of the Kehila in Kiev. Goldman wasactive in Zionist and general Jewish organizations. Butall activities were stopped by the bolsheviks, when they oc-cupied Kiev. By 1922 Goldman succeeded in escaping toPalestine. Here, too, Goldman continued his communal andZionist work. Together with Rabbi Mase he worked in the“Brith Harishonim” and also was a contributor to Israelinewspapers and magazines. Goldman organized the “com-mittee of people from Kamenetz-Podolsk and environs” andhelped prepare the publishing of the memorial book of thedistrict in Hebrew.110Zalman Porath (Fradkin)Born in Priluki, Fradkin ar-rived in Kamenetz-Podolsk af-ter the 1917 Revolution. Fromthen on he was very active inZionist and community workuntil the bolsheviks occupied thecity. Then Fradkin escaped toRumania.Thanks to Fradkin’s energeticwork, the Zeire-Zion Party inKamenetz - Podolsk became thestrongest party among the Jew-ish population of the city andthe district. When Fradkin’sability, as an executive, wasrecognized he was elected man-ager of the Kamenetz-Podolsk Kehila. He held this positionuntil the bolsheviks abolished the democratically electedKehila. Outside of his work for the Zeire-Zion party andfor the Kehila, Fradkin organized a co-operative; here hisknowledge of the co-operative movement showed resultsand helped the poorer classes of the city to cope with therampant inflation. By the end of 1920 Fradkin was inKishinev, Rumania, where again he continued his fruitfulwork for the Zionists. In no time he acquired knowledgeof Rumanian and became active with the American “Joint”and “Haias.” He was very helpful to Jews, who escapedfrom the Ukraine, to proceed to Palestine or to America.While in Rumania Fradkin was a contributor to the Yid-dish publication “Unzer Zeit.”His life-long ambition to live in Palestine was finallyachieved. After settling in Israel, Fradkin continued hisactivities for the community and, as an expert in co-opera-tives, devoted the rest of his life to that field.Zalman Fradkin111Scholom AltmanHe was born in Rogachin, Bes-sarabia to a very religious, chas-sidic family. His early educationhe received in Chotin, but insteadof becoming a chassid, like hisfather, he turned out to be amodern, progressive Jew andZionist.He married a young lady fromZvanitz and entered businessthere. Believing that a “Loverof Zion” should practice what hepreached, Altman went to Pales-tine at the age of 25. He workedScholom Altman the colony Rishon Lezion to-gether with the pioneer MoisheSmiliansky. After a few years Altman returned to Zvan-itz, where he organized a modern Hebrew school and becameits principal. In a few years “the Zvanitzer Talmud Tora”became famous throughout Podolia. Parents from near andfar sent their children to Altman’s school. Some famousJewish leaders were alumni of the Zvanitzer Talmud Tora.Altman was an active Zionist and was a delegate to WorldZionist Congresses and to conferences of Russian Zionists.In 1915, exiled from Zvanitz, Altman settled in Kamenetz-Podolsk, where he devoted himself to work for the com-munity and for Zionism. He proved to be a very effectivespeaker for Zionist causes.In 1921 Altman escaped from the bolsheviks to Jerusa-lem. There he became manager of a school and secretaryof the district Talpot. After working in Tel-Aviv for awhile Altman finally settled in Kriat Anovim among manyof his former pupils and admirers. He was the unofficialmayor of the Kvutza, worked in his garden and in thelibrary till he passed on at the age of 100.112Joshua Malchi (Schika Saltzman)His life was devoted to theHebrew language and to practic-ing of Zionism. From early child-hood in his native Zwanitz hewas exposed to the Zionist idea.As a young boy, Schika went toPalestine, where he studied at theTel-Aviv “Herzlia” high school.In the Summer of 1914, while athome on vacation, Schika wasprevented from returning toPalestine by the start of the FirstWorld War. Settled in Kamen-etz-Podolsk in 1915, when theJews from Zwanitz were exiled,Schika became a teacher of He-brew. But he was more than that, he rallied a great partof the Jewish youth in Kamenetz-Podolsk around the“Beth-Am,” the centre of Hebrew culture and the home ofthe secret Zionist organization. He also organized a groupof Chalutzim which was one of the first to depart from theUkraine after the War to Palestine. After the 1917 Revo-lution, Schika was one of the most active among the Zionistsin Kamenetz-Podolsk. He possessed a great oratoricaltalent and was unequal in debates with anti-Zionists. In1919 he led the Kamenetz-Podolier chalutzim to Palestineand helped organize the Kvutza “Kriat Anovim.” The restof his life he worked in “Kriat Anovim” making it one ofthe most progressive and prosperous kvutzas in Israel. Asa monument to Schika’s cultural activities “Kriat Anovim”dedicated their extensive library to his memory.Joshua Saltzman113Meyer Oasrachi (Munia Zack)As a child Munia came toKamenetz-Podolsk from Kup-in to live at the home of hisaunt Mrs. Brodsky. There hewas exposed to the Zionist idea.After he graduated from theTechnical High school in Kam-enetz-Podolsk Munia enrolledin the Psycho-Neurological In-stitute in Petrograd. The 1917Revolution interrupted his stu-dies and Munia came back toKamenetz - Podolsk, where hemarried his cousin Miss Brod-Meyer Zack sky. Munia devoted his life tocommunity and Zionist work.Yet at school Munia showed a great talent in public speak-ing; as a worker for Zionism Munia proved to be an out-standing orator and a convincing debater. Munia provedhis ability, as an executive after his election, as president ofthe Kamenetz-Podolier Kehila. Munia and his wife escapedfrom the Ukraine when the bolsheviks occupied the coun-try. In Bassarabia (Rumania) Munia became affiliatedwith the World Zionist Organization and served in manycapacities. In the interest of Zionist Funds Munia traveledin many European countries, but finally settled in Israel.His experience and talents were utilized by the ZionistOrganization, for which he worked until his untimely death.114Mathis SigalSigal’s father was a cantor inKamenetz-Podolsk and gave his son thetraditional education in Cheder andYeshiva. When time came for Sigal tobe drafted into the Czarist Army heescaped to Galicia. There he continuedhis education and fell under the spell ofZionism. On returning to his nativeKamenetz-Podolsk after the 1917 Revo-lution, Sigal devoted all his time toZionist and cultural work. He was aconvincing speaker for Zionist causes and a forceful de-bater, an opponent of Jewish socialists. When the city wasoccupied by the bolsheviks Sigal escaped to Kishinev inRumania. There he worked with the known Zionist leader,Dr. Bernstein-Cohen. Here he became very effective in theZionist fund raising campaigns. He worked also for theAmerican “Joint” and “Haias” helping the Jews escapingfrom the Ukraine on their way to Palestine or to America.In 1932 Sigal left for Palestine, where he was in charge ofthe “Keren Haisod” office in Tel-Aviv.In Palestine Sigal was active in many communal under-takings and cultural organizations. He was the head ofthe organization of Kamenetzer and until his death workedfor the Hebrew memorial book “Kamenetz-Podolsk.”Mathis Sigal115Malka Milgrom GlassmanMalka MilgromGlassmanMalka Milgrom Glassman wasborn in 1900, the younger daughterof a winemaker, Moishe, and hiswife, Bessie, of Kamenetz-Podolsk.Malka graduated the MarinskaiaGymnasia, and worked as a secre-tary.A cousin of the Milgroms, MoisheGlassman of Sokoletz, came to staywith them. He entered the Kam-enetz business world, and soon be-gan to court the attractive Malka.The Milgroms had a very close,warm Jewish family life. They hadsons Simon and Abraham, a daugh-ter Sarah, and the youngest, Jacob.Only the families of Simon and Jacob remain in Europe;Jacob is in Kharkov, a successful engineer, with a son.Michel.Sarah married into the Bograd family, in the town ofNova-Seletz in Bassarabia, Rumania. Malka and MoisheGlassman spent part of their honeymoon with the Bogradsin early 1921. Subsequently, the Bograds emigrated toEcuador.Of Simon’s family we know little, except that he leftKamenetz to join his grandfather in Kishenev, was a winemerchant there. Much later, he returned to Kamenetzwhere he married, after Malka had left for Canada.Abraham left Kamenetz to become a settler in Israelwhere he stayed for two years, before emigrating to Santi-ago, Chile, where he now lives with his family.Soon after Malka and Moishe Glassman were married,they decided to join Mr. Glassman’s brother, Izzy in Mon-treal, Canada, arriving May 16, 1921. The life of Malka116Glassman is the tale of the thousands of devoted Jewishwomen who emigrated to the New World in search of a newlife. The new life started in the poverty of the slums ofMontreal, where Moishe Glassman tried hard to make aliving. Finally, in 1929, he found work in the town of ThreeRivers, 100 miles from Montreal. After the tragic death oftheir second son, Saul, and severe injury to their third son,Abie, the Glassmans decided to leave Montreal for ThreeRivers, with their sons, Alex, born in 1921 and Harry, bornin 1928. Starting at the bottom in the difficult depressiondays, through hard work and sacrifice, Malka and Moishebuilt a home and a business. They always offered hospi-tality to any Jewish traveller who came to Three Rivers, nomatter how meager the fare might have been. Two moresons were born, Izzy in 1932 and Louis in 1936.The years of toil wasted away the tall beauty. Work-ing with her husband in the store, and taking care of thefamily took all the strength and health of this devotedwoman.In 1947 Malka’s brother, Jacob, who then lived in Si-beria, wrote to the editor of this book, Leon S. Blatman,asking him to locate Malka, which Mr. Blatman was able todo. Malka was overjoyed to find the whereabouts of Jacob,and requested Mr. Blatman to try to locate her brother,Abraham, who was in Chile, Once again, Mr. Blatman wassuccessful in locating a member of the far-flung Milgromfamily. However, it was too late for Malka. She succumbedto cancer in May 1948.Malka Milgrom Glassman lives on in the lives of herchildren, all of whom are successful in their chosen fields.Alex., an engineer, lives in New York with his wife, Flor-ence Blatman Glassman and their three children; Harry,an architect, lives in Montreal with his wife, Nushia GlaitGlassman and their daughter; Izzy is in the insurance fieldand lives in Montreal with his wife Doreen Acker Glassmanand their two children; and Louis, still single, runs thefamily business in Three Rivers.117The Glassman family118Pinchos WolfensonThe family of PinchosWolfenson was very closeto the family of his brotherChaim. Both were born inKamenetz - Podolsk, bothwere married there, bothfamilies had four childreneach, both families had toflee from the city and set-tle in America: Pinchoscame to New York, whileChaim went to Argentina.The brothers became in-laws, when the cousins Isidore and Charlotte were married.In Kamenetz-Podolsk Pinchos had a business unusualfor city Jews. He would rent from a large estate owner aquarry and supply builders with stone and gravel for con-struction work. In the Winter, when these activities wereterminated by the weather, some of his workers would drivetaxis for him. (one horse drojki).Pinchos did not mingle in politics nor did he belong toany party. He was religious, but not fanatical—a typicalKamenetzer, who knew the value of modern education. Hisdaughter Bella graduated from the Government High Schoolwhile Charlotte showed a talent in drawing. This came inhandy, when later in New York, Charlotte was the designerin the business she was in with her husband and her oldersister. Pinchos managed to bring the family to New Yorkin 1921, where he was in the grocery business the rest of hislife.Pinchos Wolfenson119The Kaplun FamilyEverybody in Kamenetz-Podolsk knew the “MoischeYoina” synagogue; this wasoriginally the home of Kuniaand Gisia Kaplun, which theyrebuilt for a place of worship.Their children received tradi-tional and very orthodox Jew-ish education. Later in life thechildren of Kunia supplement-ed their education with mod-ern knowledge and becameknown for their organizationalunion work and for culturalactivities. The tragedy of theJewish people during the holo-caust befell the Kapluns andtook a terrible toll amongthem.The oldest son Michael, hiswife Rose and their two teen-aged daughters were murdered by the Nazis. Before hisentire family was annihilated, Michael already had made aname for himself, as a social-democrat, Poale-Zionist. Dur-ing the First World War he was among the organizers of asecret Yiddish school for refugees and of the Yiddishlibrary.Another son Izchek, with his wife and three youngchildren were killed by the Nazis in Kamenetz-Podolsk. Thethird son Motia, an officer in the Red Arm^, \.a.. killed in abattle under Stalingrad. Motia’s wife, an infant daughter,a sister Basia and a brother Joseph were saveu by beingevacuated deep into eastern Russia. But brother Simonspent four years in a concentration camp and now lives inIsrael.Itzek Kaplun’s childrenkilled by the Nazis togetherwith the parents in Kamen-etz-Podolsk, 1941.120Morris Kaplun left Kamenetz-Podolsk after the FirstWorld War, lived in Poland and finally came to New Yorkbefore the start of the Second World War,121Chaim WolfensonChaim WolfensonChaim was born in Kamenetz-Podolsk where he wasmarried and brought up three sons and one daughter. Chaimreceived a Rabbinical degree, but did not choose to be aRabbi. Like his brother Pinchos he had connections with anumber of peasants from nearby villages; this helped himto be successful in running a flour mill and in his woodbusiness. In Kamenetz-Podolsk heating of houses was doneby burning wood. Chaim would buy from large estatesparcels of forest and have the trees chopped into Are wood.Unlike his brother Pinchos, Chaim was a Zionist andbrought up his children in the Zionist spirit. This is thereason his son Isidore became enchanted with the idea ofbecoming a pioneer (Chalutz). Isidore joined a groupwhich left Kamenetz- Podolsk in 1921 on the way to Pales-tine. Unfortunately, this group was stranded in Rumaniafor 2 years. When the Chalutzim were in port of Constanzaready to embark for Palestine, Isidore became sick and wasleft behind. Later he came to New York, but his familycould not escape from Kamenetz-Podolsk till 1927. Chaimwith his wife and three children could not get a visa toNorth America and settled in Argentina, where his familyprospered.122After many years, Isidore, Charlotte and Bella Wolf-son gave up their manufacturing business in New Yorkand became owners of a nursing home in New Rochelle,where they still reside.123The Drachler FamilyZalman Hersch Drachler, the owner of the flour millin Zavalia combined the best of a Chortkover Chosid withthe fine qualities of the Haskalah and Zionism.The Drachlers educated their children to love Zion.They proved that Zionism could be practiced in Palestinelong before Israel was established.Israel, the oldest brother, a leading educator, a LaborZionist leader in Russia and the U.S., was a delegate to thefirst Zionist Congress in Basel. His two sons, Nachmenand Shloime, are prominent in the field of American andJewish education.Sister Chaya, at age 20, settled in Palestine in 1908.She was among the Hashomer group that organized KfarGiladi, the first Kibbutz in Upper Galilee. Her sons andtwelve grandchildren today live in Kibbutzim. SisterDvorah, at age 17, came to Palestine to join Chaya in build-ing Eretz Israel. Unfortunately, Dvorah, only 21, togetherwith other pioneers died defending Tel Chai and perishedalongside the great Zionist leader Joseph Trumpeldor whowas killed by Arabs. Sarah, active in Moetzet Hapoalot,was a teacher in the childrens day school. Her son, Odet,is a founder of Kibbutz Rivivim. She was killed by theArabs in 1936. Abraham, in the U.S. since 1910, was anardent Zionist and his daughters Esther and Pauline wereraised in the same spirit. Louis and Samuel were active inZionist Youth groups. Samuel was one of the founders ofthe Zionist sport club “Maccabee” in Kamenetz-Podolsk.In America the brothers continued their Zionist work inthe Labor Zionist Farband and on behalf of Israeli Bonds.124The Drachler FamilyZalman Hersch and Alta DrachlerIsraelMonument inAbrahamTel Chai tothe fallenSarahDworaChaia12.iLouisSamuelIsrael DrachlerIsrael Drachler and familyFor almost 50 years in Russia and in America, IsraelDrachler held an outstanding position as an educator andLabor Zionist leader.As a young man, Israel was recognized among theZionists of Kamenetz-Podolsk, whom he represented atcountry conferences and at World Zionist Congresses.Starting as a teacher in Zwanitz, Orinin, and in Kamenetz-Podolsk, Israel Drachler became the head of the EducationalDepartment of Pinchos Krasny’s Jewish Ministry in 1919.During the First World War, Drachler was among theorganizers of illegal Yiddish schools. All through the years,Israel Drachler was a contributor to Jewish publications inmany lands. He also wrote nort one and poetry inYiddish. Although a Zionist all his life, he left the generalZionist organization and became the leader of the SocialDemocratic Poale-Zion. On arrival in America, he again126became active in the more moderate American Labor Zionistmovement.Israel came first to Canada and in 1924 arrived in NewYork. In 1928, he was summoned to Detroit, where he wasaffiliated with the Scholem Aleichem School system. Untilhis death, Israel Drachler was active in the Jewish educa-tional field in Detroit where at the same time, he took partin communal affairs. He also worked for the Labor Zion-ists’ projects. His outstanding qualities as an educatorwere recognized by the Jewish community of Detroit. Hissons follow in the father’s footsteps by devoting theirenergies to the field of education. The older son, Normanis assistant superintendent of Detroit public schools afterteaching in public and in Yiddish schools till he received hisPh.D in 1951. He is a member of the Labor Zionist Organi-zation. The younger son, Sol is director of the Jewish Wel-fare Federation of Detroit after years of work in the Jewisheducational field. As a youth he was active in Habanimand later was the founding President of branch No. 1 of theLabor Zionist Organization. Mrs. Rose Drachler, like herhusband, started in Habanim to become active in chapterNo. 2 of the Detroit “Pioneer Women,” where she is thesecretary.127128Benjamin RosenblattIn many respects the family of Benjamin Rosenblattwas typical among Kamenetzer at the turn of the century.Mr. and Mrs. Rosenblatt were brought up in very religiousfamilies, which were quite prosperous and strictly Chassidic.Benjamin married the beautiful, 17 year-old FeigeleRudoy, who, besides a dowry, received from her rich father,a variety shop, which kept her financially independentthrough the years. Mr. Rudoy offered to take Benjamininto his hardware store, but the young Rosenblatt prefeiTedto work with his father in the wholesale flour, dry fish, andoil business.From the start, Feigele showed a liking for the betterthings in life: she fitted up her home with fine furniture,rugs and paintings; she wore well-tailored clothes of thelatest style and jewelry to match. Although very religious,she, nevertheless, liked the theatre and opera; she was oneof the first to join the Zionist organization and her homewas open for meetings of the executive, even when theZionists were forced underground. Her children receiveda good Jewish and general education. When the oldestdaughter, Rebecca, was about to graduate the MarinskaiaHigh School, Benjamin felt that it was time he was inbusiness for himself.His older brother and sister wrote to him from NewYork to come to America for a couple of years, where hecould save enough money to start a business on his returnto Kamenetz. Benjamin went to America and Feigele wasable to provide and take care of her five children. In 1913Benjamin asked Feigele to send the older twm children,Rebecca and Sam to him, although he learned in no timethat “The streets in New York are not paved with goldbricks.” Feigele agreed, hoping that in America the daugh-ter would go to college and 13 year-old Sam would havebetter opportunities.Then the First World War and the Russian Revolu-tion, for six long years, made it impossible for the Rosen-129Benjamin Rosenblatt, before leaving Kamenetz-Podolsk forAmerica with his wife and children, with his parents and sisterblatts in Kamenetz and for the part of the family in NewYork to hear from each other. Mail did not come fromabroad. They lived in hope, eventually to be reunited.Meanwhile, Feigele continued in her store and brought upthe three children remaining with her. The older daughter,Sophie, helped her run the store; the youngsters, Sylviaand Abraham, went to school daytimes and studied Hebrewat the Beth-Am in the evening. Sophie was interested inZionism and was in an advanced group in the Beth-Am,the younger children joined the “Hatchia”, a Zionist youthorganization.Finally, in the spring of 1920 mail came from America.The rejoicing at the Rosenblatt home was overwhelming.At last they would be able to go to America and be withthe husband and father, as well as the other two children.Benjamin wrote that everyone was well, Rebecca and Sam130had married and he sent money and visas with a “delegate”for them to come to New York. Preparations were startedfor Feigele and the children to leave Kamenetz as soonas the store and household were liquidated. A week beforethe departure date, Feigele contracted typhus and within10 days died. The bereaved orphans later travelled toAmerica where in the fall, they rejoined their father,brother and sister. After a couple of years, the girls weremarried and later, the younger son also started a familyof his own. Benjamin shared the joys and sorrows of hischildren, but did not live to see even the Bar-Mitzva of hisoldest grandson. In 1932 he died of pneumonia.During the Second World War, the Nazis annihilated,among other Jews in Kamenetz-Podolsk, all the relatives ofthe Rosenblatts. The only ones remaining are a cousin,Jacob Bondar in Chabarovsk, Siberia, and an aunt, ChaitziaRudoy and her children in Charkov.131A g:roup of ‘‘Macabee, Jewish sport club” members inKamenetz-Podolsk in 1919A refugee from Kamenetz-Podolsk (father and child)before their escape from Russia into a D.P. camp inGermany in 1946132The children of Boris Jurist, a printer in Kamenetz-Podolsk,in Chernowitz in 1947 on the return from Eastern Russiato the destroyed home townGoldberg from Kamenetz-Podolsk, who survived Belsenand came to srael in 1948Michael Neiser and familyoriginally from Kamenetz-Podolsk, in Paris in 1948 onthe way to Israel from a D.P.camp in Germany133