DAVID AND SYLVIA STEINER YIZKOR BOOK COLLECTIONSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARYN O .Zelva Memorial BookSefer zikaron Zelvah = Zelva memorial bookTHE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY - NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSTHE STEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARY PROVIDESON-DEMAND REPRINTS OF MODERN YIDDISH LITERATURE©2003 THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY ANDTHE NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERMAJOR FUNDING FOR THEYIZKOR BOOK PROJECT WAS PROVIDED BY:Harry and Lillian Freedman FundDavid and Barbara B. Hirschhorn FoundationDavid and Barbara MarguliesThe Nash Family FoundationHarris RosenDavid and Sylvia SteinerRuth TaubmanOriginal publication dataTITLEIMPRINTDESCRIPTSUBJECTadd'l nameadd'l titleSefer zikaron Zelyah = Zelva memorial book / edited by YerachmielMoorstein; English translation prepared by Jacob Solomon Berger.Mahwah, New Jersey : J.S. Berger, 1992.vii, 141 p.; 28 cm.Jews -- Belarus -- Zelva.Zel'va (Belarus) -- Ethnic relations.Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945) — Belarus — Zelva.Moorstein, Yerachmiel.Berger, Jacob Solomon.Zelva memorial bookTHIS BOOK MEETS A.N.S.I. STANDARDS FORPAPER PERMANENCE AND LIBRARY BINDING.PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.r,>-■'-V' >    'f:-•i'x>.'»!'■'Si'IMw^R■ §|ilt»ZELVAIHD? "IDDZELVA MEMORIAL BOOKEdited byYEEACHMIEL MOORSTEINPublication CommitteeYitzhak Shalev, Dora Geiger, Yehoshua Freidin'ho pns’ m*n ,p’nD jwirrPublish^ by the Zelva Committee in Israel1984***English Translation Prepared and Published byJACOB SOLOMON BERGERna-D no*?® Dpi?’Mahwah, New Jersey, USA1992Copyright ^ 1992 by the Zelva Committee in IsraelAil rights reserved. No part of this book may bereproduced in any form or by any electronic ormechanical means, including information storage andretrieval systems, without permission in writing fromthe publisher, except by a reviewer who may quotebrief passages in a review.First EditionLibrary of Confess Catalog Card Number 91-92369Published in the United Statesby Jacob Solomon BergerMahwah, New JerseyPrinted in the United States of AmericaTo my Children,Sharon AnnnpDi ranDanid AndrewDnnnMDavid Allennn« nnJudyth Ellennpbj) nmn’Rachel Erynnn’H ‘?mRobert Ianpns'' mnanWith the hope that they will read this book, and come to understand theproud people from whom they stem and the noNe tradition to which theyare heirs. For truly, they are my most important legacy.Supporters Honor RollThe following members of owfamify provided financial contributions to hdp make the pubUcation of thisbook possible. Their generosity assures the preservation of this heritor for future generations, by whichthey have earned a large measure of our collective gratitude.Bruce & Judy BrickmanHarold & Pearl FreedJoshua & Harriet FreedAlan & Connie FriedDr, Murray FrumAndrea Kasen GrunbergerSam & Sylvia KrugmanDr, Jacob & Beatrice MelnickJack & Fran RubinTable of ContentsFORWARDTranslator^ Note 7%e Yiddish Lar^iuage Publication Note  Conveying Congratulations! .The Supporters and FulJiUersby Jacob Solomon Berger iby Yerachmiel Moorstein iii  iv by Pinchas Levine vby Yerachmiel Moorstein viINTRODUCTIONby Yerachmiel Moorstein 1THE TESTAMENTby Yerachmiel Moorstein 3ZELVA4OVERVIEW OF THE ORIGINS OF OUR TOWNby Yerachmiel Moorstein 5ThePlace  6The Comnmnity  7The Fairs  11Eanung a Livelihood  12Education  15Spmts  18Entertainment  18MEMORIESCmKeming The Zdva That Was Memories cf Home hty Town  The Departure From Home  Memories of My Town B^ore The Holocaust The Con^ietition to Open the Ark for NeHlah LagB’Ottter My I4fe Zdva, bfy IWage Eating "Days* "News From Zdva"  The Lady Storekeeper and Her Scholar-HusbandThe Baal Ttfilah The Modd of Conduct in Zdva • Bubbeh LaskehThe Deptuture From Zdva (Diary Excerpts) by Chaim GilonyDora Geiger & Haya Meiner by Joseph Vishnitzky by Emanuel Vishnitzky. by Dvoshka Bar-Nir (Ravitz)by Rivkah Wasserman (Ravitz) by Chaim Slutsky by Aharon Freidin... by Yerachmiel Moorstein by Joseph Slutsky... by Yerachmiel Moorstein... by Yerachmiel Moorstein... by Yerachmiel Moorstein... by Yerachmiel Moorstein... by Yerachmiel Moorstein by Eliezer Futritzky (Ritz)19282930313236383945464849495152ZELVA 100 YEARS AGOHaTzgfira, (Warsaw)   Abstracted by Yitzhak Shalev 66HoMditz, (Odessa and St. Petersburg)  Abstracted by Yitzhak Shalev 68FROM THE MOUTHS OF THE SURVIVORS71The Partisans A Famify Among The Partisans  Alone In The Forest Minit^ Gold Above The Arctic Cirde  Two Years In The Pit I Jumped From The Death Train On The Way To Concealment In Siberia From Edva To The United States The Farmer’^ Prophecy That Saved My Life ..The Seized Extermination Camp The Rescue Rabbi Eosovsky  Rachd The Teacher Yom Eippur, 1940 In The Soviet Sector The Escape From German Occupied Territories  by Moshe Slutsky 71Alta and Ephraim (Foyka) Gelman 77  by Mordechai Loshovitz 78 by Shmuel Kaninovitz 79  by Faygel Gerber 80 by Sandor Spector 81 by Avraham Lapin 82 by Sima Borodetska 84 by Joseph Kaplan 86 by Yitzhak Shalev 87 by Yitzhak Shalev 90 by Yitzhak Shalev 92 by Yitzhak Shalev 94 by Yitzhak Shalev 96 by Shlomit Becker-Laykin 96THE DESTRUCTION OF ZELVAThe Destruction of My Famify   Elialdm The Avenger The Suicides The Fitud Victim The Destrucdm Of Zelva (Jewish Daily Forward)My Town, Zdva • In the Year 1957 The Liquidation of Zdva My Famify  The Fate of Afy Immediate Famify in Poland The Lad Visit to Zdva in 1965   by Sala Koyat 99. by Yerachmiel Moorstein 100. by Yerachmiel Moorstein 101. by Yerachmiel Moorstein 102  Shmuel Yamivsl^ 103   by Shmuel Kaninovitz 105by Ephraim (Foyka) Gelman 106  by Ephraim Gelman 109  by Joseph Kaplan 110 C^uma Zhchinslqr 111VICTIMS OF THE HOLOCAUST112To The Reader   by Yerachmiel Moorstein 112The List of the Holocaust Victims of Zdva 113SURVIVING FAMILIES 117A List of Zdva Natives Who Emigrated to Other Countries 117Zdva Natives Who Wera to brad & Their Families 118Zdva Natives H%o Died in brad  122RESIDENTS OF OUR TOWN IN THE LAND OF ISRAEL123The Alfyah of Families The Kibbutzniks  Those Who Died In The Kibbutzim The Herobm of Eliezer  The Lady Pioneer and Her Son The Palmach Manby Yerachmiel Moorstein 123by Yerachmiel Moorstein 124 125by Yerachmiel Moorstein 126by Yerachmiel Moorstein 126THE FREWINS OF ZELVAby Jacob Solomon Berger 127FORWAIO)Trandaior's Noteby Jacob Solomon BergerThe task of translating the Zelva Memorial Book into English is another milestone in a continuingcommitment that I have to the preservation of the history of my family. This commitment has its rootsin the unique circumstances of my upbringing. I had the privUege of being raised in a four-generationhousehold, which afforded me a very special opportunity to see a "genealogical pyramid" from a fairlyelevated perspective. My grandparents were immigrants to the United States who came from Zelva.Because of their commitment to faith and culture, I acquired a facility with Yiddish and Hebrewcommensurate with that of my native English. It was only many years later that I understood this tobe an increasing rarity among native-born Americans, and as such, it jeopardized the preservation ofour family folklore. The immeasurable loss caused by the Holocaust served to underscore this issuein my mind.I was first moved to action in 1976, after making my first trip to Israel. As a result of meeting myFreidin family relatives, I discovered that our family relationships were not well understood. Indeed,the limited knowledge that existed among the older members of the family showed signs ofdissipating. With encouragement from my cousin Moshe Freidin, I undertook the task of developinga chronicle of the Freidin family genealogy. An abstract of that genealogy is included in this volume.I have continued in my capacity as Chronicler for the Freidins of Zelva, and their many descendantsaround the world. I became very interested in the Zelva Memorial Book project for very obviousreasons, and read the original 1984 publication with great interest. I concluded that I shared afundamental obligation with the original editor, as expressed in his following note on the subject ofthe Yiddish language. Yerachmiel Moorstein recognizes that for a testament to have value andimpact, it must be rendered accessible to its intended audience. Recognizing that Yiddish hasseriously diminished in its role as the lingua franca of world Jewry, he translated all of thecontributions to this volume into Hebrew, so that future generations of Israelis could read about thelife and times of their forbears in Eastern Europe. This step was necessary, but not sufficient.There are several hundred of our kinfolk in North America, the United Kingdom and Australia,whose future generations may not have the facility in Hebrew that would make the original workaccessible to them. They too will have a need to remember, and to know firom whence they came.It is for them that I decided to translate this work into English. I am somewhat amused to know thatsome of the passages have made the voyage from English to Hebrew, and now back to English again!I share Yerachmiel Moorstein’s outlook in approaching the task of translation. I have tried to stickto as literal a translation as I could, to convey the flavor of the authors’ writings. This is a veryinteresting challenge. For those of you who are interested in some of the considerations, I warmlyrecommend the Introduction to A Treasury of Yuidish Stories, edited by Irving Howe and EliezerGreenberg, Penguin Press, (see especially pp. 46-50).Hebrew is, of course, a Semitic language, while English is Anglo-Saxon. Hebrew is very spare in itsinventory of words and roots, while English ranks as one of the most malleable and rich languages,insofar as the range of choice a writer has, to express different nuances of meaning. By contrast.1Hebrew often relies on Biblical metaphor and allegory, where the proper choice of a single word orphrase can telegraph a page of meaning. It is not always possible to carry this resonance of meaningacross the language barrier. That is why you will see the italic print being used in more than one way.I use italic to set off words in Hebrew and Yiddish that are probably best left untranslated. Wor^such as Heder, Mincha, Maariv, and Tarbut can be related to quickly enough, and their untranslatedflavor in the English text is welcome.In addition, however, you will see italics used where its need is less obvious. For example, in hisintroduction, Yerachmiel Moorstein uses an allegorical reference to the Nazis, when he invokes theimage of an Abrogator. In part, this is a literary device used to refer to a despised and hated entityonly by the most indirect of means. Also, in his use of the Hebrew koret, he conjures the image ofthe biblical punishment of a shortened life span, coloring his description with the specter ofretribution.Sometimes the task of conveying the original text is too formidable for simple italics. Eliezer Futritzkywrote in his diary, that on his last night in Zelva, he was in the back yard of his home. In an impulseof desire to keep the night from running out, he looks up at the moon and asks it to stop in the skyso that the night will last longer. Only a reader of the original text will see that he borrow^ the ^actusage ffom the Bible, where Joshua commanded the sun to stand still in Gibeon during his battle withthe Canaanites. The resonance that comes with such usage simply will not cross the language barrier.Here and there, the reader will also see that I have left a smattering of Hebrew text, and even someRussian, where I felt it might be appropriate. For the facility to do this, I am indebted to mycomputer, and the very comprehensive facilities available in the WordPerfect word processingsoftware package. As good as it is, I must say that it lacks the warmth, grace, charm, and wit of mycousin Chaya Freidin, who typed the original tri-lingual manuscript in Israel.I am indebted to my cousin, Chaim Jonah Gilony, and his uncle. Dr. Nahum Gelman, both ofJerusalem, who gave of their time to review this manuscript and assure the integrity of the Englishtranslation. Equally, I am grateful to Ephraim (Foyka) Gelman, whose ebullient conversation andinput, helped me to put some of the content into its proper perspective.I hope that readers of this English text will appreciate what they And within, and that they will comeaway with an enhanced appreciation for the life and times of the people who lived in ^Iva. Mostimportantly, this must be a testament to the terrifying fate that overtook those who were left behind,and that this memory will be preserved for as long as our generations continue to follow in the pathof our tradition.Mahwah, New Jersey, Spring 1992The Yiddish Languti^by Yerachmiel MoorsteinWith the destruction of European Jewry, the Yiddish language has practically disappeared, the verylanguage that served as their mother tongue for all of their lives in the Diaspora, until the stirringsof Zionism began, and along with it the re-birth of the Hebrew language.Zelva youth began the study of Hebrew, but somewhat late and less than necessary. It was only afterthe First World War that the Tarbut and Tachkemoni schools were established, and only few studentsachieved enough mastery of Hebrew to be able to express themselves in itThe day-to-day language was, as stated, Yiddish, and they spoke it at home, and among fellow Jews,in addition to the national language - Polish. It is natural therefore, that after the years of inhumansuffering, the survivors who reached the Holy Land repressed themselves in Yiddish.In order that the heartrending stories of the survivors be accessible to coming generations, to readersthat were raised "at the knees” of the Hebrew language, I found it proper to translate them. Thetranslation is not literal, but the content is faithful to the essence of the original source.But in order to preserve the original language, the reader wQl find the full story of our fiiend, SamuelYamivsl^, of blessed memory, in Yiddish, as it appeared in the Jewish newspaper. The Forward, inNew York, and other stories fiom [Ephraim] Foyka Gelman, and Samuel Kaninovitz [These itemshave also been translated into English. The interested reader is referred to the original text for theYiddish versions. - JSB].mPublication NoteAfter several years of investing energy, thought and work, we have before us a Memorial Book about- ZELVA - in which we integrate the sacred memory of our beloved ones who were wiped out in suchan awesome and terrifying manner.No book can hope to focus on all aspects of the variegated life of our loved ones, but it can providea foundation that will not be disappointing to our memories about what was, and is no more.For the effort in bringing this book to reality, we are obligated to thank our friends: EmanuelVishniatzky, Isser ZeUkovitz, Mordechai Loshovitz, Menahem Levine, Ze’ev Nosatsky, and Sola Kqyat.A vote of thanks and blessings to our friends in Australia: The Slutsky brothers, Moshe and Joseph,Saruiar Spectar, and Herzel Borodetzky. In Israel: Joseph Wallstein, and in the United States, EphraimGelman • all for their contributions.Included in our good wishes are ail our ffiends who wrote to us and provided pictures.A special vote of thanks goes to Chaya Freidin, for her dedicated work in preparing the manuscriptfor this book in the three languages that it contains.We extend our best wishes to all the natives of our town, wherever they are, with our best wishes fora Happy New Year !Tel-Aviv, New Year’s Eve, 5745Translator’s Note:The original Hebrew edition contains a collection of photographs, a hand-drawn map of the town of2^1va, and an artistic rendition of an Eternal Light (Ner Tatrud) created by Yitzhak Shalev (Shulyak).It has not been possible to transfer these items into this English translation. The reader interestedin these items is referred to the original textIVConveying Congratulations!by Pinchas LevineWe have achieved the publication of a Memorial Book about our town, Zelva, that was obliteratedfrom the map at the hands of the Nazi aggressors and their accomplices.Our beloved townsfolk, who to our great consternation, did not manage to escape the Vale of Tears,were herded to the gas chambers of Treblinka, and were destroyed in a frightening and earth-shattering manner, and no trace of this community that existed for hundreds of years, was left behind.We were left no choice but to perpetuate their sacred memory by publishing this Memorial Bo<^,thereby documenting the circumstances of the Holocaust that overtook our townsfolk. The nativesof the town who reside here in Israel, number about fifty, and not all of them, myself included, aregifted with good writing skills, and they were not able to contribute a great deal to the productionof this Memorial Book. As a result, our friend, Yerachmiel Moorstein took upon himself this sacredduty, to reduce to writing the history of the city, the life led there, he translated and edited thewritings of our townsfolk, and brought the production of the book to a successful conclusion. I amconvinced that without him, this sacred undertaking would not have been properly realized.With this, I convey my honest assessment, and offer my deepest thanks to our esteemed colleague,Yerachnuel Moorstein for this work of his, to which he dedicated himself for nearly two years, and hecompleted this task of memorialization - for those who will come after us, an I hereby offer him thetraditional blessing:YASHTR KOACH !!I Gnd it appropriate to convey congratulations and thanks to Yerachnuel Moorstein for the effort heinvested in the production of this book, a monument to the memory of the city Zelva, that wasobliterated, and its Jewish population destroyed - and this, for future generations.vThe Supporters and Fulfittersby Yerachmiel MoorsteinThis volume cannot pretend to focus on all aspects of the variegated lives of the Jews in Zelva. Whatis written here, is a little bit about the central essence.Undoubtedly, there are errors in the text, and it is incomplete in its attempt to portray to cominggenerations, the nature of the town up to the time of its destruction.To those who were bom in the town, this book will not disappoint them, as source of unforgettable«q)eriences, about memories and stories of what once was and is no more.From the day they arrived in this Land, the people of our town worked hard, each one in his ownfield, without consideration of how many hours they would work in a day. They felt that they wereturning a vision into a reality. We will not forget their place because of their dedication to the gloryof Israel.The sons of Zelva were among the founders of Kibbutzim: Efek, Giveat-HaShelosha, Giveat-Chaim,Noan and Ramat HaShofet.In the ranks of the Haeanah:The watchman, Mordechai Zlotnitzky - killed on the way to the Dead Sea.The soldier, Zvi MerUl, the son of Aharon, &om Giveat-HaShelosha - killed in the line of duty.The watchman, Pesach RafUovitz - wounded in the Haifa riots of 1936-39.The Palmach soldier • Zvi Ben-Zvi, son of Rachel Barkleid, wounded in the service and disabled inboth legs. He overcame this and returned to function; participates a great deal in sport events andrepresents the Israeli handicapped in International Olympic events.EUezer Vishrutzky - son of Emanuel, an officer in the Yom Kippur War at a critical outpost. He wasat a lookout post at the edge of the Suez Canal together with four of his comrades, and they heldthe post for four consecutive days, and it was only after Eliezer was wounded and lost his memory,that they gave up and were captured by the Egyptians. He received medical care in an Egyptianhospital.Yitzhak Shalev - A defense department officer, and head of the technical section, who invented andperfected devices that became standards within the Israeli Defense Force, and receivedcommendations from the defense department. This item is taken &om the newspaper, BaMahanehof 24 March 1977.In Medicine:My daughter. Dr. Nitza Gurtz-Moorstein, an eye doctor, and her husband, JQr. Ernst Raphad a surgeon,who were among the first volunteers who came to Israel during the Sbc Day War, and did a great dealfor the country.VIIn Music:Shlomo Mintz, the son of a townsman of ours, Abraham, of blessed memory, he is the acclaimed worldclass violinist, who began his career in Israel as a child prodigy, and today, at age 29, has obtainedrave reviews. He appears as a soloist with the most famous philharmonic orchestras of the world,including the Israeli Philharmonic Orchestra.After the Second World War, when the refugees of the conflict from our town reached the HolyLand, the first Committee of Zelva Immigrants in Israel was set up, and its purpose was to provideaid and support to the people of the towm The founders of the Committee and its members were:Moshe Geiger (of blessed memory), Yitzhak Freidin (of blessed memory), Yitzhak ShaJev, MenahemLevine, and your loyal servant, Yerachmiel Moorstein.In the effort to produce this book, the following took and active part: Dora Geiger, continuing in her[late] husband’s (Moshe Geiger) position, even though ^ himself was not firm Zelva, YehoshuaFreidin, continuing in the tradition of his father, Yitzhak Freidin, Yitzhak Shalev, and myselfOur Australian townsfolk: [Inputs from] Sandin’ Spector, Herzel Bcn-odetzky, Moshe and Joseph Slutsky,and their sister Beracha, were provided by Sola Koyat.Most of the townsfolk responded to our request, and participated in the publication of this book,some in substance, and others in spirit.I permit myself in the name of the Organization of Zelva Immigrants in Israel to acknowledge thework, and thank the following of our friends: Sola Eeyat, Mordechai Loshovitz, Menahem Levine, Ze’evNosatsky, Isser Zdikovitz and Emanud VishnitzJy.Despite delays, and notwithstanding the extended period of time that it took to prepare, here wehave in front of us. The Zelva Memorial Book, a product of dedicated effort, produced amid doubtsand worry, and [even] deficiencies in research and material. There were those who believed that thisMemorial Book would never see the light of day. ”We have no material," they argued, "at most, wemay be able to put some sort of a notebook together." The publication of this book was done out ofa desire to create a monument to our martyrs, who were annihilated - not because of any wrongdoingwrought by their own hands - but just because they were Jews.I permit myself, in the name of all the members of the organization, to thank the members whohelped with the assembly of the material and the finances, and especially to Yitzhak Shalev and DoraGeiger, and to the rest of the Committee: Mordechai Loshovitz, Sala Koyat, Menahem Levine andZe’ev Nosatsky.REMEMBER, AND DO NOT FORGET WHAT THE NAZIS DID !!!vuINTRODUCTIONby Yerachmiel MoorsteinDuring the Second World War, (1939 - 1945) The Abrogator descended on the Jews of Europe. Sixmillion lives were destroyed in the most terri^ng Holocaust of our history, perpetrated at the handsof the Nazi beasts of prey and their allies, who subjected their victims to torture and transportedthem to gas chambers and crematoria in extermination camps.The Holocaust did not pass over our town of Zelva. Our dear ones, fathers, mothers, brothers andsisters, with children in their arms, were taken like sheep to the slaughter, to Treblinka. There, theywere suffocated, and burned because their one sin was that they were Jews, and no trace remains ofthis Jewish community today. In this town, located in Byelorussia, (White Russia) which was capturedby Poland in the First World War, our fathers and forefathers lived for hundr^ of years.Our youth today in the Holy Land is not sensitive to the role of Diaspora Judaism from which wecame. The concept of the Diaspora to our young people, conjures an image of the persecuted Jewwho is weak, and lacking any initiatives requiring strength, a Jew who fears all gentiles, and seeks toalter events by reading the Psalms, and who closets himself away from danger, and hopes for thecoming of the Messiah. It is our duty to convey to coming generations, that this Diaspora Judaismspawned proud warriors who knew how to take the battle to the enemy in trying times and under themost difficult circumstances.Behold, I am one of the survivors from Zelva, a member of its last generation whose roots run deepin the soil which is damp with martyr’s blood, one of the last witnesses of the life that went on thereuntil its earth-shattering eradication from the map of Jewish life. The memory of our martyrs gaveme no surcease in these last years, and I decided that I will not be able to rest, or be still, until I wasable to preserve their memory, and together with other people from the town, we decided toapproach the creation of this b<K>k, and to preserve in it what was known to us, for the sake of futuregenerations. Our efforts have been fruitful, and we are in the midst of implementation.We do not have official appointees, nor a community portfolio to describe the variegated life of theJews who entered all aspects of economic and cultural life through work and art. We are witnessesthat all those who left this town were ~ and still are ~ pioneers: kibbutzniks, reclaimers of the desert,workers on building the Holy Land and its security, and wise and educated people who contributeimportantly to all walks of life.I was bom at the beginning of the twentieth century, and on the strength of personal memoriesalone, I present in this Memorial Book, with trepidation and a sacred sense, and with no smallconcern, what is known to me of life in Zelva in this period up to its destruction.Community life in Zelva was not solely based on commercial considerations. Everything was donewith a charitable sense, beginning from small groups up through organizations. Despite want,economic pressure, and the concern for food during the war years, Jews, especially the youth,organized themselves principally in Zionist groups, but also in the Bund as well as others.While a social welfare office did not exist, a Jew who fell on hard times, or into difficultcircumstances, received assistance from other Jews who made donations in many forms. Many werein dire straits, but no one was abandoned. Even widows and orphans who preferred hunger to a1handout, were served through anonymous charitable donations such as "Maot Hittin” and "KemhahDepaskha". Even the donor did not know to whom his donation went. Everyone had faith in theintegrity of the facilitators.Jewish unity and identity filled life with substance and interest When a Jew was bom, all of themembers of the synagogue participated in this joy. If a Jew died, all stores closed during the time ofthe funeral. All Israel, as the saying goes, felt responsible for one another. No occasion, happy or sad,was ignored. News flew through the town like an arrow loosed from a bow. On the Shabbat, or ona holiday, the town rested, and the stores, mostly Jewish owned, were closed. No one came or went,apparently, because of a dominant Jewish presence affecting religious and educational matters. Butfor those who come after us, it is important that they know there was a second side to this, withdifficult encumbrances on Jews. In all aspects of life, the Jew was denied opportunity and rights. Itwas forbidden for a Jew to be elected as Mayor. A Jew could not even be a street cleaner. If a Jewserved in the armed forces, he was denied the opportunity to achieve the rank of an officer. WhenJews were finally permitted grudging entry to universities, they had to put up with harassment andembarrassments from all sides. Jews were forbidden to own land or real property, and there was noopportunity to improve one’s lot in life. In the absence of industry, the future looked bleak to theyoung people of the town. Anti-Semitism reared its ugly head and denied any peace of mind in thelife of the country.The only conclusion, which became apparent at the begiiming of the century, was to emigrate. Tensfound the strength to overcome their difficulties, crossed boundaries, and succeeded eventually inreaching the United States. Among these were three of my father’s brothers, and a maternal uncle.During the years of the First World War, these emigrants were a source of support to whole familieswith no means in a little town, which during the war years was overrun by many armies and changedhands to the detriment of its inhabitants. When the Balfour Declaration was announced, many Jewssaw in that act, the beginning of the period of Messianic redemption. The yearning for Zionstrengthened, and the youth who were members of Histadrut, and He-Halutz began to makepreparations to go to the Holy Land.Most of the young people of Zelva did not have the means for such an undertaking, because th^came from poor families with many children. The He-Halutz organization created a facilitating systemthat found these young people manual labor in order to qualify them to emigrate to the Holy Landwhen the time came. However, the Mandate administration that governed the Holy Land at the time,made a very limited number of entry certiGcates available, and therefore, many were unable to go.A second means was to attempt Ulegal entry. This effort which was organized before the onset of theSecond World War, also claimed precious lives, as many were lost at sea.And so, a random handful of about fifty souls from Zelva managed, one way or another to reach theHoly Land. The British Government in Palestine refused entry to the others, and so to our greatpain, our parents, brothers and sisters were sacrificed, and nothing remains except for us to preservetheir precious memory. The one thing we could do in memory of our martyrs was to create thismemorial which will stand for generations to come. In addition to this Memorial Book, we haveerected a marble memorial list in memory of these martyrs in the Holocaust Cellar in Jerusalem, anda second list in the Forest of Martyrs. Also a memorial scroll for Volkovysk in the cemetery ofNahalat-Yitzhak contains a memorial for Zelva as well.2MAY THEIR SOULS BE BOUND UP IN THE BOND OF LIFE,FOR EVER AND EVER !In memory of the martyrs of Zeiva, 22 former members of Zelva gathered on January 18,1983 from all parts of Israel. Because of my effort, and the effective participation of Yitzhak Shalevand Dora Geiger, everyone present took on the objective to produce this Book. Donations of up to1000 shekel were received to meet this goal. The committee was enlarged to include Menahem Levin,Mordechai Loshovitz and Sala KoyaL*****THE TESTAMENTby Yerachmiel MoorsteinTo remember and not forget.The legacy of those beloved.Who by girding themselves with strength.Trod their way under great tribulation.To Treblinka - to crematoria.Because their sole crime.They were taken without resistance.For being a part of the Jewish people.On this, their last journey.To sacrifice their unsullied souls.Their eyes raised, seeking salvation.But raised in vain.In enlightened Europe, an advancednation, with educated people.Are occupied with the technologyOf how to exterminate Jews.And to these beasts of prey.Thirsty for blood.No one cries: Stop!You are destroying a people !!!Let the memory of the marauding NazisWho brought to an endAll our beloved peopleBe an eternal shame and abominationGuard this TestamentOur obligation is to conserve and pass onTo those who come after us - the next generation.So they shall not forget, but will remember.3ZELVA[Note: This historical excerpt was taken firom an entry at the Museum of the Jewish Diaspora, andcan also be found in the Jewish Enqrclopedia]Zelva (Pol Zelwa), town in Grodno oblast, Byelorussian S.S.R. Jews were accustomed to visiting theZehra fairs from the end of the 15th century. A Jewish conununity, under the jurisdiction of theGrodno Kahal, was established in the late 16th century. During the 18th century, Jews traded at thelocal fairs, dealing in horses and in fiirs imported from Moscow. The lay and rabbinical leaders ofLithuania met at these fairs and after 1766, when the Council of the Four Lands was disbanded,Zelva became the customary meeting place for Rabbis of the region. Excommunications against theHasidim were publicized here in 1781 and 1796, and a plan of action was drawn up to suppress themovement In 1766 there were 522 Jews who paid the poll tax. In 1793, Zelva was annexed by Russia.There were 846 Jews in 1847, and 1,844 (66% of the total population) in 1897. Between the worldwars, 2^1va was part of independent Poland, and possessed Tarbut and Yavneh schools. In 1921, theJewish community numbered 1,319 (64%). The community was annihilated in World War 11.4OVERVIEW OF THE ORIGINS OF OUR TOWNby Yerachraiel McxirsteinZelva is a town in the Grodno Province, Byelorussia, in the U.S.S.R. By the end of the 15th Century,Jews were already living there, who from the standpoint of community organization, belonged to thecommunity of Grodno. By the year 1600, Jews were already established in the town. Many Jewsvisited the town, among them. Rabbis and Elders of the conununity from Lithuania. In 1766 after theestablishment of the Four-Lands Commission ("VaadArba Ha-aratzot") a community was establishedthat had to pay taxes to the commission, and 522 Jews paid this tax at that time.In 1781, at one of the major fairs, the rabbis and leaders of the four communities gathered in 2^1va.They were from the towns of: Brisk, Grodno, Pinsk, and Pluytsk. This meeting which took the placeof a commission for the country of Lithuania, among other thinp, declared war on Hasidism. In thediscussion, that included the Rabbi of Brisk, Abraham Katzenellenbogen, and the righteous teacher,Mr. Zelig, who brought a letter from Rabbi Elijah, the Vilna Gaon, the following resolution wasadopted:"We have adopted the edict of excommunication currently prevailing in Vilna,antumnced at the Zelva fair, and all who hear and accept it, and will reject Hasidismwill not be estranged from the Lord.Signed by the community leadership at the great Zelva fair on the 3rd day of Elul 5541."In 1796, again during the days of the great Zelva fair, this terrible excommunication was reaffirmed.To the best of our present Imowledge, this interdiction was fully observed in Zelva, and no Hasidimwere known to have settled there. At the time, this part of the world belonged to Poland.In 1793, Russia penetrated this area. At that time there were 846 tax paying Jews in the town. TheJewish population grew, so that by 1897 th^ numbered 1844 people, and comprised 66% of the townpopulation. After the First World War, Poland was established again, and in 1921, the Jewishpopulation of Zelva was 1319, representing 64% of the town population. Below is a table fi'om theyear 1897 that sets out the Jewish population in comparison to overall the total for towns in theVolkovysk valley, city and region:CityTotal PoDulationJewish PoDulationSvislutz30992086Zelva28031844Piesk23%1615Prozova2082931Yaluvka1311743Uskova876658Izbalin%3454Amstibuba1228389Novidbor1481183Zalvian600815The demographic overview shows that from 1847 to 1897, the population of Jews in 2Lelva grew byabout 1000, proving that this 50-year period was a period of growth, aided in part by the creation ofthe Warsaw - Moscow raUroad line, on which Zelva was one of the stops.At the beginning of the 20th Century, the persecution of Jews by the Russian government increased,and in particular, as a result of the failed uprising of 1905, in which Jews from Zelva also participated.Some were imprisoned, and those that had the Gnancial means, fled the country. Many emigrated,in particular to the United States. There, they encountered the difficulties of absorption intoAmerican life, but th^ believed in the ultimate improvement of their lives, and strived to bring theirfamilies to them, and not to return to Russia.The Bialystok pogrom of 1906, abetted by the authorities, caused much Jewish blood to be spilled.The concomitant deterioration in the economic and social conditions, accelerated the rate ofemigration. That is why the Jewish population in 1921 stood at only 1319, despite the high birth rateamong Jews, where it was typical to find between 6 and 8 children in a household.Three of my father’s brothers, one of them a revolutionary that escaped from exile, and also one ofmy mother’s brothers, fled during this era. Their descendants are found today among the greaterJewish population of the world.The Place2^1va is found on the road from Warsaw to Moscow, on the banks of the Zelvianka River thatempties into the Neman River. It is a town in the Volkovysk valley, with a railroad line, and a stationapproximately 20km from the larger city. A principal highway went past the town on its other side.Surrounding the town were tens of hamlets, populated by Russian Slavic peasantry with a Polishminority. In a few of these, Jewish families liv^ for many generations, some as estate managers forthe local nobility. Jews also found sustenance by working in the large forests of the area. Because ofits strategic location, this area did not escape the wars that took place in the area, nor the otherupheavals of the time, whose mark was seldom low-key or light-handed.During the First World War, as the German army began to move forward and captured severalfortified areas held by Russian troops, panic set in among the Russian peasant population along witha desire to cross into the heartland of Russia. Many refugees remained behind without anything, orthose who abandoned their possessions. A similar fate befell countless Jews who dwelt along theextensive boundary between Russia and Germany. The Germans forced them to leave their homes,and that is how many came to our area and in the course of fleeing, came to settle in Zelva. In shortorder, the Jews of the town gathered their persecuted brethren, and offered them a variety ofassistance. When the Germans captured the town of Zelva, the ties to the surrounding towns andcities were cut, and with no sources of sustenance, economic and commercial activity came to astandstill, and the Jews began to suffer from hunger and deprivation. Under these tryingcircumstances, disease became rampant, and intestinal typhus claim^ victims without number. Theepidemic raged unchecked by any form of medical care, and only the medical corps of the Germanarmy was able to arrest the disease and its death toll. Those who survived continued to suffer.6The Crerman OccupationThe Germans occupied these territories for about three years. Th^ attempted to enforce law andorder, and set up a commission, headed by a German-speaking Jew. A school was opened. The Jewsbegan to feel an easing of their condition with reconstruction, and a return to a normal routine.However, it became rapidly clear that the Germans were exploiting the commission for their ownpurposes. They employed forced labor in the forests, and confi^ted whatever the local citizenry had.In this way, the general want and absence of food intensified, and hunger reigned. These were yearsof want and suffering.***The First World War that claimed many millions of lives and brought loss and destruction, arousedmore and more resentment and opposition in the armed forces. In 1917 after the BolshevikRevolution, the killing of the Czar and his famOy, and the initial formation of the Kerenskygovernment, unrest spread also to the German army. The fronts began to crumble, and the Germansoldiers unused to the intense Russian winter, with erratic supplies, began to desert the firont andreturn to Germany with the Bolsheviks at their heels. In the town, a communist government was setup, including some townsfolk, but it didn’t last long. At the same time, the Poles organized themselvesinto combat legions, and a new war was underway. Between wars, when no formal government wasin place, various factions ruled according to their own means, generally terrorizing the populace,pillaging, plundering and stealing fi'om whomever was around.The CommunityThe Gabbaim of the Beth Hamidrash were also the community leaders. The most honored positionwas occupied by the Rabbi of the town. He maintained the town records. He recorded all the births,arranged wedding ceremonies, made rulings by clarification (Jews did not utilize secular courts), dealtwith questions of kashruth, in particular in slaughterhouses, and also dealt with liberating Jews. TheRabbi lived in a house adjacent to the synagogue, and his modest income was supplemented by thesale of miscellaneous religious articles in addition to the above services.The second individual, without whom it would not have been possible to maintain a community life,was the Cantor. He generally served as both a Mohel and a ritual slaughterer which provided him withhis livelihood. For the High Holydays, he would generally organize a choir that assisted him withservices. There was, to be sure, a Hevrah Kadisha, or burial society, that dealt with the ritual offunerals and burial. It was a volunteer organization. Relatives of the deceased were assessedaccording to their means to cover funeral expenses, and the digging of graves, in particular in winter,when the ground was fi'ozen.As to community matters, such as care for widows and orphans ~ whose numbers increased after thewar ~ there were ombudsmen. Women of charitable disposition would make collections fromtownspeople for this purpose, each according to their ability. Laskeh Freidin, the grandmother of oneof our Israeli families stood out as one of the exceptional ombudsmen of this nature.For Passover, the community organized a Moot Hittim campaign for the needy. Before the HighHolydays, bowls were set out in the synagogue for contributions to a variety of causes, the largerportion being for the Holy Land. In one comer, there was an alms box for anonymous gifts, which7always used to fill up. The donors rarely cared for recognition...There were also special collections taken up, for example, if a wagon driver lost his horse. A specialcollection would be taken up to buy him a new horse, so he could continue to earn even that meagerlivelihood.The synagogues were always full of volunteers who carried out the duties of leading prayers, readingthe Torah, and blowing the Shofar on the New Year. The cantor never had a difficult time obtainingrecruits for a choir, which always practiced for several weeks before the holidays. In addition, theyoung people would make collections for Keren HaYesod and Keren Kayemet by going house to house,and even the needy always made an effort to help fill up the hox.The Shulhauf as a Spiritual CenterThe synagogue, or Shul square was the heart of hearts of the town. It was here that all the buildingsof the community were centered. The single synagogue of the town was built of bricks and stone. Thismost beautiful of buildings was tall, as were the windows that were cut fi'om stained glass. The arkwas the handiwork of an artisan who, according to oral tradition handed down for many generations,dedicated decades of his life to its completion. He slept in the entrance, and the righteous womenof the community looked after his modest needs. By hand, he created and connected by primitivemeans (before electricity was discovered) an absolutely miraculous piece of artistry: when the ark wasopened, one of the figures of a Lion of Judah would present a Torah scroll grasped in its paws, andabove the open door of the ark, winged figures would flap their wings, accompanied by the sound ofcymbals and drums. A picture of this holy ark has been preserved, and may be found on page 65 ofthe Jewish Encyclopedia, Volume TV. Legend has it that the honor of opening the ark was accordedto a distinguished visitor, who upon being confronted by the image of the lion holding the scroll,expired dead on the spot. From that time on, the mechanism that moved the lion was disabled,leaving the lion immobilized within the ark.Every community affair, even family matters, coursed through the Shulhauf. A town Jew lived hisentire life here, from cradle to grave. As he was bom, his arrival would be announced in thesynagogue. Here is where he would have his Bar Mitzvah. And as a groom, led to the bridal canopyup the main street, additions to his family, with the local youth, and with the fire departmentorchestra, that was established in later years. A bridal canopy was erected in the center of theShulhauf and all the participants — and who was not a participant — brought happiness, joy, andhearty good wishes to the new couple. And it was the same, God forbid, when a member of thecommunity was taken fi'om us. It was rarely necessary to publicize such news, because it traveledimmediately from one end of the town to the other. The entire town shared in the grief of thebereaved family, and stood ready to offer support in whatever form was required. When the deceasedwas taken to the final resting place, all the stores in the town were closed up. The remains of thedeceased were brought to the side of the synagogue where he was accustomed to pray, and the Rabbior the Dayan would eulogize him with feeling, and the women would openly weep for him, and theentire square took on an air of great sadness.During the month of Ebd, the square was full of people, when everyone, including children, wouldcome for Selichot prayers late at night with lanterns in their hands. During the High Holydays, duringrecesses fi'om prayer, the square would fill with Jews wrapped in their prayer shawls. These were8especially observant, and would wear their prayer shawls to and from home, not relying on the Enivto permit them to carry the article back and forth...In the religious schools, there were always nameless yeshiva students, whose needs were cared for bycharitable women. It was a given to hear the sing-song of learning pouring out of the school, as weUas loud, argumentative reasoning being exchanged between Talmud students. Among the youngyeshiva students, there were those who were attracted to the enlightenment (Haskalah), but theyhad limited success in disseminating this school of thought to the very traditional town residents. Thefounding of the Zionist Histadnu movement kindled an interest in Hebrew language. It was the BetHarmdrash that nurtured this interest in Hebrew in the period before the Tarbut and Tachkemonischools were established.Every Bet Harmdrash was amply endowed with scholars and bookcases overflowing with religioustexts, and at every opportunity, especially between Mincha and Maariv prayers, these scholars wouldgive a Gemara or Mishna lesson to the lay townspeople, that would listen with great interest.Specialists in holy articles would be brought from the "big city," though in town, there lived Leibushthe Scribe, whose occupation was to write Torah scrolls.The town youth was well occupied with culture, politics and literature. Seasonal visits by theleadership of these movements served to spur on the youth of the town. The idealistic teachers inthe town added their own impetus which was not lost on the young people. Despite this, the Jew inthis land felt alienated; he was bom there, as were his forefathers, yet the future looked gloomy, andthe potential for life as a free and independent Jew seemed very, very distant indeed.The Fire DepartmentThe fire department was nominally a municipal organization, but in fact, its membership, except forthe Chief, was made up of Jews, and they also established the Gre department orchestra. There weremeager Gre Gghting supplies ~ several hand held pails and troughs, a storage area in the center oftown that also served as a theater.When Gre broke out, the Gremen would gather, and townsmen that owned horses would assist themin order to bring what little equipment they had to the scene of the Gre. Understandably, most of thetime they were late in arriving, and it was just the wind blowing that would cause the Gre to spread...The OrohanageThe war [World War I] left many youngsters orphaned, and led to the establishment of anorphanage. Young men in particular were drawn to offer assistance to those in need. Even AmericanJews committed themselves to this objective, and through the Joint Distribution Committee, they sentsupplies of foodstuffs. A public kitchen was erected G'om which hot soup was dispensed, that putsome life back into otherwise dried out bones...and on top of this was added the worry of how toteach them Torah.In the absence of a hospital, pharmacy or even a doctor, it was Epstein the Feldsher, who offeredmedical assistance to most of the sick in the town [Eastern European Jews referred to Medics by this9German term -JSB]. He would go out in all sorts of weather, with his bag in hand, and he gave a littlecotton, iodine, quinine, and aspirin tablets. Those who caught cold, would have a need for cups(bahnkess), that were applied by women with facUe hands that were skilled in applying the cups witha warm, and reddening pressure to the sick person’s back, and if all this didn’t help, then the afflicteddeparted this world, and not necessarily because of advanced age...Occasionally, a seriously ill person would be taken to the district capital (Grodno?) or even toWarsaw to the Jewish hospital there. The expenses for such care were borne by the community atlarge."Sleep-In" with the SickHiis group supplied assistance to the sick. At night, two young men were assigned to come an sleepin with the sick person overnight.Daily LifeMost families were large, and blessed with many children. They lived in simple houses that passedfrom one generation to the next by inheritance. Attached to the house there was normally a stable,or also a pen for domestic animals, and also a woodshed. Behind the house there was a small plotof land, on which there were several rows for planting vegetables, and also fruit trees that had beenplanted toward the end of the eighteenth century as a gift of the philanthropist, Baron Hirsch. Onthe edge of the town along the banks of the 2^1vianka River, there was a stretch of about 100dunams of land that served as a natural meadow for grazing animals. This land belonged to the Jews.Jewish shepherds would put their flocks out to graze in this meadow.The Water WellIt was located in the middle of the square, and provided water for home use, and during fair seasonto all visitors, animals, even in the winter when the well was entirely encrusted with ice.The Bath HouseIt was opened only on weekends. Each family followed the custom of bathing according to a setschedule. In those days, there were no bathtubs or privies in the individual homes. After several hoursof scrubbing with a "brush", washing with near boiling water, and rinsing with cold, one would returnhome clean and fresh. This contributed significantly to the health of the resident population. In thesummer, people preferred to bathe in the river, and as a result almost everyone knew how to swim.10The Ice HouseThis was a wide cellar, at the edge of the Shulhauf square, where several hundred tons of ice werestored, having been cut from the Zelvianka River, and moved to storage by volunteer labor inwintertime. Full of ice, it offered a respite in the summertime, apart from being mandatory for thesick to control fever. To put some ice on the forehead was the sought after remedy. The demand forice was greatest at the time that the city was beset with severe illness, in particular after the Germanoccupation, when typhus became endemic, and countless people died. The ice was the single mediumthat brought some relief amidst terrible suffering. During summer, the ice was also useful inpreserving various foodstuffs, and in the manufacture of ice cream, by somewhat primitive manualmethods.DietDiet was not particularly distinguished. The principal staple was bread, com, and small potatoes, andin the fall, some fmits and vegetables as well. Even rotten fruit was eaten, nothing went to waste. Thewell-tCKlo obtained cucumbers and cabbage, and stored them in their cellars for the winter. Meat andfish were eaten on the Sabbath or Holidays. A cow or nanny goat would give milk on most days, butin limited quantities.There was never any concern about becoming overweight. The only one who needed to diet was astorekeeper who sold woven goods that he obtained from Lodz, the manufacturer would come withnotes that he would not honor...gpthing and FootwearMany were involved in this area, and goods were plentiful and of good quality. There was heavy tradein woven goods, furs, and skins. Over the many years of war, large numbers of domestic animals werekilled or eaten. By contrast, cotton, plastic, or synthetics were rarely heard of.The farmers did not use shoes, and only in the winter would they fashion wooden sandals. Thetownspeople in particular suffered. Every item of clothing was handed down and fully utilized.The Sabbath suit of the head of the household was turned inside out after several years of wear, andthat’s how its use was extended...The FairsZelva was already known as a city of commerce by the begiiming of the nineteenth century. In thosedays, Jews would bring ffuit, animal hides, and horses from Moscow and other cities. Because Zelva’slocation was between the main road and the railhead, the location became well known, and themerchants from the surrounding area, and even from more distant locations, came to do business.Consequently, the Zelva fairs became well known events. At the crack of dawn, thousands of farmerswould descend on the city, by cart or on foot to the fair, to secure a good place in the gathering withthe livestock.11The whole town prepared for the fair which was a source of anticipation for weeks in advance. Abouthalf the Jews of the town were either merchants or storekeepers. The commercial center of town wasbuilt in a square, and the property was owned by a German family that had been invited to settlethere by the Russian monarchy, lliis famUy charged rent to the occupying merchants, and even tothe adjacent homes, on three sides of the square, the fourth side being set aside for the livestockmarket.The selection of merchandise in the stores was modest and limited. The principal buyers, householdsuppliers, made do with the minimum. Most families with lots of children, even the farmers, weresober folks. While prices were low, this also meant that income was also low, though there weremerchants and storekeepers that succeeded in their business despite the unreasonable pressure of themunicipality. The tax rate was very heavy. The tax collector, Grabski, became famous for his"squeeze,” and no small number of Jews emigrated from the town as a direct result of his tactics. Thisaliyah was therefore caUed the "Grabski Aliyah."Earning a LivelihoodThere was commerce in grain. Fortunately, the city was also a railhead, and the farmers of the areaand landholders brought their produce there to be sold to merchants, and several tens of familiesprospered in this regard. However, in the beginning of the 1930’s, with government instigation, agrain cooperative was established to provide jobs to new residents, who were Polish war veterans, andin this manner, Jews were pushed out of this important branch of economic activity.Cattle traders did a good business, since they were suppliers to the army. Butchers that catered onlyto the general population did only a modest business, since people re&ained from meat consumptionduring the middle of the week. Only on the Sabbath, or holidays, did meat appear on their tables.Only the well-to-do or the sick used to buy fowl that the farmers used to bring to market from timeto time, which gave rise to the joke: "when does the pauper eat chicken? when one of them is sick...”Wagon peddlers would leave with their rigs on Sunday, and return on Friday for the Sabbath, goingfrom village to village, and bartering their wares for agricultural produce.Fruit merchants also tended the orchards of the nobility during flowering season, and would guardthese orchards until harvest time, protecting the harvest from theft They would deal with the crophonestly, storing the fruit and selling it for a good price and returning the profitThe wide forests provided a livelihood for any number of Jews. Two sawmills were constructed onthe banks of the Zelvianka River. The better one belonged to the Borodetzky family, several ofwhose descendants live in Australia, and one in Israel. The second one was built by the Jews ofVolkovysk. There were also several lumber merchants. The Spector family constructed a building forthis purpose in Warsaw, and did very well. The family son, Sandor, lives today in Australia. He savedhimself by jumping from a train car on the way to the "Valley of Kllling"(e.g. Treblinka)..The only flour mill in the area also belonged to the Borodetzky family. All the townsfolk had needof it, including the Jews. Most families used to bring their grain to be ground, and used to wait in linefor several days. The mill ran by water power, from a dam across the Zelvianka River. The mostexpert millers were the Jews.12About Gvc families ran bakeries, and they provided a variety of bak^ goods, especially to the farmerswho came to market Town residents, including the Jews, baked week to week, filling the ovens withk>aves of bread, weighing S to 6 kg. api&:e. Tte well-to-do also bak^ challahs for the Sabbath.Immediately after Purim, the ovens in two of the bakeries w^re koshered for baking Passover matzoh.Tl^ rest [was baked] in ordinary homes. The families and their branches, organized and expeditedall the work among themselves. The womenfolk in white aprons, with kerchiefs coN^ring their hair,and even young men and the boys, participated in this undertaking. The matzoh was brought homein a white case. Under the roof was a woo^n cache for storage. This had served for storing matzoh,meal, and fk>ur for matzoh balls (JcnauUach) for more than just one generation.Jews engage in the distribution of goods running horse-drawn wagons. Several worked asteamsters, hauling to and from the train station, though mainly, they were employed in haulingmerchandise to the city, the valley, and from there. Important cargo, destined for the capital city, suchas grain and lumber, were taken only as far as the railroad station, where they were loaded on traincars.The cooperative bank, which was founded by the efforts of several businessmen, breathed life intothe faltering economy. The high level of trust in the bank leadership attracted funds for dowries andsavings, that made it possible to extend loans to local businessmen. In the capital of Warsaw, abanking center was established along these lines that assisted with organization and auditSeveral people engaged in the e>a:hange of dollars into gold. A sense of obligation, and concern forfamily, motivated Jews in America to send dollars to their needy relatives. The standard method oftransaction was to occhange the note for a letter in a folio, and the "Men of the Bourse" would thenexchange it for gold.There were hardy souls who engaged in the liquor trade, literally taking their lives into their handsto bring hard liquor to saloons, despite the express prohibition by the government. The trade inalcohol was legally limited to wounded war veterans.Several families were engaged in the building trades utilizing both lumber and bricks. The Qour millsin the city and environs were their handiwork. They also repaired millst(9nes and engaged in theircare.GiyinfcJirth.::The concept of a maternity hospital was unknenvn. Instead midwives, drawn from the local populace,attended tte expectant mother. Birth was facilitated in the home of the expa:tant mother. TheM^vbom recciv^ his first bath in a bowl of warm water. If the infant was a baby boy, then an excerptfrom the Book of Psalms, including the entire chapter of Shir HaMaaloty was pasted on each of thefour walls of tl^ room. This was the tried and true method of providing a watchful e^ over thenewborn ami the mother...Members of immediate family were nearly, ready to spread the good news, like an arrow kxxedfrom a bow, the news would traverse the entire town, and after Mincha, children and their parentswould gather at the home of the newborn to recite the Shema, and Shir HaMaakn, to strengthen the13protection of the Almighty. All the invited guests contributed something for the occasion, and therich added candies. And from the attic, would be brought down a wooden cradle that had alsoserved this purpose for many a generation. The infant was wrapped in swaddling clothes up to hisneck to assure that he would have a straight and tall body. His mother would then nurse him till hewas full, and afterwards, he was put to sleep without much trouble...The status of the male infant changed on the eighth day, when, amidst a holiday atmosphere, andwith the participation of his immediate family, the Rabbi or the Dayan, the Mohel performed hisrite...and at the same time, his name was announced publicly, usually in memory of a departedgrandfather or other relative.From this day onward, the Jew began to writhe in agony and suffer... to ease his pain, his motherwould rock the cradle, and if that didn’t help, she would open his swaddling clothes and pour a littlepowder on him, her of&pring lying frail, and wrapping the squalling infant up again, and, heavenforbid, he should start again... the mother would nurse her child until he start^ walking. He wouldbe weaned when he began to bite the nipple he suckled on, with teeth that would have grown in themeantime...The City of ZelvaZelva served as a center to hundreds of villages, and was the seat of local government whose head,understandably, was an appointed Polish Christian, assisted by several deputies. The courthouse, postofGce, railroad station, the teachers in the public schools, the five policemen, and even the doctorsent by the central regime-all were purely Polish in character.Two Russian Orthodox churches, and one Polish Catholic church were a magnet that drew thefarmers that came in throngs to the pealing of their hells during Christian festivals.Only the main street had any stone paving, and at that only partially so. There were no steps, andduring the rainy season, or snows, one constantly had to slog through muck and mire. In summertime,and during harvest in the meadow, and in particular on return firom the fields, the sides would fillwith clouds of dustMost houses were one story high, built of wood. In the city center, there were some stone houses thathad a fortress-like appearance. These served as watch stations for soldiers.The conunercial center, that was buUt as a square, was a center for storekeepers as well. Attachedto the store was a modest dwelling for the tenants, and it had windows only on one side. The heavystone walls served as a fortress to the standing army. Around the center, especially in the fall,wagoners would set up stands to sell fruit and baked goods.During the season for military draft, the gentiles would gather the drafted peasants in this area, andafter a ration of vodka, they would try to make merry, and in the process end up vandalizing andwrecking these stands, but these depredations did not last a long time. The braver butchers andwagoners took the fight back to these perpetrators and drove them off into the countryside...14EducationThe Tarbut SchoolWorld War I left orphans, destruction, poverty and disease in its wake. Sources of livelihood werecut off, shops were left bare, after they were pillaged at the hands of invading troops. Craftsmen wentidle.The new Polish regime began to establish itself. Among its directives was the adoption of the Polishlanguage. A public school was opened that accepted students free of tuition. The Jews, however, didnot accept this development enthusiastically, and continued to send their children to Heder. Amongthe refugees that had left the city, was a Hebrew language enthusiast, Yehuda Halevi Epstein. As aresult of his energy, and with the assistance of several fathers of young children, he managed tocontinue to organize and provide a school for instruction of Hebrew~in Hebrew—in his own home.I was among his few students. But, to our great consternation, there was insufficient encouragementoffered to him, and he left us amid groans of disappointment, and returned to his town, Slonim (mayhis memory be blessed!). He was among those who laid the foundation for education in our universaltongue.The responsibility for the education of Jewish youth, especially in Hebrew language, occupied manygood people, but there were also many who were very devoted to Yiddish - and the Bundists, andradical Leftists, to whom the study of Polish was mandatory. The establishment of a Hebrew Schoolwas a very difficult undertaking, but there were supporters to be found, men of vision, and idealisticteachers, who satisfied themselves with very modest life styles, and they opened the Tarbut Schule.As we have previously pointed out, in this period, most parents had rather large families, and notmuch in the way of means of support. It was in these circumstances, with the dedication of allparticipants, that this school began to accept students, make progress, and grow. From very little, intime, the number of students grew, and the level of instruction rose as well. And we, the youth,sublimated our desires, in order to master this treasured language of ours. This arduous undertaking,however, did bear fruit, and the Hebrew language became the heritage of the younger generation.The Tachkemoni SchoolThere were Jews, however, who were not satisfied with schooling limited to Hebrew language, andwith the passage of time, they established the Tachkemoni School whose objective was to impart tothe student tenets of faith and studies in Holy Scripture, in addition to skills in language. Thisinstitution, as its predecessor, flourished because of the dedication of its founders and teachers.Several Hebrew newspapers, such as HaTzfira were still being received before the War, however,afterwards, in its place, we began to receive the paper, HaYom. It would pass from hand to hand, andwe would devour its contents down to the very last...With no framework for studies available to our generation other than the Heder, and with anoverpowering desire for enlightenment, we decided to establish a library. To this end, we went outin pairs, from house to house, to gather books from whatever was at hand, and after taking inventoryand cataloguing the books, that were donated with pleasure, the library became a source ofenlightenment that was not a disappointment15In addition, the library served as a meeting place and a location for intensive Zionist activities. Theold Talmud Torah building that served as an annex to the Tarbut Schule, also housed the library.The Wealth of the EnlightenmentFrom an early age on, little boys would follow their older brethren to the Bet Hanudrash, to listento Torah lessons between the Mincha and Maariv prayers from a Mag^, or to sharpen theirthoughts along with their friends in games derived from their discussions. On reaching the age of five,the young boy began study in a Heder, and would even participate in prayer. Studies were conductedin the home of an instructor, called the Melamed, around a long table. The students would be bentover their texts and copybooks, sitting on long benches without backs, and despite the crowding,found the ambience pleasant. The period of study extended from Passover to the New Year, and backagain. Recess from study was only during holidays.After several periods in the Heder, individual students or small groups would continue to study withsome teachers for an hour a day or every other day. The following teachers especially endearedthemselves to their pupils: Joseph Matlovsky (today, Matlov, in Canada), Moshe Lubetkin (today inAmerica) and also Shmuel Boruch Freidin who died in the HolocaustThe desire for the riches of the enlightenment impelled others to leave for the big city to study ina Yeshiva under extenuating circumstances, because not all had subsidized eating arrangements.These were arrangements whereby a student would eat his meals, first one day with one volunteerfamily, and the second day with another such family, and so on.By the time he reached Bar Mitzvah age, even before the formal ceremony, which took place in theBet Hanudrash, he already had mastered the ritual for putting on the TefUlin (Phylacteries). This, henormally learned from the older boys, who took him into their group. He, feeling that from now onhe was qualiGed to GU out a Minyan, found that to be more than an adequate source of pride. Thewealth of this subject matter occupied him for a lifetime, because there was no outlet for him inordinary places of employment, because those were exclusively for the Poles. It was the youngster’srefuge, and he belonged to them, and that is where he dedicated the majority of his time and energy.Just as in all the cities of Eastern Europe, so in Zelva, there was an awakening and a ferment in theJewish community in the aftermath of the First World War, especially after the Balfour Declaration.In it, many saw what they thought would be the beginning of the Final Redemption, the only ray oflight in an otherwise dark and dismal era.The Zionist Histadrut movement made much of the opportunity. The large majority of the youthsought to afGliate with one or another of the Zionist branches that were nurtured by dedicatedpartisans. Even the fund-raising organizations like the Keren HaYesod, and the T>lue box" of the KerenKayemet could be found in almost every home, and every family repeatedly would even deny itselfnecessities to assure that it could contribute a few pennies in order to redeem precious land in Israel.In a collection for Israel, a representative from the Holy Land, Dr. Yaffo spoke, and motivated thewomen of the community to donate their jewelry in addition to the donations of the men. Theeducation of the children, especially after the War, occupied many qualiGed people, and when it16became possible to go to the big cities, the young people of our town, Zelva, began to leave forcenters of learning despite the difGcult economic circumstances of most Jews.The foUowing is a list of those who left, and their destinations:Dina and Leib Lantzevitzky - To the Tarbut Gymnasium in Bialystok.They live today in the U.S. Dina runs a pharmacy, and Leib Lantz is a dentistlUvkah Shufyak -To the Tarbut Gymnasium in Bialystok.Leibel Kaplan - To the Vilna Polytechnicum.After completing his studies, he crossed the border into Russia and joined his brothers, Chaim,Benjamin, and Pinchas, and his sisters, Lifsha and Hadassah, who were active in the establishmentof the socialist-communist regime.Sandtn" Spector - One of the Holocaust survivors, to the Vilna Polytechnicum, lives today in Australia.Yaffa Spector - Sister of Sandor, also a Holocaust survivor, studied at the Vilna Tarbut Seminary. Shealso lives in Australia.Akiva Shevisky and his sister Esther - To the Grodno Seminary.Yocheved Shertzuk - To the Grodno Seminary.My sister, Sarah Moorstein, and Nehama Slutsky - To the Tarbut Seminary in Vilna. My sister studiedat several schools, and was considered a gifted schoolteacher. She was killed in the Holocaust, whileserving as a principal of the Tarbut School in Slonim.The sisters, Dvora Geiger, and Haya Meiner (n6e SrybnU^) went to Slonim to study at the "Kunitsa"gymnasium. They both emigrated to Israel, and were devoted to one another as sisters &om childhooddays. They both raised families. Today they are active in a variety of community affairs, including theproduction of this Memorial Book.Shlomit Becker (today, Laykin) - To the "Kunitsa” gymnasium in Slonim.Chaim Jonah Freidin (today, Gilony) - To the Hebrew Tarbut Gymnasium in Volkovysk [where hewas a classmate of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir, who came from Ruzhany. -JSB]. Heemigrated to the Holy Land in 1933, and is a lawyer by profession.Dr. Nahum Gelman (Nathan Helman) -Emigrated together with his family to Canada, and is a dentist. Today, he lives in Jerusalem, Israel.Joseph Kaplan - To a Yeshivah in Vilna, and lives today in the U.S.Isaac Nahum Gerber - To a Yeshivah in Vilna, and lives today in the U.S.’ The name Srybnik, also appears to be pronounced Cherebnik. The former is used throughoutthis book for consistency.17SportsThe game of soccer was just becoming popular, and all the boys, even the older ones, were eager toparticipate. Practice was then organized outside the city, near the lime pits of Bezalel Lisitzky.After intensive practice, it was decided to invite the soccer team from Dereczin for a game. And, onthe appointed day, while we were still waiting for the opposing team, we suddenly realized that theentire playing field had been covered with flax to be dried! We didn’t think much of it, and weapproached the cleaning of the field with great vigor. The game began when the curious hadgathered, standing around us, and we then spied from a distance, a crowd of farmers with sticks andclubs in their hands, coming to beat us up. This precipitated a flight of the onlookers and players totown, and it was then that the chief of police got involved, and he ruled that we had to make goodto the farmers for the spoilage of the flax. But where would the money come from? The only solutionwas: each player would have to donate two weeks of labor in mucking out the stables, and thisdonation of labor would be accepted as reparations.EntertainmentMan lives not by bread alone, and as a result, a theater group was established. It was a group ofyoung people that volunteered to do this. Heshan Zalman, a new town resident, was the stagedirector, and his assistants included Hannan [Elchanan] Potztiveh, among others. The playersincluded:Jacob Moshe Einstein, Hashka Kaplinsky, Jacob Rotner, Joseph Freidin, my sister,Esther Moorstein, Tuvia Vishnivisl^, and the Lifschitz sisters.With the fire of youth only, they embarked on this undertaking, without props, and even without atheater hall, and behold the miracle: after several weeks of intensive work a stage was constructedspeedily, in cooperation with the fire fighters. On one side, a prompter’s box was constructed,inches were borrowed from houses in the neighborhood, and voild - a theater.The play, Mireleh the Milkmaid was a success. All the participants, the director, the prompter, theplayers, entranced the audience, and from behind the scenes, we applauded the performance •Potztiveh, Tuvia, and I with violin playing - the emotions ran very high. The extended reaction of theaudience lasted untO the following performance.From time to time, evening dances were also scheduled, and members of the Christian communitywould also participate, such as the doctor, the lawyer and the chief of police.18..I remember for you the devotion of your youth..."Jeremiah 2:2MEMORIESQmcermng The Zdva That Was...by Chaim Gilony(Chaim Jonah Freidin)In order for me to write about Zelva, that typical Jewish town that was located on the principalhighway between Volkovysk and Slonim in the Grodno Province, I feel that I have to close my eyes,and delve into the dark clouds of the past that I have been away from for over fifty years, firom thetime I permanently left in 1933. In fact, I was already gone by 1926, when I returned to Zelva onlyduring the summer months, for the annual summer vacations from the high schools in Volkovysk andVilna, where I was studying.It is not among the easiest things to draw upon deeply-seated memories and the images of life in2^1va that I witnessed from childhood until the time I left. It is possible that a skilled hypnotistapplying his powers to me, would succeed in eliciting images from my mind going back to my earliestchildhood, because in my memory, I do have fragmentary images from the time I was four years old.But let us set these speculations aside, and I will try to raise Zelva in my memory, as the villageappears to me now, over the distance of time, and from the perspective of over fifty years. I amfamiliar with the well known fact that the past is often veiled in a mantle, through which thebitterness and difficulties we experienced become less harsh with the passage of the fifty years sincethese upheavals took place.So, my town of 2^1va stands out, first and foremost in my mind, as a place where the Zionistmovement dominated, and stood out over the other intellectual movements that pervaded the Jewishcommunities of Poland, that also found expression there, such as the Bundists, Communism andYiddishism. The blue-white Zionist flag, and the Keren Kayemet pushka [charity coin box] was thelegacy and property of the larger part of the Jewish population.Its population was made up of scholars, plain folks, active merchants and tradespeople, it hadfactories and a number of merchants of high repute for such a small town. The synagogues of thetown also attracted a loyal following among the population. The Tailor’s Synagogue," wasn’t calledby that name for no reason, haying been found^ by tradespeople of that pursuit The biggest andmost beautiful of the synagogues was the Moiehr Beis-Midrash (the Wall Synagogue), in which themiddle class people worshipped, along with the storekeepers and merchants. The wealthiestworshipped in the HUtzner Schul, and even if individuals were not so wealthy, but were consideredespecially distinguished, they worshipped there, including the Rabbi of the town, and the Dayan, andit was there that the Maggidim gave their sermons, and where guest Cantors performed before theArk. There was also found here a small synagogue of unique character where the simple folk prayed,people of undistinguished calling and of a lower class. The name of this synagogue was Shiva Kenum(the seven called ones). The largest and most beautiful synagogue which was available to the entireJewish population, but was used only on High Holy Days or very special Holiday occasions, was calledDie Groiseh Schul (the large synagogue), in which there was a beautiful Ark, which was anoutstanding example of Jewish Ark craftsmanship in all of Poland.The aforementioned synagogues, many of the schools, the home of the Rabbi, and close by thecemetery, were center^ together in a separate neighborhood, and these were the centers of culture19of the town.It was in this center that the cultural life of the community was conducted for all strata of the Jewishpopulation, leading, among other things, to the founding of the Tarbut Schule approximately in 1920.The educators of the town were the melamdim of the Heders. In the Heder of Berel the Melamed,who was the Shamess of the Tailor’s Synagogue, I reached the level of the study of Gemara. At ahigher level, Litman the Scribe taught in his house, next door to the home of the Zlotnitzky family.The Zionist spirit, before it pervaded the streets of Zelva, was confined to a few homes where theHebrew newspapers Tzefirah and Shachar were read, and the books of [Abraham] Mapu and [Peretz]Smolenskin. With the founding of the Tarbut Schule, the Zionist spirit began to grow in the townwith full force. The first signs manifested themselves with the Aliyah of the first pioneers firom Zelvato the Holy Land: Rachel (from the Barkleid family), who was one of the founders of Ra’anana, andafter her, the pioneers from the families of Le^n, Lifshitz, Rotni, Ephraim Gelman, Yarmus,Yechezldel (Chatzkel) Halperin, the son of the KrepUchah, and others.The most memorable of the Tarbut Schule teachers were, Shmuel Boruch Freidin, Shabsel (Shabtai)Ratner, and Matlovsl^. The identity of other teachers, who educated the youth of the town are lostin the recesses of my memory, and doubtlessly, other members of my town will be able to recall themfrom memory in order to credit them with their blessed undertakings in the town.I especially remember an incident that proves the existence of the warm Jewish soul and its affinityfor culture: the marvelous celebration in the town marking the occasion of the opening of theHebrew University in Jerusalem in 1925 (and I was then 10 years old). Youngsters, and those olderthan I, [Eliezer] Futritzky, Nahum Gelman (my uncle), Foyka Gelman (Ephraim), and others, theseI remember immediately, constructed a gate at the entrance of the Moiehr Beis-Midrash anddecorated it with international flags (in white and blue), and under the gate, they put up a platform,on which speakers sat, including Nahum Gelman, today. Dr. Nahum Helman of Jerusalem, [Eliezer]Futritzky, and others. From where did they draw the strength and the wisdom to speak about theopening of the university? It cannot be but a hidden inner force that worked on their souls andcaused them to exert themselves to arrange this tumultuous celebration in which hundreds of youngtownspeople participated. The students of the Tarbut Schule participated in this celebration, dressedup, with their flags, and blessings were heard, and singing by the school chorus, and if my memoryis not faulty, I believe that the fire department chorus also performed. This was a unique internationalexperience, that underscored the connection between a nation and its culture, as it was expressed bythe tumultuous participation of the Jewish population of the town.This event also reminds me that by coincidence the origin of the security forces of our army, theHaganah brigades, of the fighters and dreamers, each to his own kind, was rooted in this same groupof young people, and was founded in Zelva to protect the Jews of the town against gentile hooligans.I remember these young people wearing uniforms, and arming themselves in order to fight with theshkotzim. I especially remember the figure of Foyka Gelman standing at the head of the troop (andit was the same Foyka, who joined the partisans in fighting the Germans during the Holocaust).To continue this narrative, let me also describe the role that our youth played in the fire department.These were Jacob Moshe Einstein, Lantzevitzky and Peikowitz in the fire department chorus, andYitzhak Pomerantz, of blessed memory, who was familiar as a clarinet player, llie young people whoappeared on stage either to sing or act were, Tuvia, who surpassed in his time the cantors Rosenblatt20and Kusevitsky, in particular in singing the prayer, Tikanta Shabbat, and on the parody, ^4/ SheloshaAverot Nashim Metot [women die because of three sins -JSB]. In a like manner, I recaU the singingof Liza Gelman, during the presentation of Ywn Zeh Mechubad in the fire department auditorium,and the singing of Esther Moorstein, and the young girl students fi'om the various schools.Our good fiiend, and Zelva community Leader in Israel, Yerachmiel Moorstein, also participated inmany of these activities, as did others, who I hope will forgive me for not mentioning their names,as I am unable to bring them all to mind.Among the personalities that stand out, are those of Mr. Aharon Rotni, and his wife Fradl, who livewith us here in Israel, who over many years were workers for the Keren Kayemet LeYisrael. Beforemy eyes, I see the erect fi^re of the Dayan, Rabbi Nahum Moshe, who lived at the edge of thetown, near the Spectors. Similarly, I see the faces of Rabbi Pesach Rachko, and the scholar. RabbiJoseph Shulman. And with the ears of my soul, I hear the praying of the worshippers on the HighHoly Days, the voices of Herschel the Mocker, of Sedletzlqr, and Potztiveh (if I am not mistaken). Andhere before me, I see the image of Rabbi from Cologne, blessed be his memory, who was the onlyHasid in our town, and was among the first to go to the Holy Land, and he is today buried on theMount of Olives in Jerusalem. It is not p>ossible to forget the appearance of the Tehilim Zog^r [thereciter of Psalms], for he is the father of Elke Nosatsky [also Nosatzky], who sang all the verses ofUie Psalms, by heart, with the congregation, in the time between Mincha and Maariv on the Shabbatin the Moiehr Beis-Midrash. Even more prominently, stands the figure of our late grandmother,Bubbeh Laskeh, who even till the end of her life, with the coming of the Germans to Zelva, was aprovider to the needy, who worked indefatigably to provide food and sustenance, and was a pillar ofsupport to the helpless.An unusual figure that ties Zelva to President Franklin D. Roosevelt of the U.SJL was Motti[Mordechai] Maggid, who had malformed legs, who despite his handicap, was a soccer player with allthe teams, and was able to perform as if he were quite normal. When the Germans invaded the town,he corresponded with Roosevelt, and obtained assistance from him to come to the United States.I also recall the Maggidim, who gave their sermons in the various synagogues, and their many topicsin literature and philosophy, and the speaker (whose name escapes me) who spoke on the topic of:lovers and enemies of women. A crowning event in Zionist activities came with the establishment ofa Betar preparation point in the yard of the Poritz (who, incidentally brought the first auto to town).This group used to march with pride to the synagogue, singing lustily the words: "as one weproclaimed that we shall make Aliyah, and we shall,” to Israel, naturally.A great deal of singing was done on Simchat Torah, and when one was called to the Torah for analiyah, it was customary to make a substantial donation to the synagogue. The good will andneighborliness of the community was manifest in the home of our grandfather, Avraham, YoshehAfaggid’s of blessed memory. When the season for baking matzoh in the oven at his house came, itwas accompanied by singing, and the good cheer pervaded all those who partook in this mitzvah.The entire population participated in happy occasions, such as weddings, and when the time came,in sad occasions such as funerals, and the scene at such events involved many of the people of Zelva,and was representative of the strong family spirit to be found among all Jewish communities ofPoland.21A somewhat special light was cast on the large group of butchers in the village by the teacher, Litmanthe Scribe, who nicknamed them, bnei bassar [sons of the flesh -JSB], drawing this reference firomthe prayer, Aleinu LeShabayach. I felt at the time, that this was a somewhat acerbic sobriquet, sinceit was through their effort, and the weight of their influence in the life of the town, that the first andonly bank in the town was founded, which continued to function untO TTie Destroyer descended onthem. The Shiva Keruim Synagogue was established for the almost occlusive use of the town butchers.It was from here that their noteworthy influence on the town emanated. Among them were thosewho engaged in the trade of meat products with countries outside of Poland, and in this fashion,created links between this small village and the outside world, especiaUy with Germany. Merchantsflrom Warsaw and Germany would (X)me to the Zelva fairs, and established international trade tieswith the town butchers. Our father, of blessed memory, Yitehak (Itchkeh) Freidin, and his partners,David Yosha Srybnik, and Itcheh Jonah Freidin, who despite his limitations as a simple country man,without formal education, traveled to Upper SUesia, to Germany, and carried on business andtransactions on an international scale.The monthly Zelva fairs bear witness to the prominence of our town in Poland. These fairs beganon the third day of the month, and were held for several hundreds of years up until the destructionof the town. I recall how difficult it was to get home during the fair days, because the streets of theentire town were blocked up with wagons and carts right up to the doors of the houses, beginningeven up to three days before the fair opened. What could you not find at the fair? It was as if all ofPoland had created, grown and open^ up in spirit and in substance — everything centered andfocused on the fair. Yes, I remember the acrobats, fire-eaters and magicians, each to his own kind,candy vendors and artists, etc.Here is the place to quote the work of the Zelva songwriter Mr. Lunsky, which he wrote during hisexile to Siberia, from his book of songs, "Across the Lithuanian River," published by Yachdav.ZELVAZelva, in her fairs is to be praised,Slonim in her sesame cakes.You will yet be praised, my rejected village.In my songs, as my name becomes knowruAnd because I endured and / sangAnd I felt an ache in my heart.They will raise a memorial to my name.In the garden of my beloved town.Let a dog go by and scratch with his paw,A pig •• befoul her with malicious intent.Lest an Army General stiffen with feelingAnd hiss through fus teeth- "ZhidrI cannot escape my feeling of "local patriotism" regarding our town, because even then, in my youth.22I knew that the town had been mentioned in the writings of Graetz and Dubnow as an important andcentral town in the lives of Polish Jewry; that its marketplace was well known, in which theesmommunication of the Hasidim by the Vilna Gaon was announced. Consequently, I wore my prideop>enly in front of my comrades in Volkovysk and Vilna, for having been a product of so historicallyimportant a town. Even then, as a youngster, I was driven by curiosity and interest in research todiscover who were the people interred in the very oldest of the graves in the town cemetery. Severalwere interred in decorated stone sepulchers, with trees planted around them. Even then, I knew ofthe hidden treasures in the repositories of the Great Synagogue, and I heard the stories of the spiritsand souls of the saints of the town, who would stand watch in the night hours over this very sameresplendent synagogue. I would inevitably succumb to fear and trembling every time I would hearthese stories from old and young alike. Today, when I hear lectures on the Jewish Kabbalah, and onreincarnation, these childhood experiences take on a special significance, in connection with all thesouls and spirits that circulated through the night in that self-same synagogue.Despite this, I never really considered why Zjelva specifically came to become the center for the fairsthat were held there. However, after giving the matter some thought, it occurs to me that it may haveto do with its geographic location: the railroad that went through the town, and the river, theZelvianka, that connected to the larger river, the Neman, on which lumber was transported to distantplaces. This river served as an important link to all parts of the Grodno Province, and consequentlyas a barrier and line of defense during times of war. Hie capture of the river by one of two warringfactions generally meant control of the surrounding territory, and consequently, many bloody battleswere fought in the vicinity, and Zelva was a lolling field” as it passed from one hand to another.This river had romantic secrets hidden in its banks, in addition to the men and beasts who fell deadin the comers of battle around it. On its banks, ardent young men demonstrated their amorous skills,as was demonstrated in the incident of the wife of the pious shochet, who gave herself to a youngswain on a Sabbath afternoon, planning to spend some time with him in the tall grass by theriverbanks, when th^ were caught in flagrante delicto, and became the cause c616bre of the town.It was in this river that I learned to swim. My father, of blessed memory, would take me on his backwhen I would go immerse myself in the water. It was on these riverbanks, next to the flour mill(which was powered in its day by water accumulated behind a dam) that had been destroyed in oneof the many battles to capture the river, next to the bridge that went over the river, that I and myfriends would while away the time, and even then, I dreamt the dream of the establishment of theState of Israel In this river, and in its clear waters, the Baptists would come to be baptized, andbefore th^ would perform this act of faith, we all, old and young, would come to watch the baptismalritualThe hospital was right next to the river. The odor of carbolic acid would constantly waft from thehospital and to this day, I can smell it as if it is still reaching my nose. People sufiering illnesses, suchas typhus, were brought to its doors. It was a strange feeling for us Jews to receive assistance firomthe hospital. A feeling as if we were "beyond the boundaries.” Nonetheless, the fact of its existencewas further evidence of the uniqueness of our village.I remember the strolls along the Haufgasse, and passing the saw miU of our town’s richest citizens,the Borodetzky brothers, and then approaching the apple orchards of the Poritz, BoshOov with thefeeling of participation in the preparatory labors of our pioneers, who were getting themselves readyfor the hard tofl in the future, if and when their emigration to the Homeland would materialize.23T .ike a moving picture, people from aU walks of life pass before my eyes, beginning with theprosperous manufacturers, the Borodetzky brothers, and ending with the tailors, and shoemakersoccupied in their work. I remember well, carpenters like Grunberg, of blessed memory, and buildersof wooden houses. Alter Goy, and his two sons, (who buQt the house I lived in until I moved toIsrael), the barber, in addition to the gentUe barber, who apart from his primary vocation, sold leechesfor meHif-inal purposes and for bloodletting; the bread bakers: Moti-Meir, the father of Pesha andHenia Peikowitz, and the bakery that was n^ to the house of Itcheh Yudelicheh’s; I can still tastehis zemel rolls in my mouth; The bagel bakers on Schneider Street, Fradel Rotni, the owner of thegeneral store right next to our house, from which we got not only our foodstu^, but also our schoolsupplies as well. Her husband, Aharon Rotni, made carbonated water and ice cream. Themanufacturing merchants, the Slutskys, and the famous Herr Manzheh, and the vigorous merchantsin the line of the small stores of the Volksdeutsche, Herr Schuchart, who added unique color andatmosphere to the diverse activities of our small town.Kreineh Freidin was the most famous of the folk healers in the town and surrounding villages, towhom myriads would flock. She utUized incantations, balls of dough from fresh bread, and bones. Shebrought relief and succor to all manner of swellings in various parts of the body, and would removethe curse of the "Evil Eye" with a glance. She would receive all manner of agricultural produce inpayment for these services, as well as eggs from gentiles, who would constantly flock to her, knockingon her door, which was right next door to the house I was bom in, and in which I lived until I leftfor the Land of Israel.As regards matters of health and healing arts, it is appropriate to recall the Feldsher Epstein. He wasthe doctor as well, and he was held in awe by all the townspeople, especially during the typhusepidemic, and I was then only a boy of four. I remember when he came to visit my grandmother,Michlah Gelman, of blessed memory, after she contracted typhus, and it was his diagnosis that shewould certainly die, and indeed, that is «ractly what happened after his visit.It is also appropriate to recall the gentile feldsher, who according to my natural impression to this day,appeared to be a good gentile who was dedicated to caring for the ill, and he cared for them withconviction; as is also recalled with favor, our pharmacist, Ethel die apthekerin, who also healed thesick, and was someone who helped the sick not less than the feldshers themselves. She continued todo this, until she emigrated to ^nada, along with the family of my grandfather, R’Avraham Gelman(son of Yosheh the Maggid, and four of my uncles and two of my aunts). After many happenings, andthe passage of many years, a son of my grandfather returned to us in Israel, and today. Dr. NahumGelman is a dentist (in Zelva, he too was a pharmacist, and an assistant to Ethel the pharmacist, andhe also emigrated to Canada). One of those uncles was the most popular Zionist lecturer in the town,and he really livened up the spirit of the occasion when the Hebrew University was established inJerusalem. He was a uniquely responsible individual in his day in the town. He also was arevolutionary, and an expert in personal powers, who left the precincts of the Bet Hanudrash. As ithappens, he was the only one in the town who studied the Talmud at night, as if it were day, and heeven slept in the Bet Hamidrash. He was able to set a direction based on his revolutionary ways, andobtained a position at the post office in Gamina (the town) where he worked, even on the Sabbath,which sharpened the efforts of Rabbi Nahum Moshe, the Dayan and other town notables to alter hiscompromises with the exigencies of earning a livelihood to escape both unemployment anddegeneration. Because of this initiative, this left an impression on me as a young boy. I was proudof my freethinking Zionist uncle whom I admired so very much.24In attempting to delineate a portrait of our town, I couldn’t compromise on the impact made by myuncle’s image in making so aggressive an impression as he did, whether it was necessary or option^as it was seen in those days by the majority of the town population.If we are indeed discussing matters of health, then it is appropriate to also recall the town bathhouse, which also contributed to the health of the Jewish citizenry of Zelva. There were those whoused the important services of this institution on Fridays, or towards the end of the week as theSabbath approached, and there were those who used it only on the eve of holidays. It was a uniqueexperience for me to go to the bath house with my father, of sainted memory, and to see theimportant Jewish men of the town nude, such as Reb Moshe Tschomber, who was 'Veil hung," andthose who would spray each other on the shoulders with boiling hot water, using whisks from the topsteps for a couple of seconds, because it wasn’t possible to stand it for more than a couple of seconds,and in order to catch one’s breath, it was necessary to immediately pour pails of cold water on them,and much steam would rise, to the point that it was not possible to see who was to be found in thechamber.I also recall stories of the times that the women would come to the Mikvah for puriGcation, in a sidesection of the bath house, and of incidents where there was contact between the sexes, and thesetales were undoubtedly embellished and these happenings became the subjects of stories and jokesin the town. I have the impression that this was a Jewish institution only, and that the gentilepopulation of the town did not make use of it at all. In this vein, I recall that from time to time, thisinstitution required repairs and improvements that ran into a lot of money, and for lack of financialresources, it was not possible to implement these repairs and improvements for many long months,and therefore there was a singular difficulty, that involved risk to life, if one wanted to use it duringthe winter season when there was snow and ice.Sports, athletics and playing soccer are also subjects that relate to maintaining good health. In mymemory, several soccer games come and arise between our town youth (who doesn’t rememberAbraham Perlmutter, who could kick a soccer ball to such great heights?) and the police force, thegentiles, or playing against a team from Dereczin. The soccer players were high in the affection ofour youngsters. Across the river and toward the meadows, a field was set aside for playing hockey,which was played by selected teams, and these games, the teams played on fields in the middle oftown, like the field across from the fire house, or the field opposite the "Gemina" which served asa market for the sale of horses during the fairs, before the horse market was transferred to a locationat the back of Volkovysk Street In this regard, I recollect a singular effect on my health, caused byplaying soccer. Instead of contributing to my health, these games caused me to develop anaccumulation of water in the pulmonary membranes, and for several, long months, I was in the careof Dr. Aaronson in Volkovysk, who succeeded in curing me without using the newer cures of the day,notwithstanding the severity of the cure, and its duration -as I said- many months, and here I was ayoung man, who was by myself in Volkovysk, and I went to the doctor as if I were a full grownpatient in all respects.In addition to soccer, we made use of the ladders in the fire house, and other equipment, althoughthis was primitive by our standards today, in order to exercise and improve our physical condition. Weused this equipment with the support of Mr. Schuchart, the Volksdeutsche, but the truth is, that I donot know how the youth of the town made use of the equipment However, I won’t compromise thetruth if I say that these young people also learned to play all the brass and woodwind instruments inthe firemen’s orchestra ensemble that had been established, and also worked to put on fire-fighting25demonstrations, especially after the town acquired a modem Gre engine.Advancing progress did not skip over our town either. In order to accommodate new Gre engines,and for the health of the populace, the wells of the town were ordered to be repaired, and a waterhydrant was installed opposite the Gre house. This was a festive occasion, the time when the groundwas broken and work begun for the Grst hydrant in town, after long weeks of drilling in the place.T r>nking back today, I really feel that if oil were stmck after an attended drilling operation of thissort, it would not have caus^ any greater joy than this drilling did to the townspeople, when the wellsucceeded in bringing up clean and tasty water, that they then brought to their houses in pails.Instead of using water that we would draw up in a pail Grom the weU that was adjacent to our house(and who doesn’t recall that well near our house?), instead of muddy, polluted water, in which withbare eyes you saw living insects swimming around, instead of the danger that confronted you in thewinter months, the time when the ice around the well practically covered the opening, and it wasnecessary from time to time to work hard to remove the layers of ice around the mouth of the well,because otherwise you risked possibly falling into the well itself^ we had the privilege of being ableto draw our water with the help of the hydrant, which in our eyes was truly one of the great wondersof the world.In recording impressions about our town, we cannot skip over the constabulary. The prefect of police,the policemen, and the jailhouse itself that was beneath the police station. These were establishedby the Polish regime, and it was at their behest that things were done. As to street cleanliness, whenthe prefect of police came to inspect the town, the populace was responsible for cleaning off theareas beside their homes, and to pull out all the grass growing between the cobblestones. This wasgenerally a festive occasion, in which all members of the household, and next door neighborsparticipated, and in the end, no prefect would even come. The jailhouse was in general empty, butGom time to time, particularly during the fairs, its population would consist of an occasional dmnkor so. Truly serious offenders were generally sent to the county jail in Volkovysk, which was thecounty seat for the area. However, it would occur that even one or another Jew from our town wouldend up in the Volkovysk prison, for bootlegging moonshine, or illegal money changing, as in the caseof the arrest of my father, of sainted memory, who was caught in possession of valuta^ or foreigncurren(7, but these were generally released immediately, at most after a few days. In general, therewas no Jewish crime in Zelva.An independent Jewish governance, derived G'om the consent of the heads of the community and itsdistinguished citizens, existed in Zelva as long as I can remember, and there is no doubt that thispattern of life had gone on for the hundreds of years in which a Jewish community existed there. Thegentiles of three denominations lived in a separate area, Grom which they nevertheless would sendtheir pigs to forage in the Jewish yards, but the Jews who drive them off with blows, and this causedGghts to break out between our young people and the gentile youth. A few Jewish families livedoutside the Jewish neighborhood, at the edge of the town and near its entranceways, as was the casewith my aunt’s famUy (my father’s sister) Hannah Sarah Bublecki, along with her husband, and theirchildren, Jejna (Jonah), Kattel (Yekatriel), and Chaya who were the Grst victims who were kiUed bythe Germans, after their gentile neighbors informed against them.The Grst driver, the Grst bus that ran between Zelva and Volkovysk, the Gist and only gas station inthe center of town, opposite the Geld in ffont of the Moiehr Bet Hamidrash, has left the impressionin my memory that our town also and begun to take its initial steps into the motorized andmechanical age. It is my impression that the town’s only locksmith, and bicycle sales and repairman26(whose name I forgot), was the first to travel to Volkovysk to learn how to drive a bus, and thatreturns us to those wonderful days of bicycle riding in the cobblestoned streets of the town, after welearned to bicycle ride, and the romantic days of ice skating on the ice, and of sleigh-riding on thesnow firom the top of the hill on which the Russian Orthodox Church stood, to the bottom near thewater hydrant and the Gemina building.Thus, in addition to the spiritual and cultural enjoyments and the various youth activities, were addedperiods where we could enjoy the many pleasures available in the tx^m of nature, and in thebeautiful environment of the town, in which nature is able to bestow pleasure and joy by the handful.It is important to research and place on the record the deeds of the townspeople firom the time ofthe Second y4/ry<i/i (if there weren’t already such people in the Fast Al^ahi) and their contributionsto developing the Homeland and the generations th^ brought forth to follow them. There is nodoubt that since the Zelver seed and root was vibrant and full of Jewish life and essence, so it mustbe true of their o^pring, trees, branches and firuit, whether in The Land or in the Diaspora. Abouta Zelver, one can say with certainty, that even if he is found in the Diaspora, only his physical beingis there temporarily, but indeed, his soul and spirit is bound to Our Land, and is found there.The things that have been written, and will be written by those that have come from Zelva, and willbe enshrined in a Memorial Bo(^ as an permanent testimony and eternal remembrance of this sacredcommunity and its Jews, will profoundly touch the hearts and souls of those who come firom thistown, and those that had a connection to its residents, even if they themselves are of differentgeographic origin, because we recognized that there was a special grace and magic to this little village.Then, The Abrogator iescexideA on Zelva, our town. Tractors and rollers razed its houses, its schools,its theater and its gardens. There are no Jews there any more, nor will there ever be Jews thereanymore, after the Nazi exterminators wiped them out, burned them, and uprooted every remnantof Jewish life that existed there. And so all the treasure and property that was accumulated forgenerations by the Jews of our town was lost, but woe betide those who can sustain such a loss andthen not remember.BLESSED BE THEIR MEMORY !Let us visit, work around, and care for the Trees of Zelva that were planted in the Forest of Martyrsin memory of our community. At ail time, let the memory of our dear ones stand before us as asymbol and a sign, that our people and nation will continue to live, to grow and prosper on ourfitful Holy Land, in Israel, our beloved and dear country.27Memories of HomeDora Geiger & Haya Meinerfrom the Stybnik FamilyMuch has already been written about our town of Zelva. We don’t remember a great deal, becausefrom the age of about 9 or 10, we went to Slonim, to attend the Kunitsa Jewish Gymnasium, in whichthe language of instruction was Polish.For holidays, and in the summer for two months, we would return home, to Zelva.We can remember the town, and part of its streets well, in addition to the neighborhoods that wereclose to us. Our mother’s family the Selman famUy, and across the street was our father’s family, theSrybniks. The real name of the famUy was Kahan or Kagan, since they were a family of Kohanim, butthe name was changed to Stybnik some generations before, on account of one of the sons beingdrafted into the army.Our famUy had been in Zelva for generations. The house in which we lived was an ancient building.Its walls were made of thick stone (about one meter thick). It had deep windows, and on its sills wereput several rows of brick flowerpots. Also, the interior of the house was full of flowerpots. Weremember a ficus tree that occupied a central spot in a room, and we, the children, were supposedto clean up the leaves that fell from it. It was our mother who loved the flowerpots, a pleasant, alertand effervescent woman, who looked after us five children, to assure our education and that wewould acquire insight and skills.There was a large oven in the house that was used to bake bagels. This was our grandfather Yosha’soccupation, the father of our father, of sainted memory. Afterwards, it was also used to bake Passovermatzoh for the townspeople for many years.Our famUy had many branches. A large part emigrated to the United States and to Argentina.Father, together with partners, was involved in the meat business, and from time to time also dealtin grain. His partners were leading cattle dealers distributing to Warsaw and Germany.We recaU, while being in Warsaw, we studied there after finishing our schooling in Slonim, that therewere merchants who received an undertaking from our father to provide us with funds to allow usto meet our needs, and on many occasions, we were invited to their homes during holidays, in orderthat we not feel lonely in the big city.After we graduated from school in Warsaw, Haya emigrated to the Holy Land in September 1933,and Dora in September 1935.We had another sister, Rivkah, who was already close to being saved. Haya’s brother-in-law made atrip to Poland in 1939 in order to bring her to the Holy Land, but when he reached Lvov, the warbroke out, and he could not reach 2^1va. He had no alternative but to return to the Holy Land asquickly as possible, taking two months with considerable tribulation, and by highly indirect means.Thus Rivkah was denied a means to elude the talons of the Nazis, and became a victim of theterrifying Holocaust along with the other members of the family there.28We recall a unique incident told to us by our parents.The ZcWa veterans who survived the First World War, made a pledge that they would all contributeto having a Torah scroll written, and would donate it to the Great Synagogue of Zelva. Our father,David Yosha Srybnik, Itchkeh (Laskeh’s) Freidin, Israel Shulyak, and several others, took uponthemselves the task of actually writing the Sefer Torah. The project took many years, seeing that itinvolved a considerable expense, but thanks to the stubborn dedication of the scribes, the work ofwriting the Torah scroll was completed, which was then splendidly covered and decorated with all theusual paraphernalia, and in a festive parade, underscored with accompaniment by an orchestra, andunder a suitable canopy, they all stepped along the full length of the main street of the town with theTorah to the Great Synagogue.This was a great celebration for everyone in town, especially for the volunteer scribes, and thesponsors who lived to see their pledges fulfilled and redeemed. Afterwards, a large and festive partywas put on. Our mother, Esther, {David Yosha’s) Srybnik, was the spirit behind itFor most of the Zelva townsfolk, whose lives were pretty routine, this scene was something trulyunforgettable, and served as a topic of conversation for quite a long time afterwards.Many other episodes took place in Z^lva, but have been forgotten with the passage of time. It is apity that we can recall so little at so late a time, when we can place on record our recollections ofour childhood years in Zelva, that with the passage of time pass on from our memories and areforgotten.An so. The Abmgator descended on this effervescent Zionist town, and on its residents, who live therefor so many generations.MAY THEIR MEMORY BE BLESSED!My Townby Joseph VishnitzkyAs we are moving further away fiom the period of the Holocaust with the passage of time, the impactof this terrifying tragedy overpowers me even more greatly, both on a personal and universal plane,and a terrible sense of guilt will follow me to my dying day, that I did not have enough sense, at thetime, to bring my family with me to the Holy LandIt is hard for me to get used to the idea that all the cities and towns that I knew so well no longerexist. From the dark swirls of time, images of my town and her populace form before me, who in theexigencies of the day, struggled with great ardor for each loaf of bread, yet without compromisingmore lofty goals such as education and culture. Despite the difficult economic conditions, there wasa rich cultural life, whose crowning glory was the Tarbut School, which would not be anembarrassment even when measured against any of the good schools in the Holy Land today.They lightened their drab existence by the value placed on pioneering initiatives, which imbued theyouth with a love of life and new hope.29One of the Ggures that floats around in my memories is of a talented Jewish man (I forget his name,but I think he was a watchmaker) 21alman? [Possibly Zalman Brash, as described by RivkabWasserman later in this book. JSB] He was the living spirit behind drama presentations andentertainment. He directed the plays and lead the choir.Believe me, every time I hear the singing of Shir HaMaalot, it seems to me, and I feel again, and italways seems to me, that our version that was sung in Zelva was the best of all the others that I havebeard to date.And if there should be those in generations to come who will want to research our passing, and toreturn to our roots, I would want the world to know, and not to forget, that proud and honest peoplelived in Zelva, who were raised and lived there, and who were annihilated, that were not a&aid ofthe gentiles who surrounded them, and when necessary, knew how to defend their honor.The Jews of Zelva donated a great deal to Zionist causes and to our international rejuvenation asa people.Here in Israel, you will not Gnd the emigrants from Zelva in the aisles of the Bourse, you will findthem among those who worked hard all their lives, and who did a great deal to build the Homeland.The Departure From Homeby Emanuel VishnitzkyIn 1935, my brother Joseph was already in the Holy Land for two years, and we were receiving lettersfirom him in which he indicated that he was working on getting me into the Holy Land with the helpof my uncle.My uncle had an orchard in Rehovoth, and each head of an orchard had permission to recruit laborfrom outside the country. In less than two months afterwards, we receiv^ a letter in which was aninvitation for me to come to the Holy Land. We were overwhelmed, and didn’t know quite how toreact, and I was at that time only 18, from a small town, having never set foot outside of itsboundaries, not even to neighboring Volkovysk, and here I have to travel to Warsaw, the capital ofPoland. In our home, there was great joy: the second son is going to the Land of Israel! I saw myfather, one of the strongest men in 2Lelva, crying at the side of the train, and I was crying along withhim, as if I were just a little boy. That was the first time in my life that I ever saw my father cry, andthis picture has remained engraved in my memory. To this day, I remember my little brother’s words,who was then a member of Hashomer HaTza ’in "the day is not long in coming when I too will come."However, to my everlasting sorrow, be, along with the remainder of my family, stayed behind inZelva. My mother, Shifra, didn’t know where to start: there was little time and much to do. I neededwarm underwear sewn for me (gadkes mit bendlach). In short, there wasn’t enough time to cry. Mymother traveled with me as far as Brestovich. Her whole family was there, and it was only when wegot there that she first began to cry from great joy. On the train there were many Polish students,who jeered at my mother with their chant: "out of here to Palestine!" My mother yelled back at them,crying as she said: "yes, he’s leaving • but to Israel." I went direct^ to my brother in the kibbutz ofHashomer HaTza ’ir, to freedom, today called Ramat-HaShofet30The members of the kibbutz, received me in absolutely outstanding fashion, despite the fact that theyknew I was a radical Betarist, and I could never forget this. I was a guest of the kibbutz for a month.After this, I went out to work along with everyone else. I ended up working in my uncle’s orchard,but then we feU on hard times that I didn’t know or dreamed could happen. The work wasoppressive. At night, when I returned from work, I used to fall on my bed from over-exhaustionwithout eating dinner. Despite all this, I sent letters home in which I indicated that everything wasGne with me, in order to keep my mother happy.After a while, I worked up enough courage to leave the job in my uncle’s orchard, not realizing thaton the outside, hard times were waiting for me, and it was then that I joined the Haganah, and fromthere - to the British Army.In 1947, I met my future wife, who was bom in Tzisov, and was a partisan during the Holocaustperiod. As of today, we have three children: Deborah, Shafrirah, and Eli.Our son, Eli, was seriously wounded in the Yom Kippur War. He was a commander at the SuezCanal, and was captured by the Egyptians. Today, thank God, he is healthy and well. Today I amretired, and a grandfather to lovely grandchildren, like all of our Sabras.Memories of My Townby Dvoshka Bar-Nir (Ravitz)In 19341 left home for school in order to get ready to go to the Holy Land. I saw what was coming.It is good that I wasn’t late for the train.My sister, Rivkah, went to the Holy Land two years before I did. My cousin, Hadassah, reached theHoly Land in 1946, after she survived seven levels of Hell.My mother said: "children, begin your preparations, and make aUyah, and perhaps we too will be ableto reach you afterwards." It was as if a premonition of evil had possessed her, notwithstanding thefact that our economic circumstances were still tolerable, because we had been farmers in Zelva formany generations. My father tilled the soil using hired help. We didn’t lack for food, but man livesnot by bread alone. Hve years later, when I returned home from my schooling to get ready to leavefor the Holy Land, everything had changed. My parents had gotten old, and both of them were sick,and my father was very worried. He had no other means by which he could support the family. Mybrother, Moishel, was in the army. My sister. Pearl, helped with the house work, and studied at night'The atmosphere in the house was difficult The odor of smoke from the fires to come could alreadybe sensed in the air. People said that the war could not be stopped, and it would break outapparently, pretty shortly. In Germany, Hitler had risen to power, and his influence was recognizedin Poland as well. The bubbling anti-Semitism was fomented by the statutes of the regime. Theeconomic condition of the Jews of Zelva became more desperate day by day. The sources of incomefor storekeepers, merchants and working people were shut off. There was no peace or tranquility.Yet the youth of the town still pursued various lines of endeavor, and the life of the Tarbut [school]continued along its normal course. The children continued to learn, and parents struggled to earntheir sustenance, but you could feel the despair. But not even one of the young people conceived oftheir future as being in Zelva. To a one, they dreamed of the Land of Israel The large majority ofthe young people belonged to one or another of the Zionist organizations, whether HeHalutz, Poalei31Zio/i, HaShomer HaTza ’ir, or Betar. They all organized themselves and worked in order to makeatyah, to a better life than what they had in Zelva. I remember when I took leave from my parentsand all my famUy. My father was a good and honest man. In his dealings with other people, he alwayslooked for the good side of things. In my entire life, I only saw him cry once: at the side of the trainas I embarked on my journey to the Holy Land. My mother was ever the optimist. She was a bubblywoman, well known for being good-hearted, a volunteer to help in Zelva, a dedicated mother andgood homemaker. Our home was a warm place, where the door was open to anyone who wasdistressed or needy. My mother was always receiving guests with love and a smile. I recall, that peopleon our street would turn to her, asking that she write letters on their behalf to their relatives inAmerica, to request that they send clothing or money. She wrote these letters in a style and tone thatwas uniquely hers, and in a short time, they would always receive what th^ had asked for.The cherished likeness of my parents will go with me forever. I will never forget the last Sabbath thatI celebrated at home. Sabbath morning, my father returned from the synagogue, and we sat aroundthe table to eat our traditional warm meal, and in honor of my impending departure, my mother hadprepared all sorts of delicacies that I liked. We sat by the table and toasted each other vnthL’Chaim,as I sampled my mother’s delicacies, trying with all my might not to burst out into tears, lest I ruinthe festive atmosphere that suffused all comers of the house. I sensed the tension around me, andI looked for an opportunity to leave the table. I had a feeling that this was my last chance to see myfamily that I loved so much, and to sit in its midstI remember the first bus in Zelva. The route was from Slonim to Dereczin, and from Volkovysk toZelva. The bus used to arrive towards dusk. The whole town used to be as if on wheels, anxious tosee, as if they were mnning to put out a fire. The children especially used to mn after the driver,pleading with him to let them go into the "little house that ran on wheels," and in general, they sawin the driver a kindred spirit.I remember the fairs at Zelva which were renown throughout the area, especially the monthly fairthat took place on the third of the month. There was usually fair once a week on Thursday. Peoplewould ride aU night in horse carts in order to get there early in the morning with their merchandisein order to get one of the better selling spots. You couldn’t cross the street on those days from sheerovercrowding.The Haufgasse is etched into my mind, on which we strolled Saturday nights, after leaving theHeHalutz branch. I remember the train station, which was not far from our home, and the BershkerWald [the Bereshko Forest], the crisp clean air, that was suffused with the scent of pines. We cameto this forest nearly every Sabbath, taking with us food for the entire day, and whoever wanted adrink of cold milk, used to go to the establishment of Jacob Lantzevitzky, and drink there on suchoccasions. I also remember the Bereshkovsl^ family which lived in Bereshko. It was a very wellrespected family.I will never forget my family and my childhood years in Zelva, — not ever!!Brfore The Holocaustby Rivkah Wasserman (Ravitz)In our little town, Zelva, there was a church at the top of a high hill that stood like a fortress. Fromthe back side of the hill, we used to slide down on sle^ from the heights to the Slutsky home at the32bottom. The east side served as a mock battleOeld for the games of the youngsters on the Sabbath.Further down, there was a pasture that was used to grow wheat, that was sown in rows, and the wheatwas beautiful and romantic, and the place drew young couples for strolls, and lovely places to takesuch walks were not missing in Zelva. To the north, one could see a forest of pine trees, and at itsend was the town of Bereshko. In the spring and summer, this was a place where young people wouldcome to spend time, and in the sununertime, it was used as a sanatorium for curing the ill, especiallythose who suffered from tuberculosis. They would rent rooms from the gentiles who lived there, whoalso supplied them with such needs as milk, fruit, vegetables and the like.In times of economic crisis in Zelva, when heavy taxes were imposed, and the harvest was meager,the Jews and gentiles suffered alike, but those Jews who made their living by serving the gentilepopulation were especially hard hit. In the summer, the situation was generally a little easier, b^usethere was seasonal work to be bad. There was work in tobacco to be bad from the nobleman (Poritz)of the area, who used to hire women workers from the surrounding villages, and even Jewish womenhad an opportunity to work there. And in similar fashion, the two sawmills that were in Zelvaprovided seasonal work to the townspeople.After the First World War, when Poland was restored as a nation, the Jews were driven from theproperty that th^ had occupied. That is how Jews began to arrive in Zelva from the surroundingvillages. While they were rooted there, their cultural level and the level of Jewish education amongtheir children was somewhat deGcient. In town, th^ tried to survive by becoming innkeepers, afterarriving with little in the way of possessions, however, despite the best of intentions, their economiccircumstances were difficult, because in town it was hard to get permission to open up an inn, andthey couldn’t make a living from farming anymore:Towards the end of the 1930’s, an emigration to South America began, especially to Argentina, andalso to Canada. This was a period of growth in Argentina. The FIKA organization, established byBaron Hirsch, supported the Polish Jews farmers who wanted to emigrate in order to establish Jewishsettlements in the hinterlands of Argentina. Several of the young people in Zelva, who simply couldnot Gnd satisfactory outlets for themselves, and saw no future in their town, succeeded in emigratingto various countries.Most of the young people of Zelva came from worker families, and they established there a branchof the Poalei Zion, while the middle class children established Hashomer HaTza’ir, and HeHalutz. Allof these laid a foundation for socialistic Zionism. Despite the trying circumstances, they overcame allthe obstacles, working hard by day, and studying by night There were those who were very capableas leaders in scholarly matters, and they organized clubs, from which many gained signiGcantknowledge, because not all parents were capable of imparting enlightenment and knowledge to theirchildren. There were clubs for literature, economics, natural sciences, geography, and other subjects.This cultural work filled Zelva with substance, and the youth of the town took a great interest in itAnd Zelva youth served as a role model to others, and the name, "Zelva Chapter," preceded us inthe HeHalutz and Poalei Zion organizations of our area. In 1924 we already had a following ofHashomer HaTza’ir, and I remember the ffrst halutzim who made aliyah to the Holy Land. Theconditions in the Holy Land at the time were very trying, and the pioneers from 2Lelva and otherplaces fought for their survival, and were ground down because of grueling work, suffering fromhunger, and attacks of yellow fever, yet only about one percent returned to Zelva, and among thosewere the two sisters, Hannah and Malka Lifshitz.33In Zelva, we succeeded to organize the workers, and we obtained permission to form a worker’sunion- We established that all the trades would be organized by the Zelva workers union. Allemployers knew that the Jewish workers did not work more than 8 hours a day. Even the Poritz, whocontrolled most of the summer jobs in the area, knew this, and took it into account.I remember the first of May in Zelva, and the times we marched in the streets with slogans, singingsongs, and dressed in uniforms. There were times when we did not obtain permits to celebrate MayDay in this way, because informers would give prejudicial information to the police about us. Therenever seemed a lack of people willing to inform on us this way in Zelva, nevertheless, most of thetime we got our permit. Even if we wanted to organize a meeting, if someone came &om a centralofGce, we were forced to apply for permission. Eveiy young man and woman, without exception,belonged to one or another of the youth organizations in town. It was the cultural pursuits thatoccupied the position of greatest respect. At the beginning of the week, a schedule was drawn up,and every evening there was some activity dedicated to the interests of that chapter of the youthgroup. Every Saturday night, we used to organize a literary debate. The debaters were selected fromthe members of the chapter, and even from other chapters. Pro and con sides were selected, andthat’s how public debates were organized, which were of great interest to many participants. Thosewho participated learned public speaking, and a channel was opened to them for reading andindependent thought Among the books that I remember being debated were. Crime and Punishment,Buntzia Sahok, and The Trial, by Kafka.Every Jewish household always had a daily newspaper. My parents used to read Dem Heint, and I alsoread the weekly Freiheit, and the monthly Befreiung. There was also a chapter newspaper called DosVort.Zelva also had two drama studios: one was the Poalei Tzion studio, and the second belonged to themembership of the Tarbut school. The members were middle class.The head of the Poalei Toon drama group was Zalman Brash, who also was the director and theleading actor. He was a man of exceptional energy and capability. He would also do all thedecorations and makeup. The actors were often members of the chapter as well. If the show was asuccess, they would take the production to sunounding towns, and the proceeds were used to acquirebooks for the library. They used to buy the better quality books in order to really be able to learn&om them. The second company used to donate its profits to the town library. I remember the namesof several of the players, such as Taibel Kaplan, Bashka Kaplinsky and her husband, EstherMoorstein, and Leitza Vishnievsky. From time to time, teachers from the school would also perform.I was particularly impressed by Bashka Kaplinsl^’s performance in Mireleh Ephrat, and herperformance, which was truly outstanding, was talked about for a long time in Zelva. ’Travelling dramatroupes used to come to Zelva, and we were fortunate to see companies from the Ukraine, Romania,and even Ida Kaminska and her company reached us. The drama hall in Z^lva was a long woodenshed whose second half served as the Grehouse. Evening entertainment was organized in this hall,as in the case of Purim, and for those occasions, the walls were decorated so that the bare beamswould not be visible. This humble shed was transformed into a cultural center for all the townspeople,because when a play was put on, even the adults came to see it.We, the young people, were occupied with collecting donations. In pairs, with boxes in our hands,we would pass through the town, soliciting the townspeople for donations to Keren Kayemet, Keren34HaYesod, Rabbi Afeir Baal-HaNess, etc. We also participated in the sending of gifts {Shalach Manoss)on the Purim holiday.We had a orchestra with all brass and woodwinds, and violins and mandolins. The orchestraperformed at all town events, such as weddings, and Hanukkah and Purim celebrations, during whichtime a Beauty Queen for the town was also selected. This entertainment was organized at the Tarbutschool, and if a large crowd was expected, it was scheduled for the firehouse building. Even the Polishintelligentsia used to come to these events. Most of the teachers at the Tarbut school were nativesof Zelva, and only a small percentage were brought in from the outside. Rachel Kaplan was the firstkindergarten teacher in Zelva. For the kindergarten, a large room was set aside in the Tarbut school.The kindergarten operated for a year or two, but was closed for lack of sufficient children.As for my family, my grandfather was a landowner with a lot of property. He willed a substantial partof this to my father, and yet enough land remained for the rest of his children. The origin of theseholdings goes back to the time of Czar Alexander n, who apportioned lands for use by the Jews. Thesovereignty was in the hands of nobility, and the Jews had to pay them very heavy taxes.When the income from these lands deteriorated seriously, my father sold most of the land off, butretained a plot for growing vegetables. Even during the time when my father would work the landin the summer, he would engage in commerce during the winter season. He had a partner, and mymother also helped out. He had a Grade A commercial permit, and we were well off. For many years,we had two non-Jewish servants: a shaygetz [non-Jew], who helped my father with the farming, andwas practically the house steward, and a shiksa [non-Jewess], who helped my mother with the houseworlL However, when the government changed, and times changed as well, the amount of money wehad dwindled. My father was forced to sell off his remaining land, but he still engaged in business tosome orientThe older daughter, Dvoshka and myself, went to off to school. The younger ones, my sister Pereleh,and my brother Moshe, stayed home with my parents. After six years, when we returned from schoolin order to get ready to make aUyah, there wasn’t so much as a penny left in the house. My parentshad gotten old, their health was not too good, and it was very difficult to find ways to make a living.The essential question was how to find the money that was needed for me to make al^ah and leave.That was when my father decided to travel to a town and take a loan from a gentile he knew there.They praised him, and honored him there very much, and he earned their trust. They even jested withhim when they said: "Pesach, what kind of a Jew are you that you don’t even know how to bedevious!" And that’s the way it was: the gentile brought the needed funds , conveying his desire tobe rid of the daughter of Pesach and Tzeitel. At Saturday noon, he brought the promised money, wedrank a L’Chaim, and we parted very good fiiends. And in the same manner, the aliyah of my sisterDvoshka was also arranged, literally at the last minute, at the time the Germans invaded Danzig.The question can be asked, as to where did my parents get the money to repay their loans to thegentiles.During the good times, my father was in the habit of buying valuable goods, such as wagon parts,farming tools, and also gold, and he would hide them in the eaves under the roof. When they becamepressed for funds, they would take some of these items and sell them. Thanks to my parents, wholived frugally, my sister and I were saved, and though my brother Moshe was denied this escape, since35he was past draft age, after the Russians invaded our area, he was drafted immediately. After that,my parents never saw him and he vanished without a trace.My little sister Pereleh did not want to leave our aged and firail parents alone. The Russians affordedher every opportunity to work and stucfy, and thereby Pereleh worked extremely hard to assuresustenance for our parents and herself, and she also studied at night. I received letters from mymother facilitated by the Red Cross. From those letters I learned that firom the time the Russianscame to Zelva, Jewish refugees streamed into 21elva from central Poland and from all the placesinvaded by the Nazis. They put up tents for them to live in, and when th^ ran out of tents, they sleptout under the sky. Slowly but surely, life began to return to normal. The younger generation unit^with the refugees, and they lived the present as best they could, without thought for what tomorrowmay bring.In the last letter that I received from my mother, she told us that my sister Pereleh was getting readyto be married. After that, the line to our remaining dear ones in ^Iva was cut, because Hitler hadinvaded our area, and they were destroyed in the Holocaust among the other Six Million.May Their Memcny Be Blessed!The Competition to Open the Ark for NeHlahby Chaim Slutsl^[I write this] in memory of my town, Zelva, and in memory of the beloved members of my family whowere annihilated during the Second World War by Hitler and his supporters who fell upon us:In memory of my sainted mother, Sarah, of the family of Hasia and David Rubinstein, and my fatherof blessed memory, Yitzhak, from the family of Rachel and Moshe Slutsky, my sister Rashka andbrother-in-law, Abraham Bereshkovsl^, my brother Gedalia, who, in his time, served in the Polisharmy and was killed in the fighting against the Germans, and similarly other uncles and aunts andtheir entire families. May their memory be a blessing!My town Zelva, in which I was raised and where I lived untQ 1935, until I made aliyah to the HolyLand, remains in my memory as a Zionist town, in which most of the [Jewish] residents were Zionists,who donated to Keren Kayemet and Keren HaYesod for many years, and only a small percentage ofthem were privileged ultimately to make aliyah to the land of Israel.Zelva was surrounded by Gelds, forests, and had the Zelvianka River, along with beautiful scenery.The inhabitants of the town mostly made their living from manual trades: tailors, smiths, shoemakers,carpenters, wagon drivers, and fanners who grew vegetables, fruits and grain. There were alsostorekeepers, merchants, innkeepers, and they had a variety of occupations. They were allstraightforward, honest people, who worked hard to make a living.I am reminded of the period before the holidays. The shoemakers and tailors would work far into thenight, and even arose at an early hour, continuing their work by candlelight in order to earn theirbread, and they made do with lifted hours of sleep and rest36We were raised and educated during our initial years in the Heder of the Rebbe. After that, we wentto the Tarbut school from the Heder. After graduation from the Tarbut school, those students whohad the means went to study in other cities, and a part of us continued to study in small groups withthe teachers in town, in an informal manner, because Zelva did not have a high school.The S3magogues were in the center of the town, and the cemetery was not far from there.My father, of blessed memory, worshipped at the Great Synagogue, called the Schule, whichcontained a large and marvelous Ark that was decorated with a variety of animals and birds, eachaccording to its own species, an outstanding work of art, literally a wonder. On the Sabbath, mybrother and I would go to worship along with my father.The custom of the synagogue is engraved into my mind: those called to the Torah on holidays usedto make a donation as requested of thenL In particular, I recall that in order to obtain the arkopening for the Ne’Uah prayer on Yom Kippur, this honor was sold to the highest bidder. My father,of blessed memory, would buy the honor of opening the ark for Ne’ilah year in and year out Afterthe other worshippers realized that my father really wanted the honor of the ark opening very much,they would compete against him, and there were times when the final price got to be a verysubstantial sum of money, but, to the best of my memory, I do not recall any instance where myfather relented and let the honor go.The Z«lva youth was educated in the Tarbut school with a Zionist spirit, and after joining suchorganizations as HeHalutz, and HaShomer HaTza’ir, they came to recognize that there was no futurefor the Jewish people in the Diaspora, and sought means of exit in all sorts of places in Poland.There were those, who after many years, managed to get to the Holy Land, and bemuse of this theywere saved and remained among the living.And thus, our little town of Zelva was erased, and not even a memory remains of it. Let my wordsbe recorded in the Memorial Book for all eternity, in memory of all our loved ones who are nolonger with us.37Lc^B*Omerby Aharon FreidinThe memories, ocperiences and adventures [of our townsfolk] have been extensively retold, however,in thinking about the townsfolk who were dear to me, and who had a part in contributing to thematerial in this Memorial Book, as I have, I will content myself with a short description of thecelebration of Lag B’Omer as it took place in Zelva each year.Most of the youngsters studies in Hebrew schools, and when they reached the age of 8 or 9, theyjoined such youth groups as HaShomer HaTza’ir and Betar.The joy in our hearts enveloped all of us, and we were privileged to celebrate the holiday as it wasintended, in the bosom of nature, in the forest Every aspect was celebrated in the forestDressed in uniforms, we stepped through the grass together. Many of us had short shovels, that weused to dig long narrow furrows in order to set up food tables. In the center, Ores were lit that wereused for cooking.The candy stores brought their wares out to the forest, and there they set up selling booths, &omwhich were sold a variety of sweets, ice cream, cold drinks, etc.It was an unforgettable and emotional experience of being together, and to pass by the tables thatwe had set up with our own hands. Our communal feast (a Kumzitz), to listen to the lectures of ourleaders, officials and guests who came from many different places in order to spread and implant inus the precepts of Zionism and its goals and objectives. It was from them that we received news ofwhat was taldng place in the movement in the rest of Poland, and other parts of the Diaspora, andalso what was happening in the Land of Israel.During the day, several sports activities were organized, soccer, badminton and handball.With the onset of evening, we prepared to return home, a walk of several kilometers. We were asclean and as orderly as when we started early that morning. We fell in front of our group leaders andofficers in rows, and we went out across the grass following our standards, with lanterns glowing inour hands, with a song on our lips from the Holy Land and the movementWhen we reached the outskirts of our town, the Gre department band waited there for us, which wasall Jewish except for Schuchart, the gentile German, [sic Volksdeutsche] who lived in the middle oftown with his family. Here we met up with the members oiHaShomer HaTza’ir, who had crossed theGeld under their standard, with their lanterns, and to the music of the band, we paraded the lengthand breadth of the streets to the joy of its citizenry, our parents and families.This was the crowning Gnale of our celebration that I will never forget.38MyI4feby Yerachmiel MoorsteinAt the beginning of the twentieth century, during the period of my childhood, Jews lived in signiQcantnumbers and made their living in the towns and environs around the city of Zelva. I was bom at theedge of the Medukhova Forest, which was widespread, in a village home that was sunk into the earthon one side up to the windows, which was probably occupied for many generations before me. Oneof the wings, was occupied by my grandfather, Zvi Moorstein who was still alive, and bom in 1850,along with my grandmother, Batia. From his lips, I heard many stories about his grandfather from thedays of Napoleon We were the only Jewish family in a village of about fifty in the area, most of whom were of theRussian Orthodox faith, and the rest Polish Catholic. They were certainly not distinguished by theiraffection for Jews, but conducted themselves with dignity towards us, because all our menfolk werehealthy, vigorous and strong. My uncle, Abraham, even was awarded a pocket watch from CzarNicholas [II] as a prize for being a cavalry officer when he served in the army in the artillery. Inaddition to this, my mother was recognized as a "practical nurse," and would attend to sick people inher spare time. She could apply cups [bahnkess] skillfully, and in her bag, she had all manner of pillsand medications... the farmers used to come to the house to solicit advice and direction from mymother, even with help in corresponding with the government. The connections with these self-samefarmers existed for generations, and even in bad times, the lives of the Jews were protected.Everyone spoke the local language - Byelorussian (White Russian). It was natural wherever possible,that we, the children, tried to speak their language, and to play with the village children, but not allof them, and not always, did they permit this, and the central reason was - we belonged to the peoplethat had crucified Jesus...In the First World War, the farmers hid their cattle in a corral in the forest out of fear that thesoldiers would confiscate them. There were Jews who objected to taking our cattle into their corral,and because of this, we built a separate corral entirely. Large numbers of hungry soldiers passedthrough the area, who foraged for any sustenance they could find, and one day they came upon thetracks of the cattle, and emptied out the gentiles’ corral, but they did not touch the Jewish corral.The gentile elders took this as a sign of divine retribution...When the Russian army began to retreat, with the Germans at their heels, pandemonium broke out,and the farmers fled into the heart of Russia, and only stragglers remained behind.The nearest Jewish family lived in a village that was about three kilometers distant from us. On[Jewish] holidays, other "neighbors" like us would go to this town, understandably on foot, in orderto fulfill the obligation for community worship. I was very lucky to make part of this trip riding onmy father’s shoulders, and to meet with other Jewish children like me who spoke Yiddish. This wasa very moving experience for all of us. I still remember one of them, Ezekiel Kaplan was his name,who emigrat^ with his parents to Argentina, and after several years had gone by, he wrote to methat he had become involved with newspaper publishing.I can still hear the bright and soulful chanting of my grandfather who lead the prayers, which pluckedat the heartstrings of these isolated Jewish people, who lived in the midst of this gentile populace,in an era as turbulent as the creation itself, in the midst of a brutal war that consumed victims without39number.My father, Isaac Jacob (Yitzhak Yaakov) Moorstein, like his forbears, made a living from lumber. Hewas expert in recognizing all different kinds of trees, and those not fit to be sold for export, he wouldkeep to build houses for the farmers, and he divided up his trade among the Jewish merchants whoused to visit our home, and even spend the night with us. When they were in our area, I came toappreciate that we were not isolat^, and that there were other Jews in Russia, and in other landsas well. How I would yearn to speak with these Jews to see and learn how they lived!My mother was the daughter of Rabbi Leib Ber Vand, who was the author of about fifteen booksof scholarship and tradition, and lived in Piesk, about forty kilometers from our village. She was agenuine helpmeet She fulfilled her role as the woman of the house, the educator of her children,whom she bore every other year, with great skill and dedication. She raised us in a comprehensiveJewish spirit, and assured the fulfillment of the commandments of the Torah, and during the longwinter evenings, we would sit around her and listen intently to heartfelt telling of stories about theJews and to beautiful songs that she knew to sing in her sweet and pleasant voice.My parents kindled in me the desire to learn. When I finally reached the tender age to start Hederwith the Melamed Shlomo, I already knew how to read, and even to say my prayers. Together withmy sisters, Yaffa, Zipporah and Esther, we lived with a family of our relatives in 2^1va which wasabout seven kilometers from us. I was very lonesome for our home. On Sabbath Eve, right afterschool, we would set out on the dusty road to home, and after a couple of hours, we reached ourwarm little nest, tired, but I had found my lost treasure...The term of study of the Heder was counted between the High Holidays to Passover, and was calledthe Period [literally: the Time]. World War I broke out during my very first school Period, and lifewas derailed The orderly learning in the Heder, where I excelled in writing and reading, came to ahalt, and I returned home to the village.This war, which during four years claimed 20 million victims, and visited us with destruction andsuffering, and brought us horrible brutality, also brought soldiers to our home, among them Jews, whoserved in the Russian army, and after the German occupation, their soldiers, who served in theGerman and Austrian armies. We even had a Jew from the Turkish army, Turkey being a memberof the alliance... together with these came hordes of refugees, who were uprooted and left homeless.All of these found warmth and aid from us to the extent we could offer it, seeing as we also sufferedfrom great want at the time. There were educated people among these, who gave of themselves andhelped advance us with our education. This channel brought us books, which I read with great speed.In particular, the hook Avahat Tzion, by Avraham Mapu made an impression on me, and its heroes,Amnon and Tamar... in Zion, the land of our forefathers! Among the refugees was a relative, LeibLansky, who was brilliant, and he taught me Torah in generous measure. In normal times, he was ateacher at the Jewish Gymnasium in Volkovysk.The Russians retreated, and the Germans reached their rear echelons in Russian territory. In Zelva,one of the refugees was an ardent promoter of Hebrew language, and opened a public school afterobtaining his citizenship. Only six children were enrolled, and I was one of them. The teacher, whowas an idealist, sunk a great deal of effort into us, and succeeded in inculcating the Hebrew languageinto us, and even got us ahead in our studies. Sadly, he left us after only one Period. The parents ofthe students, most of them poor, and blessed with many children, could not provide him with40adequate sustenance.The Germans concerned themselves with implanting the German language, and had brought fromtheir country, two Jewish women teachers, and in this manner, they also enlisted as a teacher, theyoung Dr. Jacob Sedletzky, a native of the area, and the only specialist Students were enrolled, andfor the Grst time, even girls were enrolled, and the school was opened, but not for long. The Germansbegan to falter. The cold in the Russian heartland, and the irregularity of supplies put pressure ontheir center. Poles began to organize brigades that planned to take control that was sUpping from thehands of the Germans, and again chaos reigned. Partisans organized themselves into brigades, andthey would attack and plunder what little was leftMy father, of blessed memory, was one of the many millions of victims claimed during those fouryears of war. My mother was left a widow with Gve children, the oldest of which was a thirteen year-old girl, without any sources of livelihood or sustenance. The isolation and fear of remaining in thevillage among the gentUes impelled us to uproot ourselves and leave, after hundreds of years, andcertainly forever, the bouse that I lived in until I reached Bar Mitzvah age. No more to have thesurroundings of nature, the green fields bounded by the wide forest, enveloped in mystery whichstirred both curiosity and thought., there is a heart tug and an longing, even after seventy years ofmy life... we moved to the nearby town, Zelva, which was an administrative hub that had a populationof about two thousand, among which there were several hundred Christians. We lived in a small, lowhouse on a narrow street, full of mud during winter season, and in the summer - clouds of dust fromthe passing of cattle herds to and from the meadow... but at least we were living amongst Jews! TheJews here conducted a full community life. In the Schule Haufwas the center of the synagogues, andI found much substance and interest there. In the Bet Hamidrash of the synagogues, two prayerminyans were conducted each morning. Between Mincha and Maariv, we also heard a lesson inMishna from one of the scholars. I would attend worship with regularity, and resolved not to miss anyprayers. I was observant of all commandments whether they be light or onerous. I found friends herethat matched my temperament, and no longer felt isolated, yet still, I was an orphan... there is no oneto watch over you, no one to be concerned about your welf^are, here you are leading a very insecureradstence... my mother wanted to see a change in me to become the man of the house, and on thenight of the S^er, it was my role to act as head of the family. But the repast was meager, and dampwith tears, as I conducted the ritual as it says in the Haggadah, in accordance with tradition, but itenervated us. We struggled mightily not to have to accept the public charity available through MootHittiity and we prevailed. To my mother and dear sisters I was a symbol of hope, that someday in thefuture I would become famous!!! I genuinely wanted to help them already, but really, how?...In Zelvathere were three Heders for pupils, and there they learned Torah, reading, writing and arithmetic. Butwhat after that?And there were Yeshivah students who came from faraway places to study in the Bet Hamidrash, andalso local youths, who obtained learning from self-teaching with the use of books. I, and several otherpupils, used to get an "hour" from one of these young men, generally twice a week, in order toaccelerate our learning, but even the very meager cost of these lessons was a heavy burden for me...This was a very difficult period. The Jews, especially the merchants, became progressivelyimpoverished. Without a place to learn, and with no gainful employment, the youth of the townbecame idle. The outgrowth of this distressed situation was the establishment of branches oforganizations, mostly Zionist, but also the Bund and communists. There were young men who were41drawn to communist ideology, and gave their ideals substance by going over to the Soviet Union.Despite all the tribulations of the time, our home was a happy home, full of things to do. From ourhouse, one always could hear the sound of music, song and dancing. I learned to play the violin. Allmy sisters had beautiful voices. Faigel was a beautiful girl, and she helped my mother with thehousework. Esther was a seamstress, a soulful singer, dancer and actress. Batia was also a seamstress,and could express herself beautifully in Hebrew. Sarah completed the syllabus of study at the Tarbutschool, and studied further for sk years at the Tarbut in VUna, and graduated with excellence, afterwhich she became the principal of a school in Slonim.Feverishly, I threw myself into studies and Zionist organkations. I acquired knowledge &omindependent book study, and also learned bookkeeping, and continued to play the violin. The landof Israel • Palestine then appeared very distant indeed, but the yearning to reach and live thereimplanted in us an agenda for the future...Together with several companions, we created out of nothing - a library, and in the library we bada catalogue of thousands of volumes. We organized the books in which were laid the foundations forthe Tarbut Hebrew School. The school was not established in time for my sister Zipporah and I totake advantage of it, but the rest of my sisters were educated there.And so, I grew up, I worked in a sawmill in Slonim for three years, and after that in Pinsk for fouryears as the director of a Jewish agricultural cooperative founded by the J.K.A. and ORT, and I evenparticipated as a representative of my country to Warsaw under the authority of Singlovisk in 1933.In the Pinsk [Memorial] Book, volume n p. 576, some of my writing can be found about thecooperative.After a year, I married Hannah Dolinko. Her parents perished in the Holocaust Their daughter Liza,may she rest in peace, passed away in the Holy Land. Her sons, Shalom and Daniel, and herdaughter, Bruriah, live in our land. The rest of this family emigrated, among them the Meltzer family,and they live in the United States. They are committed Zionists, and make substantial contributionsto finance all manner of needs in our land.We went to the Holy Land in 1935. We reached the port of Jaffa in Palestine-Israel at sunset, andwere welcomed in Hebrew, and I felt that I had Gnally reached the homeland that I longed for, andthere was no one more fortunate than I!!!The British still ruled the land, and the Arabs were beginning to organize themselves to oppc^ ourimmigration. Bloody clashes broke out, and the Arabs used their arms to attack Jewish settlements,and the British constabulary didn’t restrain them, but the Haganah stood in the breach and gave backa good account of itself. We had dead and wounded, among them myself. I was taken to theHadassah Hospital, where I was kept for about two months, but I left there healthy and in one piece.From that time on, I participated in different capacities in the many wars of Israel. Even to this day,I am active in the central committee of the Haganah veterans in the Dan branch.As a Zionist from early childhood, I am fortunate in having done my part in the realization of Zionistgoals, and in the establishment of the Land of Israel firom the time of my arrival, even before myJubUee year which draws near. I discharged all my obligations to my beloved homeland under difficult42circumstances, several times at great risk to life and limb, and here I am, exultant and proud at havingattained this !!! The etemitv of Israel is no lie !!!•In the Encycky)edia of the Pioneers of the Settlements and its Builders, by David Tadhar, in volumeXIX, page 5674, there is a summary of my work.I brought a blessed family into the world. After our arrival, we had a daughter, Nitzah. Two yearslater - Aviah. When the terrifying news reached us that our loved ones were annihilated anddestroyed by the Nazis and their accomplices, and that no trace remained of the families that wererelated to us in Zelva, and that only I and Hannah, and my sister Batia remained who could preserve,carry on and fill out the family to help populate the nation, the responsible reply was:We had a son, Jacob, and after him a daughter, DoritNitzah and [her husband] Emest-Raphael are both outstanding physicians, and they have a daughterRuth and two sons, Yair and Joab.Aviah has a daughter named Ephrat.Jacob and Nitzah have a son named Itai, and a daughter named Adinah.Dorit and Ilan have the daughters, Inbal and Reut, and a son, Ohad.My sister, who is the widow of Meir Feinstein, who was killed on the Jenisalem road in 1948, has adaughter, Shafirirah, and with her husband, Yitzhak Fuchs, has two daughters, Liat and Shiri. Thechildren of my sister’s late daughter Sarah, of blessed memory, are Orit, Michal and Paz. Their fatheris David Hirschman.I am one of the last ones, who lived during the period of the Holocaust, a witness to the uprootingand annihilation of all the beloved preople of the community of 2^1va, and among them, my mother,Shifra, my sister Sarah Moorstein, my sister Feigel and her husband Moshe Gerber, their son, Yitzhakand their daughter Jaffa, my sister &ther, her husband Joseph Freidin, their son Yitzhak and theirdaughter Atarah, my aunt Freidel and Leib Bereshkovsly, their son, Shmuel Zlalman and his wife Lizafi'om the Gelman family, and their three children, Jacob and his wife Resha and their three children,Yitzhak and his wife Rachel from the Becker family and their three children, Abraham and his wifeRasha of the Slutsky family, Lieber, Moshe and Zevulun, and also the daughter, Sarah, married toLeib Vishnivitzky and their four children. My aunt Leah and her husband Zvi Selman and theirchildren: Zalman, Yitzhak, Benjamin, Leib and Batia.Joseph ben David and Bashka Moorstein (their children live with us in Israel - Sarah and Nurit,Joseph and Dorit), their son David, and their daughters, Havivah and Esther, and also our relativesin related branches of the family. All were vigorous, intelligent people, and an asset to their people.I am discharging some form of universal obligation by having their names permanently inscribed inthis Memorial Book, along with the brutal events that cut them off from us, so that succeedinggenerations will remember them and will never forget, and will continue with the preservation andstrengthening of our people and nationhood!!!My uncle, Eliezer Moorstein, was active in the revolt against the Czar in 1905. He was released fromprison, an act facilitated by a bribe provided by my father Jacob, and whisked out of the country tothe United States. He was followed, after a few years, by his brother Chaim, and after him, Abraham,after having served in the Czar’s army, which earned him the watch as a prize for his distinguishedrole as a cavalry officer in the artUlery. They reached the well-endowed land of freedom, America,43and they were a mainstay to their aging father and to the remainder of their family during World WarI with their support, sending necessities (and who didn’t?...), packages and dollars at a time wheneven they didn’t have very much...I also am obligated to record the efforts exerted by Zclva natives whose commitment to the Jewishpeople manifested itself in all sorts of ways. In the August 1971 edition ot Ma’arachot, the publicationof a book, entitled. The Pledge" (Ha-Ne’Emanim) was publicized, in English and in Hebrewtranslation, and it was dedicated to my uncle, Eliezer. The book was written by the author LeonardSalter, my nephew, and according to the table of contents, it contains a unique chapter that only atthe last brought to light an important fact; the activity of in the United States regarding the [Israeli]War of Independence and its conduct.This may have been the first time since the Bar Kochba rebellion that the Jewish people were calledupon to help their brethren not only with philanthropy, but with the provision of armaments: rifles,cannon, boats and planes.The Jews of America were unfazed by either danger or difficulty when it came to helping Israel inits momentous hour of need, and it was a "finest hour" for many of them as well.During the War of Independence, when we were in dire need of arms beside Sten guns and theDavidka, my uncle Eliezer, this outstanding Jew, endangered himself personally, in addition to thesubstantial funds he provided, and provided us with very valuable resources. The leaders of theHaganah, among them Golda Meir and Yigal Allon, used to come to his home, which served as acritical staging point for shipment from his warehouses in the port of San Diego in California.My uncle Eliezer’s children are:A daughter, Beattie and her husband Leonard Salter, both writers.Their daughters Lucy and Amy.A son, Richard, may he rest in peace, who was an economist and a presidential advisor in the UnitedStates, and a granddaughter, Karen.My uncle Chaim’s children are:A daughter, Frances, and her husband, David Zwanziger, their daughter. Eve.A son, Daniel, a physicist, who spent a year at the Weizmann Institute.A daughter, Rena, and her husband, Sy Goldsmith, their son Gary, a physician.My uncle Abraham’s children are;Benjamin, a psychiatrist, his sons in academia: Bruce, Mark and Ronnie.Harry is an accountant, his wife is Sylvia, their children, Deborah and Barton.Here, therefore are these good Jewish people, who were compelled to flee the land where theirfathers and forefathers lived for many generations before them, who left and regrouped themselvesin America, a land that took them in, and gave them the opportunity to develop themselves in manyfields of endeavor. This took place before Our Land was in any condition to attract them. They were44a mainstay to the Jews who stayed behind in Europe, the inheritors of suffering after the Wars. Theirhelp manifested itself in many different ways. I can still remember the communal kitchens that wereopened in 1917 that infused life into otherwise dried out bones...As of today, their children continue their posture, with all respect, to be committed with all theirmeans in supporting and strengthening the development of our country!!!Zdva, My Villageby Joseph Slutsky, Melbourne, Australia(Original translation fromYiddish to Hebrew by Y. Moorstein)This was my village, full of life, in which I spent my youth, and now it no longer exists. Zelva waswell-known in the entire area, and it stood out for its love of Israel and yearnings for messianicredemption. It bubbled with vitality, and was full of romantic beauty, having on one side theZehdanka river, in whose cool waters we would bathe in the summertime, and on whose ice we wouldskate in the winter, and on the Sabbath and festivals, couples and the rest of the townsfolk wouldstroll along the Haufgasse.Zelva did not produce academically trained people because of the economic circumstances whichprevented the young people from continuing with studies and the acquisition of advanced learning,but this same youth excelled in self-learning, the proof of which - in Zelva there were two Hebrewschools: TarbiU, and Tachkemoni. Zelva youth read a great deal, and participated in all aspects ofJewish life.The village was Zionist There were organizations, branches, a drama club, there were debates heldon political and cultural subjects, in which the better speakers and lecturers from Warsaw and thearea would come and address filled halls.I was active in the Revisionist organization. I remember the visit of Dr. Lipman from the centralofGce in Warsaw. After his lecture, in the middle of my ride with him to the train station in thewagon of Vehreleh Tatkeh’s, he said to me that of all the towns and villages in the area, Zelva wastruly one of a kind. He then turned his attention to the remarks of the wagon driver who expressedthe following thought: "Everyone wants to elevate and improve mankind. It would be better if theyimproved the quality of these roads, so it would be easier for my horses to pull the wagon." Dr.T.Jpman said at that point that he would adopt the very practical notion of this otherwise simple,uneducated man.During the famous market fairs, pickpockets would come even from as far away as Warsaw. In 1939,about two months before the Great Deluge... I left the village, and I remember Hitler’s (may his namebe erased) historic speech on Czechoslovakia. I met up with Leib Spector, of blessed memory, whomI thought to be an intelligent Jewish man. He told me that in his opinion there would be no war, andif there was a war, that even Hitler couldn’t overpower three and a half million Jews. To our greatpain and sorrow, he was proved wrong.Only one Jew sounded an alarm: [Vladimir] Ze’ev Jabotinsky. To me, he continues to be a guiding45light even in ordinary matters of living.After the war, when it became clear that the Jews of Poland were exterminated, I tried to bringseveral families that remained in Russia to Australia: Spector, Hertz [Herzel] Borodetzl^, and AnkaBorodetzl^.WE BOW OUR HEADS IN MEMORY OF OUR MARTYRS !!!Eating "Days"by Yerachmiel Moorstein" And you will drink water sparingfy - and you will eat meager bread"The desire to learn and acquire knowledge gave no rest, but how was one to accomplish this? TheFirst World War is at its height, and the educational "institutions" of the town are continuing todispense learning, but at a sparing rate. Some heders for pupils are opening up, but they are just forthe Grst 2-3 years of instruction. In order to progress, it was necessary to travel to a place of learning.The county seat was about 20 kilometers away, and there was a Talmud Torah there, an educationalestablishment, in the absence of a Yeshivah, where learning was dispensed, and where the Talmudwas taught to students who showed ability to progress. My parents decided that this was the properplace for their only son.And that is how I reached the city of Volkovysk, in my eyes as one young and untried, sent to myrelatives, who lived in a stone house, whose walls were thick and sunk into the ground up to thewindows, and where drops of moisture dripped like sweat from the ceiling, and it is late in the fall,and the rain outside penetrates to the bone.The father of the house, a good-hearted Jewish man, was a whitewasher by occupation, and from thistime until Purim - he was idle. He tried to make me as comfortable as possible while I lived withthem, and he prepared some fresh straw for me on a bench and sofa, the only one not occupied inthe house, and over this they spread a large flaxen spread; a coverlet, thin from great use, whichserved as my blanket, and on top of that, my outer clothing, and under all of this, I didn’t fall asleepvery easily...The woman of the house, who was our family relative, the mother of five children, the oldest ofwhich was bar-mitzvah age, tried to help me, but with what?This family had great diCGculty in providing clothing and cover for its own children, and the same forthe meager food they had, thus my own sustenance depended on the "days," that were promised tome by donating families, who were also related, that invited me to come and dine each day at adifferent household which offered such a donation [this practice was known as essen teg in Yiddish,literally translated as "eating days" -JSB]After I became resigned to my fate, I was very depressed, frightened by each leaf that blew at me,lacking security, and with very few kopecks in my pocket I went to b^ The night was very long,untU I would get up in the morning, and go to the home that had committed to feed me breakfastthat day, and also lunch.46Feeling insecure and sad, I would wend my way to Ond my appointed place, and when I would seeit in the narrow lane, by weak light according to the description that I had, I would knock softly onthe door, and a boy would open it, and indicate that I should sit nort to another boy, who had alreadyarrived and sat at the table.The boys who were inured to this way of life were spiritually strong, because they were Yeshivah boys.They had Gnished the Talmud Torah, and because of houses like these, they were continuing withtheir studies independently, and felt adequately unburdened.After several routine questions, such as my name, where I came from, my relationship to this family,which I could only explain with great difficulty, they started to cough, and urged me to join in. Istarted to, but quietly, and they yelled at me, louder!" The purpose of the coughing was to wakenthe woman of the house. As it turned out, this donor had left to go to the bakery, and when shecame back and opened the door, I quietly stole out and headed for the Bet HanUdrash, my studyplace.Sad, hungry, and feeling scrawny, I started to study after a silent morning prayer. I had to absorb thefirst lesson, but understandably with great difficulty.I didn’t recognize a single other student there. There were those among them who were abusive tome, because they were bigger than I was, and one of them even said: "what’s a pipsqueak like thisdoing in our class?" I choked back tears in my throat, and at our first recess I went out to theSchuUtauf to find something to eat, and in one of the comers I found a woman sitting cross-legged,having a heavy metal pot under which were hot coals, and nect to her another pot that was wellcovered, and she sold a sort of baked item, made from spelt wheat, not of the best kind, fried in oil,and crescent-shaped, weighing about what you would anticipate. I took the coin requested from mypocket to pay for one, I ate it and ... I was satisfied. For a long time after this "meal," I drank onlywater, but I remembered the taste for many days...News and stories started to reach us of further stirrings that were going on. The Poles were settingup legions for an army of liberation in order to re-establish their national sovereignty.My mother boarded a wagon used to transport merchandise, and after considerable difficulties, shereached me in order to bring me home. She was positively shaken by my weakened and stuntedappearance, and it was probably only her prayers, the prayers of a caring mother, that reached theright place.And yet, here, the story is before us.47"News From Zdva”by Yerachmiel Mcxirstein(Translated from Yiddish)Before the Holocaust, several Jewish newspapers were published in Warsaw. In one of them, Heint[Today], a column appeared called News from Zelva.On one Sabbath, in connection with Mizrachi matters, Mr. Rabinowitz, an official of the centralMizrachi office, visited us (as was described in the reports) for the purpose of organizing a Mizrachibranch in Zelva.In &ont of a gathering at the Bet Hamidrash, the guest outlined the goals of the Mizrachiorganization.The work of this organization, to involve the participation of religious Jews in the buUding of the landof Israel, was received graciously even by those who were not Mizrachi sympathizers, but it appearedthat the speaker had other intentions. In his lecture, he accused the other schools of educating theirpupils for... conversion &om their faith, and he argued that their students were simply ignorant Thisirresponsible representation of their character stirred up a lot of bitterness among those involved withthe Tarbut school, who then decided to oppose this association [with Mizrachi\, because instead ofcoming to praise, he had come to severely criticize.A special event was precipitated by the visit of Eliezer Futritzky^ who visited us from Jerusalem, andwho took the lead in directing a Hebrew play put on by HaShomerHaTza ’ir. UntU that time, Hebrewplays were only put on by children. This time, the young people prepared the historical drama basedon the life of the Hasmonean prince, Eliezer ben Yehuda.Mr. Eliezer Futritzl^ has served in this capacity in Jerusalem for the prior two years with greatsuccess, according to the review of this production that had appeared in the newspaper Doar HaYom,voL 75, 30 December 1927. This was the source of the considerable interest in this play in 2Lelva.[Also], The drama club of Poalei Zion put on the play, Der Groiser Moment, under the direction ofY. Zalman. Proceeds were used for the benefit of the fire department of Zelva.Tuvia Vishnivisky, Esther Moorstein and Yedidia Shv^ky gave outstanding performances in thisplay.The Tarbut library, which did not grow because of lack of consensus among the school leadership,received a great boost from the appointment of Mr. Garbovnick, a teacher at the Tarbut school, asLibrarian, and thanks to his efforts, the library was re-established and came to contain about 1000volumes in Yiddish and Hebrew.^ Eliezer Futritzlqr comes from our town [Zelva], Eliezer Ritz. was among the founders of theelectricity companies in Israel. He passed away in Haifa, His widow is Manya, his daughter • Maxima[Neutra], his son - Odded (see also The Freidins of Zelva later in this volume).48The Lady Storekeeper and Her Scholar-Husbandby Yerachmiel Mcx>istemFeiga was the sole heir of the store, since she was an only daughter. From early childhood on, sheparticipated in the sale of kerchiefs to the farm wives, and she succeeded in this, gaining control overher business, getting ahead in business, and she did very well, and most of the kerchief inventory onthe store shelves was her property, free of debt or any other encumbrances.In time, Feiga grew older, and she was left without anyone to help her or to give her support. Well-meaning people seeking to do good, reached into the woodwork, and married her off to a Yeshivahstudent, Yankel Velfer, who for years had spent his life in the Bet Hatnidrash. His calling was thestudy of the Torah. He was thoroughly grounded in the Shas [the Six Orders of the Talmud] and allits related commentaries. He paid no attention to practical worldly matters. His central concern wasto observe the 613 commandments, the casual ones with as much zealousness as the serious ones, andto arrive at a world that was all good, he was a pure soul... short and thin. The charitable women wholooked after his diet apparently didn’t overfeed him...Even after their marriage, Feiga ran the kerchief store without his help. The year-round conduct ofbusiness in Zelva permitted Yankel to continue to remain in the Bet Harrddrash, and to delve furtherinto scholarship and Talmud, to pray, and between Mincha and Maariv to give a lesson in Ein Yaakovto a coterie of listeners. But when it came time for the fairs, and business activity rose considerably,then Yankel had to stop his study of Torah, and he was compelled to help Feiga with sellingkerchiefs. When it came to prices and colors, he was totally lost, and he only spoke a few words ofthe local language, and when a farmer’s wife would ask him for a green kerchief, he would give hera red one, and if she stood her ground and demanded a green one, he would answer her in thelanguage of the Gemara with its accompanying intonation, Mai Nafka Minah? or as if to say:" what’sthe difference? this is a kerchief and thus too is a kerchief..."The Baal Tffilahby Yerachmiel MoorsteinThere was a cantor in the town and for the High Holidays, he also formed a choir despite the factthat aliyah claimed one of the grown up singers, but the appearance of the cantor before a full housewas generally reserved for the Great Synagogue, since it had the greatest seating capacity and becausethe acoustics were best there. Accordingly, there was little air left to breathe, because on all theholidays, the place would get so filled up that there was no room leftIn addition to the cantor, there were several Jews who were capable of leading prayers as a BaalTefUah, and to convey the sentiments of the congregation to the Almighty. The most venerable andpopular of these was Yershel Boyarsl^ (the investigator), whose deep and pleasant voice would tugat the heartstrings of the worshippers. To hear him pour his feelings into prayers such as UnsanehTokef on Rosh Hashanah, or P’tach Sha’arei Shamayim during the Ne’ilah service on Yom Kippur,all the Jews would stream to the Da ’atz Bet Hamidrash, where he served as cantor, and in a wondroussilence would listen attentively to his prayers - his entreaties to the Creator of the Universe.Yershel served as a cantor only for holidays, since he spent most of his time as an overseer in the49forests, being an «q)ert in wood and lumber, and there were many times when he didn’t have theopportunity to be home. But there were slack seasons when he was not working, and probablyb^use he was not earning a living, he made an impression on the Heavenly Dweller with his voice,and on the praying congregation, especially the women, would gather to hear his clear and pureprayer, greeting it with sighing and tears.50The Model of Conduct in Zelva - Bubbeh Laskehby Yerachmiel MoorsteinIt is difGcuIt to conceive that the Jewish people could have survived in every nook and cranny of theworld, facing all the tribulations that they did, if it weren’t for the volunteers among them, whodedicated themselves to helping those who were in need. There wasn’t a comer of Jewish life inwhich these people didn’t appear and perform their service.Among these, I raise the memory of one of the role models of charitable work in our town 2^1va,Laskeh Freidin, of blessed memory, called by her grandchildren in Israel Bubbeh Laskeh.In our country, we have socialist foundations, with welfare offices, headed by a minister with a staffthat administers a large budget, and oversees all the requirements of the needy for support andassistance. Thousands of social workers work in these foundations, managers of special offices, anddepartments, who disburse lots of funds to the applicants, and occasionally, it comes to light that therecipient of the funds has no business being there... and so starts the conversation of where is theboundary between someone with means, and someone without means. Today, we have a conceptcaUed the "poverty line." Someone who is guaranteed food and clothing is not below that line, butnot every recipient of these funds appears to be satisfied with this. According to his reasoning, he is"entitled" to more, and he will sometimes demand this quite vehemently...In Zelva, bread never got thrown into the garbage... if it was even available on the table in the house.Only the well-to-do in town baked challah for the Sabbath.Among our obligation to those who come after us, is to describe how life was conducted in ourcommunities, despite the lack of wealth, overburdened with population, and blessed with anabundance of children, without a ministry of welfare and support, and without a single salaried socialworker.Zelva is counted among such towns. It is understood that here too, there were paupers. Mostpreferred to go hungry rather than accept charity, but there were difficult days for those starving fora piece of bread, and it was these that the Bubbeh Laskeh looked after as a volunteer (socialworker), and did all the functions of these many "foundations."In the First World War, when the Germans ruled for about four years, a typhus epidemic broke out,which caused many deaths, and not all the soldiers returned &om the battleGeld either, leavingwidows burdened with the care of orphans. The blessed efforts of Laskeh eased and helped thesuffering of the needy a great deal. Despite her advanced age, she would take to her feet in all sortsof weather, visiting the houses of the well-to-do, who would Gll her sacks with all sorts of life’snecessities, which she would then distribute to those who were in need.As to her own modest needs, these were provided for by her son, Yitzhak [Itchkeh] Freidin, who withhis blessed family made aliyah to the Holy Land, and he passed away here. May Her Soul Be BoundUp In The Bond Of Life.51TTte Departure From Zdva(Diary Excerpts)by Eliezer Futritzky (Ritz)[8 March 1926]In another two days, I am leaving the town of my birth...In another 48 hours I will no longer see my mother and the beloved members of my family, I will notsee the tombstones of my father, brother and grandfather^...in another 48 hours I will no longer seethe ambience in which I was educated, in which I was raised, and where I lived for twenty-eightyears...All, all these, with whom I lived with for twenty-eight years, in another twenty-four hours it will beas if they never existed...Even though I don’t fear the moment, I nonetheless feel a weight on my heart, and in addition, thequestion weighs on me, how will I take leave of my frail mother, how will those moments pass... thatis what I fear.Even thought the house is ever so dear to me, I cannot allow myself to be found within it, I will notbe able to bear my mother’s damp eyes... I will not be able to sleep in my own bed, when my elderlygrandmother will rise from her b^ to sit in front of me and cry. I want to be able to scrutinize herface with care, so I will not forget her...I want to run away, to run away from all of them and not to see a single one of them, not to speak,but rather to wander the backstreets of the town, to run to those places where my feet walk^, tokiss the dust of the ground, to leave them, for these are the places where I spent the days of myyouth.How will I be able to take leave of you, from all of you whom I love and hold so dear, how will I beable to exchange you, my town and all who are dear to me, for the staff of the wanderer!?But from the depths of my soul, a voice bursts out of me like a clap of thunder:"Eliezer, Eliezer, how can you think such thoughts!? You are travelling to the Land ofIsrael!!! In just a little while, you will arrive in the land of your origuts! Look, here youhave nothing that belongs to you. Everything - everything - belongs to them, THEM..."Slowly, slowly the weight passes...Nonetheless, how strange it is: for over two years, I dedicated myself body and soul to the Zionistideal, I spent days and nights in the offices of the Zionist Histadrut, the Keren Kayemet L Yisrael, andthe Keren HaYesod, and here, when the hour finally arrives, and I, myself, am ready to go to the HolyLand that I aspired to, there is the pressure of such a weight on my heart!? Despite this...^ Here, Lou Ritz refers to his father, David, his brother, Moshe Beryl, and grandfather Jacob(the Dayan), who died in the great influenza epidemic of 1919. See The Freidins of Zelva elsewherein this volume.52I was invited to a going-away party by my friends tonight at eight, and again a weight begins to presson my heart. Will this be the last evening in which I will Ond myself in intimate contact with myfriends? How will I feel?In the company of my close friend Moshel, I came at eight o’clock to the place the party was beingheld (at the home of Yamivsky). Everyone was seated around the table. It looks like they were ailwaiting for me to arrive. My heart is beating furiously. Is this the last time? But there is no time tothink, and they start the festivities.At the party are my girl friends: Tzipah, Batia, Dina’tcheh and Leah, and my boy friends: Moshe’l,Moshe Mordechai, Shmuel, Zelig, Lipik from Volkovysk, and Yerachmiel.I felt great at the party, you might even say, terrific, I practically didn’t feel that the entire to-<lo wasin honor of me. If it weren’t for the occasional congratulations and best wishes that were offered tome, I would have thought that I was at a going-away party for one of my other friends...But before the party was over, I no longer had any doubts, and I felt only too well, that it was mewho was going to depart, and I am going to be separated from all my dear ones. I felt that I was theone who was leaving, and they are staying behind. They will go on with their lives, in the samesurroundings, and I am taking up the walking stick of the wanderer in my hand, and I begin towander in the outside world, so different from the world in which they live. They will continue theirlives in the same phase that we all lived in, and I am passing into a completely different phase, andin my soul, a sort of feeling of jealousy towards them stirs.They will yet continue to live at home with their parents, enjoying their beds that their mothersprepared for them, and I, the youngest among them, will be lonely, forsaken, without a relative andwithout someone to rescue me. Far, far from my family will I go...And once again that inner voice thunders at me:"Eliezer, Eliezer, you are travelling to the Land of IsraeirThat voice truly takes care of everything, but yet...I part from my friends in high spirits, and accompanied by my friend Moshe’l, I return to my home.We enter the yard of the house. It is silent, all are asleep, the lights are out., and it appears to methat I am surrounded by everything in my neighborhood: the houses, the yard, the trees - everything,everything is whispering, talking about me and my forthcoming trip. It appears to me that each andevery thing says to me:"Take our last blessings. For you see us now for the last time! For you see, we areparting now! We are parting and who knows, perhaps for ever and ever. Take our lastblessings. Look! Look again! Don’t forget our shapes and what we looked like!..."And it appears to me that even the moon in the heavens speaks to me and whispers: "Oh, you poorwretch, you poor wretch! It is still night, and you will be here for only one more night.'"And my heart contracts from so much pain.53At the sound of my knock, my mother comes down, opens the door and lights a candle. I try veryhard not to look at her face, which conveys such a deep sadness, but is this not my mother, my dearmother, who worked so hard on my behalf! My mother, who suffered so much from me until shemanaged to raise me, and I want to run to her, to fall into her embrace, to hug and kiss her, saying:”Oh, my mother, my motherrI lift my eyes and I see my mother standing on the threshold of the bedroom door, her head bowedlow and crying, and when she spied me looking at her, she heaved a deep sigh and went to sleep.Understandably, she didn’t sleep, and neither did I.All the images pass before my eyes, to irritate me they stand before me and do not move from theirplace. I try to force them away, I try to fall asleep, but to no avail. Only with the coming of daybreakdo I fall fitfully asleep...9 March 1926When I awoke it was late already, and the clock rang at nine. I dressed hurriedly, and went outside.Under no circumstances can I stand to stay in the house despite the fact that it is so dear to me...Where to go -1 don’t really know, I walk slowly at the side of the street, and I think. The peoplecoming and going look and stare at me, but I, I do not want to look at anyone...Two friends interrupt my thoughts. Two friends from the f^ren Kayemet L Yisrael came up to me andadvised me that in the evening at eight thirty, the Zionist Histadrut, and its affiliate organizations,were throwing a going-away party in my honor. All the members of the various organizations in whichI was active were to participate in the party. I thanked them, and parted from them.I rushed to the Beit Am, where the offices of the Zionist Histadrut and its affiliates were located.Even if I had only one day left in Zelva, I still had work to do in the offices of the Zionist Histadrut.It is difficult, very difficult to leave them behind. For about two years now, I have spent my time, allmy days here, in these offices. I got up and worked here days and nights while my friends spent theirtime at leisure. I would be separated from them, stuck in between the damp walls of the Beit Amdoing my "international work" there. At times, when I was in a bad mood, it was this work thatdiverted my mind from all cares. And when questions of "purpose" would start boring into my mind,I would always go running to the office, and there I would forget everything.Today I am Gnishing the completion of the minutes of the international affiliates for which I servedas the head secretary, and I am preparing to turn them over to other secretaries.This is a gloomy day for me, because it is oh, so difficult for me to depart I have but one comfortin my heart: I am leaving all this for a different work: the building of the Holy Land. It is practicallywaiting for me. My goal is the Land of Israel, and in that I take comfort..At ten in the morning, I turned over in the presence of the director of the Zionist Histadrut, comradeChaim Yitzhak Lev, the minutes of the Zionist organization to the new secretary, comrade AharonRotni.At eleven in the morning, I turned over, in the presence of the director of the Keren Kayemet54LYisrael, comrade Z. Helman, the minutes and principal flies and all the material to the newlyelected secretary, comrade Shmuel Yamivsky.At noon, I turned over the minutes of the Keren HaYesod to the honorary secretary, comradeRosenbloom.At four in the afternoon, I turned over, in the presence of the director of the Eretz Yisrael office,conu'ade Rosenbloom, the minutes of the office of the Eretz Yisrael organization, to the newly electedsecretary, comrade Nahum (Nathan) Helman.In this fashion, I turned over all the minutes, and I returned home like it was after a funeral...9 March 1926 EveningThe last evening and night of my presence in Zelva have arrived.The sun has gone down behind the mountains, and the night is drawing near. Hundreds, hundredsof questions, for which there are no answers, begin to gnaw at my mind. The sadness, worry, and fear,spread their control over my heart, and as much as I try to shake them off, I do not succeed...Master of the Universe! Is this real, or just a dream?!Is it true that this evening is my last evening in Zelva? Is tomorrow’s evening already part of a setdifferent from the ones in which I had spent my first twenty-eight years?! Does tomorrow’s eveningbelong to a new period in my life?... "Oh, you moon in the sky - stop! Don’t you dare to distanceyourself from me! Don’t pass by so swiftly! This tu^tt, it is incumbent upon me to speak and whisperabout great and wonderful things... oh, evening, evening if you couid only extend for twenty-four hours...forty-eight... more... and more... how fortunate / would beTI won’t be able to completely drink in my surroundings, I won’t be able to finish my conversations,the evening will pass, day will come, and at ten o’clock at night, I will leave my home town, leave mymother and the members of my family, my surroundings, my fiiends, and alone and forsaken...lonely...with the wanderer’s staff in my hand...And suddenly a voice is heard:"Eliezer! Eliezer! No! No! No! You won’t be wretched and forsaken! You won’t beabandoned! There is no one forsaken in the land of Israel! In the settlements andkibbutzim in Israel there is no sadness!!! You will be happy, joyous and radiant, but onlyin the Land of Israel! You will work at your work, and you will speak your language,you will sing your songs, you will dance your dances, but only in the Land of Israel, andonly for the Land of IsraeVHere I was daydreaming... about life in the Holy Land.The clock rang eight., and I recalled that I had to go to the party. I put on my overcoat and I go outIt is dark outside. The sound of the raindrops stopped my daydreaming. Here I am, walking alongslowly, lost deep in my thoughts, without sensing that I had reached the auditorium. I can’t go in...55the sound of song comes at me from the auditorium, but I can’t go in. They have come together,singing and happy... but it is I who is to depart., and they... will remain. Tomorrow, they will escortme to the train, they will go back to town together, and even then they will sing as well... and I? -I will sit in a comer in one of the train cars, and I will dream..."EUezer! Eliezer! They are jealous of you, because you are the fortunate one, that it fellto you, that it was ymir lot to make aliyah to the Land of Israel They envy you, thatit feu to you to be among the fortunate ones, to work here on behalf of the Latul ofIsrael, and to work in the land of Israel.. aU those who have gathered here wait withgyeat impatience for the hour to come when they will also be able to make aliyah. In thehour when you take leave of the bitter Diaspora to go to the Land of your Fulfillment,they have to stay behind in the Diaspora, and in that hour do you envy them? - why,and what for? fi^y dUd you wmk so hard and dedicate yourself att your Ufe, and whywere you ^wn to the Zionist ideal? Why did ym woHc so hard for the benefit of aU theZkmist foundations? Did you not yearn every day, and each minute for this hour toarrive?"I breathed deeply, and felt lighter, the heaviness on my heart went away... I entered the auditoriumto loud cries of ’liurrah!"- Here is the Guest of Honor!!!The preparations for opening the celebration were complete. We were waiting only for the arrivalof the director of the local Tarimt branch, comrade Rosenbloom. After a few minutes, he arrived.Participating in the celebration were:RepresentingZionist HistadrutKeren HaYesodKeren KayemetEretz Yisrael OfficeTarbut ChapterThe Teachers Associationof the Tarbut School Shmuel Freidin, Shabtai Ratner, and Akiva Shveysky.The Director, Chaim Yitzhak Lev, and the Treasurer, AharonRotni.The Honorary Secretary, Chaim Rosenbloom.The Executive Committee: the Director, Nahum [Nathan]Helman, the Assistant Director, Shammai Kaplan, and theTreasurer, Shimshon Levine. Charity box distribution: Theappointee, Mordechai Perlmutter, the Secretary, MosheRafUovitz, and the chapter membership: Moshe Slutsl^,Yerachmiel Moorstein, Shmuel Yaroivsky, Rachel Buchhalter,Itkeh Schriftiger, and Esther Shtureikovitz.Comrade Jacob Rotni.The Director, Chaim Rosenbloom.56Tarbut LibraryHeHalutzComrade Elchanan Potztiveh.Ezekiel Halpem.And in a similar fashion, my brother Mordechai [Max] was invited.The party opened with the singing of Hatikvah. As master of ceremonies for the party, they hadselected the Director of the Tarbut branch and the Eretz Yisrael Office, Chaim Rosenbloom. DirectorRosenbloom suggests that the opening remarks be given by Shmuel Freidin from the Teacher’sAssociation of the local school, I being among the Grst of those educated at the local Hebrew schoolto make aliyah to the Land of Israel. All those seated agree with the suggestion of the Director, andmy favorite [Hebrew] teacher, Shmuel Freidin accepts this first undertaking. He dwells especially onthe needs of young Jewish people in general, and on the needs of school graduates in particular, thatyouth which stands at the crossroads, seeking the right way to go. Shall the youth turn to Zionismas a solution to the question? And afterwards, he speaks about me, and he holds up as an examplemy participation in the youth groups and my dedication to the Zionist movement. Among his otherremarks, he says:"/ feel myself to be among the fortunate, when I see the labors of the teacher have bomfruit, and the first of the educated ones is making aliyah, Futritzky! Don’t forget thewords of your teacher, and don’t stray from the path that you have hewn for yourself.Your teacher’s blessing to y(M is: may all your wishes come true! Go on and succeed.'"Mr. Freidin’s speech made a strong impression on all the participants.Director Rosenbloom spoke in great detail about youth and its relationship to Zionism and to theLand of Israel, stopping to describe my own work for the Zionist foundations, my dedicated effortson behalf of the Histadnit and HaShomer HaTza’ir, in which I served as the head of the chapter andhead of the section. With best wishes for a successful aliyah, and for the realization of my desires,and with the greeting, Hazak Ve’Ematz!, he Gnished his speech, which lasted about an hour. AfterComrade Rosenbloom, the Director of the Zionist Histathnt, Ch. Y. Lev spoke, and the Treasurer,Aharon Rotni. [Jacob] Rotni spoke on behalf of the Land of Israel office, for Tarbut, ElchananPotztiveh, and on behalf of HeHalutz, Ezekiel Halpem, among his other remarks, said:"Even though our comrade, Futritzky, stands here on the right, I hope that in the Landof Israel we will find him in the ranks of the Labor Histadrut."Moshe RaGlovitz offers a blessing on behalf of all the comrades and youth. And similarly, all theattendees are quick to chime in with similar blessings for me on my aliyah to the Holy Land. At theend, the Director of the Keren Kayemet LYisrael, Nahum Helman spoke. And he especially spendsa good part of his time describing my work on behalf of the Keren Kayemet. And in this vein, he adds:"Futritzky was not satisfied with working only for Keren Kayemet, but also took an activerole in our other international and cultural branches of endeavor, such as the ZionistHistadrut, the Office of the Land of Israel, HaShomer HaTza’ir, Tarbut, and others ofthis kind...57and he finished as follows:" Our dear amirade, Futritzky!I haven’t ccmie at this time to thank you for all your work, because you did what wasincumbent on a young Jewish man with a cosmopolitan outlook to do, but I doapproach you on behalf of the local committee of Keren Kayemet, and convey to youour most heartfelt recognition for the international effcnis you have made, and for allyour great dedication on behalf of Keren Kayemet in particular, and as a recognition ofyour wrnk, the committee, at our last meeting on 3 June 1927, has decided to presentyou with an award of excellence as a memento."This memento was a silver medal in the form of a Star of David, which on one side bore theinscription: "A memento from the Keren Kayemet Committee of 2^1va,'' and on the other side, ToE[liezer] Futritzky." And in a like manner, he reads &om a proclamation firom the local committee,permitting me to display the medal, and a proclamation from the central committee of Poland, andalso conveys thanks to me for my active participation as a member of the drama society of the localcommittee. He then gives me the proclamation, that was received from the central committee, thatcites the fact that I had served as secretary, and asks ail the international foundations in the HolyLand to offer me any assistance that is necessary. As all the attendees rise in their places, theDirector of the l^eren Kayemet, Nahum Helman, pins the medal to my coat.The Director of the Zionist Histadrut, comrade Lev, reads the contents of the proclamation that wasreceived from the central office of the Zionist Histadrut of Poland, as evidence that I had served assecretary of all the international foundations, and asks all of the Zionist Histadrut organizations tohelp me in cotmection with my settling and getting organized in the Holy Land.Director Rosenbloom reads the contents of the proclamation received from the central office of theKeren HaYesod of Poland. They also read the contents of the proclamations received from the localOffice of the Land of Israel, and the Tarbut branch, and place them in my hand.At four o’clock in the morning, to the strains of Tehezaknah, and the Hatilcvah, the celebration comesto an end. We left in high spirits, buoyed by the impact of the marvelous celebration.« « «My friend, Moshe’l accompanies me. He will spend the night at my home. How I feel the strong bondthat exists between us at this moment Just as I don’t want to visualize the moment of parting fromthe members of my family, so I don’t want to bring to mind the moment of parting from Moshe’l. Itis difficult to take leave of all my friends, because we were all together like one body. But, there isa big difference between the rest of them and my dear Moshe’l. Moshe’l and I were as if we wereone soul. His thoughts were my thoughts, mine - his, my secrets were his, and his - mine. Any littlething that was on one of our minds was immediately communicated to the other. It is difficult, oh,so difficult to take leave of a person who was a friend of this sort to me for 16-17 years, because wewere already playing together when we were both two years old... but how much has happened duringour lives since... it is equally hard for him to take leave of me - and he is spending this last night ofmine in Zelva, sleeping over at my house. Moshe’l! Moshe’l! Will I ever - or will you ever - again findanother friend of this caliber as we were to one another? Moshe’l! I swear before you, my dear and58beloved friend, that we are only parted in body, but my souL..neither oceans nor days can remove myaffection for you. Even &om across the ocean I will remain dedicated and bound to you.And let not my other friends feel that I am indifferent to them. It is equally difficult for me to takeleave of you, but even you wUl have to agree, that there is a sort of difference between Moshe’l andyourselves... the bond of affection between my dear Moshe’l and myself stems from childhood days,when we still used to hit and cuff one another.Here I am lying on my bed and thinking: I’m resting on my bed, in my mother’s home, I see myhouse, I see my brothers, and sister, and the members of my family, my aged grandmother, andeverything that is dear to me, and tomorrow, tomorrow morning, I will not see, either my home, themembers of my family, my friends, and all who are near and dear to my heart. Mountams and valleys,fields and vineyards separate us. I wiU have to be satisfied with just the pictures that I am holdingin my hands.Tomorrow, and the day after, if I’ll want to see my home town, I will have to lie down on my bed,close my eyes and conjure up the image of the town in which I was bom, Zelva!! Oh, Zelva, myZelvaH And it was with these thoughts on my mind that I fell asleep...I awoke at dawn. I remove the blanket from me, and I see that my mother is standing with a candlein her hand, and she is crying, crying, and tears are falling from her eyes, tears... and her tears - arefalling on my heart...My poor mother was up at dawn to bake me biscuits, presumably as food for the journey... and in themeantime, in going from the bedroom to the kitchen, she had paused by my b^ide, and stood atmy bedside and wept. When she saw that she had awakened me, she left me, because she didn’t wantto upset me. Ah, but my mother, my dear mother!And the hour inevitably came. It isn’t possible for a young man of eighteen to sit in his parent’shome and to eat their food indefinitely as if it were charity. This is simply not possible. This time hadto come, sooner or later, and the hour came to part. I covered myself with my blanket, and oh, soquietly, I wept over the fate of my poor mother... and I fell asleep...« « *10 March 1926Tonight, I leave my home town of Zelva... all the members of my family are milling around the houselost in thought., what a condition there is today in our home! I am proceeding to collect parting bestwishes from my near ones, friends and acquaintances.Obtaining these good wishes was difficult for me, because who here did I not know? Isn’t this arelative, that one a neighbor, the next one an acquaintance, this one went to school with me, that oneI had a conversation with once, and in addition to all of this, in connection with Keren Kayemet, andKeren HaYesod, hadn’t I visited nearly the entire population of the town? All day, I went from houseto house...At three o’clock, accompanied by my friend, Mordechai, I went to Rabbi Damta. I spent about two59hours there, and we spoke of many matters, and after obtaining his blessing, a rabbinical blessing, heescorted me to the door, and we parted.I came to see Moshel’s father who was sick. I offered him my blessing that he should recover fromhis malacfy, and return to full strength. He thanked me, and burst out crying just like a little child.Needless to say, I burst out crying as well, and so did Moshel, his mother and sister. Everyone whowas in the house wept, they wept like little children. Nevertheless, there was no choice. I left. Moshe’land I, exiting his house and crying. We walk over to a side street so no one can tell that we arecrying. We stood there for about 15 minutes and wept Do you know what it is for friends to cry likethis together?...I remembered that I hadn’t yet taken leave of my teacher, the principal of the Tarbut School,comrade, Motlovisky. I went to his room, but didn’t And him there. He was observing the mourningperiod - his mother had passed away... I went to approach him in the synagogue, and I found himleaning over a book... I feel the tears rolling down my face, why? • I’m standing before my belovedteacher. Is he not one of those who instilled in me the very yearnings that I am about to go andfulfill... is this not the very synagogue in which my forefathers, my father, grandfather, the rabbis andgaonim, of blessed memory, spent most of their lives? This is where they gave thanks to the Lord forwhat ever good fortune came their way, or, heaven forbid, prayed in the event of misfortune. Thisis where they poured out the bitterness in their hearts... what a sanctified emotion seized me in thosefew minutes...I took my leave of the Director of the local Tarbut chapter, conu'ade Rosenbloom. He was unableto see me off at the train that evening because he was not well.And in this manner, I took leave of all my dear ones, my acquaintances and my friends...I enter my house. My mother is sitting next to the table and crying... my old grandmother is sittingin the comer and weeping... I feel that any minute I will no longer be able to control myself, but Iovercome the feeling. My mother gives me lunch - the last lunch I will receive from my mother’shands, but to my great disappointment, I take no satisfaction in eating it I have no appetite at thistime.Again, I am hanging around outside and in the street, but I can’t And any peace. I go into the garden,and stand on a little mound and watch the sun set For the last time I see the sun set in my house...in my town... and it seems like the sun is taking its time in setting, because it too wants to keep mein good spirits...And that is the way I stood for about a half hour, until the sun had completely set behind themountains. I went back into the house. Inside the house they had already put up lights. Theneighbors and relatives were beginning to gather in the house. The house gets fuller by the minute.All around, the women sit and chat with one another.- what are they doing here? - why did they come? - to see me expire?...I can’t think in such surroundings. I want to be alone. I go into the bedroom, I think, and I feel thatmy heart is just Ailing up with explosive, and that any minute, it will burst, explode and spread allover. I regain control using all my will power.60My friends come into the room and interrupt my thinking. Suddenly, my friend Bathsheba Bashkinfrom Dereczin comes into the house. She is a very close friend of mine. About two, or two and a halfyears ago, I met her when she visited Zelva. She is a young, beautiful and well-developed young lady.From the first time I met her, I was attracted to her. I would visit her home town of Dereczinfrequently. Although I had many reasons to visit there, I visited for only one reason, Bathsheba...!love her...but it was a platonic relationship, two friends, and she has come to bid me farewell, and herarrival gladdened me considerably. We hugged and kissed each other.Everyone goes out to the second room. I am left with my brother, Yitzhak [Izz]. We are talking toone another, when suddenly, he bursts out crying:"you are going away, leaving us, yes. How fortunateare you to be released from our abandoned and unfortunate household, but what will I do, I, whatwill I do?" I feel his pain, but it is not within my ability to comfort him, for I also desperately needcomfort..The clock strikes nine...A carriage pulls up to the side of the house. They have come to take my belongings. My brother,Yitzhak, takes the bundles and suitcases, and rides to the train station to arrange the loading.The Grst step has begun...As they take the bundles and suitcases out of the house, my mother bursts out crying, and then mysister after her.-My God! What will happen in another half hour?The clock strikes ten...The members of the Keren Kayemet committee come into the house, the Director, Helman, mybeloved teacher, and family member, comrade Freidin, Potztiveh, their groups, and others...I put on my overcoat There is keening in the house. I brace myself. I begin to take leave of thosein the house. I go around and around, and take leave of each one, I take leave of all the membersof my famUy, my relatives, from my frail grandmother, who no longer has the strength to even cry,I take leave of them all.An the minute that I feared finally arrives. My mother falls on my breast, hugs me and bursts intoa bitter cry:"Oh, Eliezer, my beloved son, we are parting from one another, and who knows, perhapsforever, perhaps I will never see you again, you are all leaving me. Oh, how I worked,and how I suffered until I managed to raise all of you. Artd with whom will I remain?Ymr father is dead, your oldest brother is dead, and you are leaving, and your twobrothers will also leave me soon, artd I, an abandoned widow, will stay behind with heronly dauber. We shall remain behind, two women, forsaken and abandoned we shallremain, along with the four walls of the house..."With this, I could no longer control myself, and I, too, burst out crying:"Mameleh, don’t worry! I am going to our Holy Land, to the Land of Israel Only ashort time will pass, and we will be together again."61We stood this way for about five minutes. My fiiends are urging me to hurry, and if not, I’ll miss thetrain We hugged each other again and in the company of my fiiends, Moshe’l and Mottel, I leavethe house in which I was bom, where I was raised and where I was educated. There are hundredsof people waiting the side of the house. I go out of the yard, and everyone starts to walk.Sudden^, I hear the voice of my poor mother:"Eliezer, Eliezer, my dear son! Please, come back just once more.."My heart melted. I turn back, and she hugs me yet again, and weeps with bitter tears... And again westand for about five minutes, and everyone else is waiting. I think I also heard a silent weepingcoming from the crowd.I took leave of my poor, dear mother with a broken heart Just now am I begiiming to feel andunderstand what a mother is aU about..We, the young, do not know how to show our parents proper respect, at the time when we are undertheir care...I walk ever so slowly, and I still can hear my beloved mother’s groans. My heart shrinks fi'om all thepain, and yet with a few more steps, my mother’s voice becomes muted.I turn to the edge of town, towards the side of my house, and look at it for the last time. I wantedto go back to the house, and to see my mother again, but I was concerned for my mother’s health...- Goodbye dear mother, goodbye fiiends, and acquaintances, goodbye, goodbye to all of you! I walkahead, and I see before me how my mother is sitting at the side of the table and cries, and my heart,my heart is constricted with pain... and that is how we reached the half-way pointAnd suddenly a voice wells up inside of me:"Eliezer, Eliezer! You are going to the Land of Israel!"-and everything changed...In my imagination, I already see all of the Land of Israel, her blue skies, and all that is marvelousthere... and I am making a transition from the present world to a world that is completely different..With this thought in mind, I enter the railroad station. The station is fuU of people, who went aheadof us, there are acquaintances, and people who simply wanted to accompany us. After all, I amtravelling to the Land of Israel... I find myself in high spirits. My fiiends did not imagine that I wouldbe in this kind of mood at this time. Nobody believes that I am the one who is making the trip...Another young man and young woman are travelling with us, but everything is centered on me...Travelling with us is the Director of the Keren Kayemet of Dereczin, comrade MoUor, and his family.The clock strikes eleven...In the distance, the whistle of the locomotive is heard, as it draws near. I take leave of my friendsand acquaintances, and now comes the third step... I take leave of my sister Rivkah... and again thereis much crying and groaning. I am no longer crying. I am in a completely different frame of mind. I62am going to the Land of Israel.The train arrives, and they put my belongings onto the train car. My brother Mordechai [Max] willaccompany me as far as Warsaw. Everything had been organized as it was supposed to be, and I wentup on the first step of the train car to offer my best wishes to all those who came to see me off:"Honored attendees, and friends!It is most wtpleasant for me to take leave of the members of my family, my relatives,and the community in which I have spent eigjhteen years, but the idea is, that I am goingto our Land, the Land of my wishes, the Land of Israel - this is my comfort. Goodbye,goodbye, goodbye, my dear and beloved ones. I hope to see you all once again in ourLarui, the Land of Israel that is being built! Goodbye to you ZelvaUrA clarion of "Hurrahs" burst fi'om the hundreds of mouths of those that were gathered.The train conductor closes the door and forces me to go inside the car. I open the window. Theentire gathering is singing Hatikvah and Tehezaknah. In my heart I feel myself standing and growingstrong, that I will not burst out crying. My sister Rivkah is standing opposite me and is crying. I girdmyself... I stand as if frozen.Suddenly there is a long whistle. The wheels begin to turn. Slowly at first, and then faster, shouts of"hurrah," "Hazak VeEmatz," "Next Year in Jerusalem," burst from the lips of the onlookers, and forthe last time, I look back into the faces of the people who guided me for eighteen years. Theshouting and the noise still ring in my ears, and suddenly, it all changes, everything is transformed,and it is over.GOODBYE, GOODBYE, GOODBYE TO YOU ZELVA, AND ITS RESIDENTS ! ! !I sit down in one of the comers of the train car, and my brother, Mordechai sits opposite me. Bothof us are lost in thought. Is my brother so deep into his thoughts about me? Most certainly.A picture passes before my eyes:A month ago, two months ago, three months ago, five months ago, we used to escort the Olim[pilgrims to the Holy Land] to the train station. On the way to the station, we would sing and dance.How great was the happiness!! And afterwards, in the station itself, came the parting... and here, thetrain comes. The singing of Hatikvah, and Tehezaknah, the train disappears, and we, with song on ourlips, quietly, and still dancing, would return to our homes. How marvelous were our spirits at thathigh point..And here, right now, I am sitting in a comer, entirely sunken in thought, and they - they are goinghome, singing and making merry, and their spirits are soaring...Suddenly we hear a whistle... our train has reached Volkovysk, where my friends, Rosa Kabintovsky,Zina Levine, Gutka Lev, Merozinick, and another one whose name I’ve forgotten, and my friendJoseph Lipik were waiting for me. Again the whistle... we parted.At each station, Halutzim were added to our ranks, and with them our spirits rose hour by hour. At63each station we were greeted by a large crowd. Waiting by the side of the station were parents andrelatives, that had come to escort their near and dear ones, and again there was song and dance... theatmosphere became more and more pleasant, but with the coming of the dawn, a sort of sadnesssettled on the faces of each person, a hidden sadness...« « «11 March 1926We reached Warsaw at 7:30AM. We debarked at the Vilna Station as the city was beginning to risefrom sleep. All the electric buses were full of people on their way to their places of work. On thestreets, workers of every description were rushing to their jobs, carrying the tools of their trade.Automobiles were going to and fro. In a comer, a policeman was standing and rubbing his handstogether. Little boys, selling newspapers, ran alongside the electric buses yelling "Heint, Moment,Courier Farang, Courier Krarborue, Rabotnik.” Across from the station is a row of shoe shine boys.Warsaw is humming.We got on the number 6 electric bus which goes to the Ogrudoba area. We are spending the nightat the home of my brother’s sister-in-law, Batia. She had already gotten up to go to work, and shehanded us the Heint, which I started to read, and suddenly I saw my name in large letters: EliezerFutritzl^. It contained best wishes in the following language: [From the Yiddish]"On the occasion of his departing journey, our best wishes to our co-worker in allthe Zionist foundations and institutions, EUezo" Futritzky who is going to theLand of Israel, we offer him our wishes for good health and we wish him goodfortune in our old-but-new home.His friends at the Zionist Histadrut, Keren Kayemet, Keren HaYesod, Palestina,and Tarbut Ubrary.Zelva, Vesten March 1926."Naturally, I was very happy to see this notice of best wishes. I took one copy of it and put it betweenthe pages of one of my Ix^ks in order to preserve itThat same day, accompanied by my brother, I went to the central Eretz Yisrael office at Marzhinaska10.1 was examined by the physicians at the office. Dr. Fackar, and Dr. Lansky. I took care of all theissues regarding the Eretz "^rael office. Thanks to my efforts, I was excused from paying theimmigration tax of the government of the Holy Land, in the amount of between 7-9 dollars. Thatsame day, I finished all my tasks, and I was ready to leave Warsaw, but we had to wait for a specialtrain that was not leaving Warsaw until Sunday, March 14.12 March 1926We visited the home of Mr. Chaikin, the editor of the newspaper, Heint. My brother’s brother-in-lawwas also invited to their home for lunch.During the day, we walked the city streets, and visited many interesting places. That evening, wewanted to go see a performance of HaBimah, from Moscow that was touring Warsaw at the time,but to our great disappointment, we were late for the performance. Instead, we went to the Jewish64art theater, Azel, at Danaga 50. The theater was very small. Only a couple of hundred people couldflt in it. The subject of the performance was wonderful: On Israeli Dance, and the monologue wasdelivered by Gudik Parsbeh Beigei.13 March 1926We visited the brother-in-law and sister-in-law of my brother, Mintz, and his wife, Masha, the sisterof my sisters-in-law, Rivkah and Zipporah in Prague.14 March 1926In the morning, we visited with these same acquaintances. For lunch we were invited again to theChaikin home, and towards evening, my brother, and sister-in-law Batia rode to the east side trainstation. From there we were booked to travel to Constanza.I had to take leave of Moshe Chaikin at his home, because he had to stay behind in order to preparethe evening edition of the Heint. Mrs. Chaikin, Julia (Yocheved), and her daughter promised to meetus at the train station. Also, Mrs. Mintz promised to be there as well. At six thirty, we arrived byelectric bus to the Dozhik Wilansky train. This special train, which would take us as far as Constanza,was already waiting on the siding. All the cars were full of people, but nonetheless, I was able to findmyself a comfortable spot in one of the cars. I brought in my valises, and I arranged a comfortableplace for myself, and then went outside again. At the side of the train, waiting for me were mybrother, Mordechai, my sister-in-law, Batia, and Yocheved, Masha and Shoshana Chaikin.The trainyard was full of thousands of people, women and children, who had come to see off theirsons, relatives and friends. The hubbub gets stronger and stronger. The trainyard is getting fuller bythe minute. A variegated picture unfolds before you:Frail Hasidim with white beards, young men wearing long kapotes, with long curly sidelocks, and menand women in the balconies are singing and dancing. From one comer you hear Hatikvah, and &oma second, Tehezaknah. The atmosphere is festive.A quarter of an hour goes by, and the parting best wishes begin, kisses, tears, amid shouts of "NextYear in Jerusalem" and "We’ll See Each Other in Israel" and "Go in Peace and Arrive in Peace."There is a hodge-podge of crying, good wishes and song, everything mixed together.At seven thirty, the train starts to move. I am parted from them all. My breath stops. They arehugging and kissing each other, over and over. There, wailing and crying, and here singing, andsuddenly: "My dear one, you be sure to write every week." - a commandment from a mother to a son.The train begins to accelerate. The rhythm of the wheels accompanies the wailing, and the singing,and on this night of voices, it is deafening. Under the strains of Hatikvah, that burst forth from theaccompanying crowd and from the "lucky" group that was going to the Land of Israel, the peoplewaving their white handkerchiefs begin to disappear, the train station vanishes, the relatives vanish,and among them also... also... my brother Mordechai...I feel, my heart., but I am travelling to the Land of Israel...And it is my good fortune that I am the one who is travelling...« « *65ZELVA 100 YEARS AGOWritings from the Years 189I~I900HaTz/^pra, a Weekly, later a Daily, Published in WarsawVolume 91, 30 Nissan 5651 in April 1891.Abstracted by Yitzhak ShalevZelva - Emigration to the Land of Israel! These two words are now on everyone’s lips in our town.Everywhere that we go, we see that each person is talking one to another about this. Several skilledworkers, who because of their abilities, plan to leave town this coming summer to go to the HolyLand upon receipt of letters from people who know them, because there they will be able to applytheir sl^ in order to obtain an income for their little ones. This is in place of having these sameworkers being idle all day in our own locale, because there is no one to hire them even for minimalwork.We have heard the news that from nearby towns, that families with the financial means have travelledto buy tracts of land in Palestine, and the people who return from their trips to the Holy Land saythat "the Land is very good, and the property obtained by the people there has tuned out well forthem,” and because of these reports, the excitement in our town has increased considerably. Manyhouses are up for sale practically for nothing, but there are no buyers, no prospects, and no onelooking to buy, because who wants to buy houses in the hour when his soul and spirit is focusedentirely and only on the idea of going to live in the Land of Israel? And who has the desire to spendhis money at a time when he has one foot here, and the other foot is planted in the Land of Israel!An endnote: Eveiy man thinks thoughts and sees in his vision the gates of Jerusalem opening beforehim, and that he will lack nothing if he will just come to the Holy Land and be fortunate...Zc'ev KaplanVolume 135,25 Sivan 5661 in 19 June 1891Zelva 14 June - Notwithstanding the daily warnings and news that reaches us, advising that ourtownsfolk should not go to the Holy Land without sufficient funds in hand • many people from ourarea are planning to leave the land of their origins and to cast their lot in the land of Palestine; inany event, those people, who travel there without money, cause a great deal of problems forthemselves, and they add no value to the condition of the settlement there in general...Ze’ev KaplanThe Slonim Diary (Pinkas Slonim), Volume HI, Page 130Volume 101, 26 lyar 5655 in 8 May 1895Zelva - About two-thirds of our town went up completely in flames yesterday at dusk, leaving theaffected property owners with nothing. The enveloping Are took hold suddenly in two or three places66simultaneously. In the twinkling of an eye, the greater part of the town was engulfed in flames. Thosewho were burned out were among the poor and needy, and they were left naked and withoutanything at all, and at this moment do not even have their next meal. This is the tenth time that werecord a day of a fire in our town this year, and if the previoiis nine times left a deep impression onthe memory of the community, this conflagration made an even larger impression bemuse of itsferocity.Eliezer Libert Sbereshevsl^Volume 109,10 Sivan 5655 in 21 May 1895Zelva - The arsonists who set fire to the town were apprehended on Friday. They were all taken tothe jail. It is known with certainty that they are the ones who set fire to the town.H.S.Volume 111, 13 Sivan 5655 in 24 May 1895Zelva - A committee has been established to provide aid to the victims of the fire, and the head ofthe committee is the arbitrator (farrednik), the Kohen, Mankovsky, and of our own distinguishedgentry, Avraham Sedletsky, and Moshe Oryansl^.Y.A. AranovitzVolume 129, 4 Tammuz 5655 in 14 June 1895Zelva • Even amidst want and deprivation, everything depends on luck, even in the case of a townconsumed by fire... If all of the towns that suffered a fire receive rains, let ours be the one to receivethe least amount... Our Jewish brethren, far and near: do not turn a blind eye to our impoverishedtown, please send donations, and let us hear from you, lest, God forbid, a Jewish community beeradicated &om the midst of Israel...Ze’ev HaKohen KaplanVolume 132, 8 Tammuz 5655 in 18 June 1895Zelva - The authorities have forbidden the townspeople to begin construction before the creationof an overall municipal plan. For housing, it has been communicated to us that it is necessary to leavea space of eighteen ammot as a space between houses, and many of the fire victims have been wipedout as a result of the re-allocation of space between dwellings. It is three times already, that thetownspeople have gathered in the bouse of the rabbi, to arbitrate between the two factions of firevictims, the "eliminated ones,” and the "returning and re-building ones," because the former want thelatter to compensate them for the loss of their property - and the participants left about the way theycame, without having decided either on major or minor issues...Libert Shereshevsky67Volumes 154 and 161 1895(There were two correspondents who accused a Jewish merchant of the arson but afterward it wasproven that the accusation had no substance. * The Editor)HaMditz, a Weekly, then a Daily, Published in Odessa and St. PetersburgAbstracted by Yitzhak ShalevVolume 43, 9 Tanunuz 5645 in 10 June 1885Zelva. Gose to Slonim, 2 Tanunuz - We were judged with thunder, not the thunder from theheavenly heights, but with the thundering that we had been on the receiving end in recent years - thethunder of the "barefoot bunch," and workers drunk on wine...On Sunday, June 2, Ove railroad workers who were then working on the track being laid betweenBaranovich and Bialystok came to town, and after having drunk their Gll, they went over to theJewish stores and began to steal anything that th^ could lay their hands on, and the storekeepersdid not confront them, knowing that this was not the time for a Jew to confront every robber andthief; but the workers were not content with this, because they also began to beat on the heads ofpassing Jews with iron rods that they carried in their hands. The Jews showed concern for their safetyand began to run from those who were beating them, and unwittingly, one of the drunkards got hitin the head and started to bleed from his wound. The hurt one react^ violently on the ground, andraised his voice, calling for help, saying that the Jews hit him and were trying to kill him. His friendsrushed to their companions who were located at a field outside the city, and in about a half-hour,about fifty of them showed up, armed with iron rods and wooden staves, yelling in loud voices: "Beatthe Jews!" - and they began to wreak havoc in the town. In one hour they smashed all the glasswindows in the homes of our brethren to smithereens, even the windows in the synagogues were notspared. All the stores were padlocked, and two stores that the owners didn’t manage to close up fromthe outside, were pillaged, and nothing was left behind. People who passed by out of doors werestoned with heavy rocks, and one man and a woman who didn’t have the strength to flee for theirlives were struck by large stones in the head, and they both are now hovering between life and death.Pillows, linen covers, and even books were tom up, household utensils were smashed, a wine cellarwas emptied into the bellies of the vandals, and the rest was spilled onto the ground. The end of thething was like the thunder whose name and memoiy causes a dread among ail our kinsfolk in theserecent times. The one policeman who could be found in the town made no effort to restrain thesevandals. This morning, the Inspector of rural police (CraHOBoft IIpHCTaB [Stanovoi Pristav]) came,and after him, the county officer, and a doctor, to assess the extensive damage and injury done to ourbrethren. They also visited the injured Jews, and wrote all of this down in their bcMlL Afterwards,they went to visit the injured railroad worker, who was hurt by the Jews, but they no longer were ableto find him in the hospital, because after the drink had worn off, he fled the hospital in the night,and he was back at his job along with his companions. A guard was put over eight of the thievingrailroad workers, that were recognized by the victims, and also over two Giristian townspeople whowere found in possession of stolen goods in their homes, and tomorrow they will be brought to thejail at the county seatWe continue to fear what they might do to us in the days ahead, because the railroad workers willtake their satisfaction with us, as indeed they have already started to do, and we fear that their hand68will be at us yet again, to do with us what they please. We pray that the Almighty will see ourdesperate plight, and return to us peace of mind, because we have had our fill of trials andtribulations without number, and our misery has risen above our heads.Shimon Duber FreidkinVolume 49,1 Menahem Ab 5645 in 1 July 1885Zelva. Near Slonim. - The perpetrators of the vandalism in our city were sent to the county seat, asI reported in the HaMelitz Volume 43, but they were not sentenced to jail, because the assistantprosecutor did not feel that it was appropriate, and they are currently free to do as they please, andthey are up to their old tricks again as before, untU word came from the district attorney at thecounty seat, to bring their trial to the district court (OKpy»:HOft Cy2. [Okruzhnoi Sood\),OT beforethe Justice of the Peace...On June 19th, a representative of the county came once again to our town, and he went out togather up the Jews into the synagogue, and having gathered them together, he went up to the lecternand addressed them in the following manner:" 7 am here at the behest of the district officer who sent me here to speak to you,because even though the railroad workers are guilty of the vandalism that they wrought,you yourselves are the cause of all the damage, because you afforded the perpetratoran opportunity to get together, and to wreak this havoc among you, when you defendedyourselves; if you had gone to complain to the police officer at the time that a few ofthem started to act destructively, then you would not have suffered so badly, once it hadbecome known to Mm. There is no connection between the workers actions to attackycmother than they drank too much, and accordingly, they acted crazily and riotously.Therefore, when they saw everyone gathering in one place, they thou^ to themselvesthat you had come to pursue them, and that is why they banded together to defendthemselves and to loll the Jews. I am wanung you, that if one or a number of theseworkers touched any of you with malicious intent, then you are to immediately go aruilodge a complaint with one of the three policemen that are stationed in this town or withthe section police officer, who is now also located in this town, and you are not to takethe law into your own hands, and don’t go run with great commotion because of thingsyou hear in one place or another. I am also advising you that your request for armysoldiers to be stationed in town for ymir protection - has been granted, and tomorrow,a unit (poT [rot]) of troths will arrive in town, foot soldiers led by two officers, andguards patrol), who will patrol the streets contirmously, and when needed, you will beable to turn to them for assistance, and then you will have peace and tranquility.”To the sound of: ”We hear [and obey],” - which burst forth &om the lips of all those present, theofficer descended from the lectern, and went his way. And we, what are we to say afterwards? Amen,may it only be as the officer said, and let us, indeed, have peace and tranquility. We say, even now,that when the workers gathered in the middle of town, even if they embarras^ us, or cursed us -all day we were sUent If they came into a store, or a saloon, and didn’t pay for anything that theybought, or for the whiskey that they drank, no one touched them, and they were sent away peaceably,and it was only after a few of them started to beat the people standing around them with iron rods.69that a few of the storekeepers stood to defend themselves.With the large number of guards circulating through the city, our peace of mind was a bit restored.But because of this, our brethren who reside in villages that are close to the rail line, melt every daywith fear, because after the ability of the workers to attack the Jews in the city was limited, they wiUpour out all their wrath on the Jews who live in the villages...On June 20th, the army unit came to the city, in accordance with the word of the county officer, withgreat fanfare and music, and we were made further at ease.Shimon Duber Freidkin70And a Divine Voice answered from the heavens:"Tjf I hear another voice, I will transform the world into water. I willrender that which is beneath me into a void without form.It is a decree that goes out before me.ACCEPT ITYou, who lovingly adhere to the faith with daily constancy...'"- The Martyrology, Yom Kippur MahzorFROM THE MOUTHS OF THE SURVIVORSThe Partisansby Moshe SlutskyWritten in YiddishTranslation firom Yiddish into Hebrew: Y. MoorsteinWhen the War broke out in 1939, I was serving in the 42nd Battalion of the Polish Army inBialystok. From there, we were taken to Brest, the Germans attacked us, and we retreated to theKobrin-Kobel road. It was there that we received word that the Red Army was attacking. Ourcommand disbanded, but was able to provide us with documents, and we prepared to head for home.From the time we reached Zelva, the Germans bombed the city heavUy, and the city went up inflames. My family was uprooted and sent to a nearby village, but when it was captured by theGermans, they returned to the city. The Germans appointed "Abba Poupko" as the leader of thecommunity. In July 1941, about twenty Nazi SS offlcers arrived, and they ordered all adult Jewish mento gather in the center of town, and to line up. In front of them, they raped a young woman, andthen gave her 24 lashes. This scene was terrifying, and left a veiy deep impression. The head of theSS declared that if the Jews foUowed all the orders of the head of the community, they would notbe beaten, and he immediately requested that all the teachers, accountants, rabbis, and anyone withan education step out of line. In answer to the question, "Why?" came the answer, "To do Imowledgework." They were taken to the Bereshko Forest and shotThe Germans put the Jews to work at all sorts of labor, and in the process shot and killed many ofthem. On one day, the [German] leader sentenced seven Jews to be hanged. The execution wascarried out publicly, in the marketplace, in firont of all the residents of the town. Both Jews andnon-Jews were ordered to build the gallows. The Germans murdered with "clean hands" accordingto their view, claiming that they were only hanging lawbreakers... the seven corpses were left hangingfor three days.I worked on breaking up stones for the road, and it was there that we discussed how to organizeourselves and how to obtain ammunition. Among the organizers were: my brother, Katriel, my cousinNathan Slutsi^, my uncle Hannan, Isaac Michal Kabintovsl^, Abraham and Dov Loshovitz, IsserSelman (a man from Warsaw), Gorovitz, the three Zlotnitzl^ brothers, and several refugees fromLodz.Nathan worked for the Germans as a locksmith, and managed to smuggle away a sub-machine gunwith 500 rounds of ammunition. My father brought 3 rifles from the forest. We cleaned them, duga ditch, and hid them.On November 2, 1942 in the morning, the SS troops that came from Volkovysk surrounded us,demanded a list of all the Jews, and ordered us to report to the train station. We decided to flee theghetto, and I was the first to leave the concentration point, and after me, came the rest of the band.In view of the fact that my sister had just undergone surgery, my father stayed behind to look afterher. In all, we were ten men.71As we crossed the Ruzhany road, the Germans strafed us with machine gun Are, and we scattered.In one of the places, I remained with my brother, cousin, and a Jew from Warsaw. We forded theZelvianka River, and with nightfall, returned to Zelva. In the city, already there was not a Jew to befound. We dug up and found our ammunition, re-crossed the river, entered the forest and began ourattempt to contact partisans. On our seventh day in the forest, we saw a wagon approaching us. Wetook cover by the side of the road, and when the wagon passed us, I ordered the occupants to stop.Four men jumped out of the wagon and identified themselves as partisans. To our surprise andelation, these were four men from Dereczin whom I knew: Gedaliah Basiak, Mishka Ogulnick, ManiaKoblinsky, and Israel Koblinsky - all of whom subsequently were killed in combat as a result of sortiesthey led against the Germans. These were active fighters, in the "Bulak" partisan group firom theShchuchin command on the shores of the Shchara River. On their word, we were accepted by thisgroup, and together we went to work, which turned out to be sabotaging the Warsaw-to-Moscow raflline that passed by Slonim. After implementing this task, the enemy opened fire on us, but wesucceeded in reaching our base. The mission was carried out with great expertise.At this time, there were 38 combatants in the group, all of them Jewish, except for the Head, Shubin.The commander of battalion one was Eliyahu Lifshovitz of Dereczin. Battalion two had EliyahuKobinsky from Volkovysk, awarded the R^ Star and the Order of Lenin, and the command of thebrigade of Chaim Moshe Lifshovitz, who fell in a siege in June 1944. His place was taken by Dr. Atlasfrom Lodz. This group distinguished itself by being so active, and was well known for itscombativeness, and for carrying out exceptionally heroic missions.That night, the division commander Valentin, and the group head Bulak arrived, and questioned meregarding my motives in coming into the forest, to save myself or to fight. And when I answered thatI would not surrender the weapon I had in hand, they gave me a mission to obtain shells for theircannon. Five of us went out: my brother, my cousin Nathan, Mania Koblinsky, Moshe Ogulnick andI. We departed with two wagons - 80km to Zelva. Not far fi'om our house stood a tank, and in itthere were approximately one hundred shells. We received an order not to engage the enemy. Wecrossed the Warsaw-Moscow raOroad tracks, and we reached the town of Bereshko, in the Zelvaenvirons. We woke up a farmer, and ordered him to ferry us across the Zelvianka River. We warnedhim, that if he gave us away, we would shoot him on the spot When we successfully crossed the river,we began to load the shells onto our wagons, but the noise of the wagon wheels on the thin roadbed,attracted the attention of the German sentries that were nearby, and they opened fire on us. Wereturned the fire immediately, in order to retire. By morning, we had managed to return as far as thefarmer’s house, and then to our camp. This was reported by the German command in their dispatchesas having "successfully repulsed a partisan attacL" We began our preparations for the winter. To thisend, we moved our camp to Voiko Volya, a wide stretch of forest on the road to Zhitiel. I led andarranged for the construction of five hous^ that were 3x5 meters in cross section, and also a bakery.On December 6,1942 we were visited by the ofiicers of the partisan division. During the somewhatfestive reception held in their honor, they conveyed their impressions of the Jewish fighters. At thesame time, the Germans opened up a broad general assault on us. We dug in on the banks of theShchara River, and with every piece of artillery at our disposal we denied the Germans the ability tocross. After three days of fighting. Dr. Atlas from Lodz, who was the battalion head, was killed. Hehad organized our group, he was the spirit that breathed life into it, and was a model of courage. Hismotto was: anyone who survives is obligated to take revenge upon the Germans to the utmost of hisability. We could not fulfill his last wish, which was to bury him beside his parents. We buried himwith full military honors in our camp in the "Borolum" partisan cemetery.72In view of the fact that the strength of the German forces stood at forty thousand troops, and pressedus with its full might, we were forced back to the outskirts of Baranovicb, where we al^ wereambushed by known forces. Because of this, we entered the forests around Slonim. In this period,contention broke out among the various partisan groups, particularly among the commanders, andour group suffered losses.During the siege, the Jews suffered from hunger. Bulak forbade the Jewish officers from looking afterthe food supply. Despite this, Kobinsky and Lifshovitz sent men to bring food. When Bulakconfiscated a Jewish partisan’s ammunition, our leadership decided to move to the camp of Orlinsky,and it was at this time that Bulak shot two Jewish woman partisans, Shlovsky and Becker, and evict^several families as well. A simQar incident occurred in the Avramov camp. They searched forKobinsky and Benjamin Dombrowsky, but they succeeded in blending into the Shubin group. Wedecided to establish a new camp, a complement of Gve houses, each 5 x 10 meters in cross section,1.7 meters high, and each window, 0.2 meters in height Each bouse had an iron stove, and on theroof - snow for camouflage. In this fashion, we erected a hospital, a kitchen and a bathhouse. Mostimportant of all was security, and in the forest, there were always security patrols.With the assistance of a treasonous farmer, the Germans mounted an attack on our camp andsucceeded in entering the bakery, but the workers, like Malshinsky, and Bela Bernstein, managed toescape, even after the Germans fired at them and wounded them. The partisans returned a furiousattack, and the Germans in retreating, left many dead and wounded and they fell back. About thirtyfamilies from Dereczin lived in our area. In the tumult of the attack they started to run, and 16 ofthem were killed.During the month of February, we derailed eight trains carrying battle ready troops. We were at astrength of 250 men in the attack on the village of Khatziv^, which harbored the "Samokhovsly”force, farmers who fought against the partisans as an auxiliary army to the Germans. We attack^from all sides, and our enemies fell by the sword, and afterwards we took what remained of theirguns and ammunition. In the end, we put the village to the torch, and left it in ruins.In March, Lifshovitz received orders to carry out a mission to destroy a food supply convoy that wasbeing sent to provision the army in Dereczin. The orders were given also not to engage the enemyin battle. When we got to within seeing distance, we realized that we had gotten too far outside ofthe forest. We fell back to the village of Sluzhy on the banks of the Shchara River. At dawn, theGermans launched a major assault Our leader Lifshovitz ordered us to cross the river on rafts andto set up defenses. Apart from rifles, we also had two machine guns, and with these, we were ableto stall .their advance. On the following day, the Germans bombarded us with cannon fire, and wewere forced to retreat From that point on, fighting broke out in the forest, and after suffering losses,the Germans retreated. At the end of the month, the Germans concentrated a large force in the areaand besieged us. We began to fall back to the area of Slonim and Baranovich. We set up a camp often tents camouflaged with branches. From there, we began operations. We cut telephone lines andblew up a railroad bridge adjacent to Baranovich. We wiped out two companies, one was a supplycompany, and the other from Vlasov’s army. The results: 5 dead, 3 captured, 2 mortars, 10 rifles withammunition, and a lot of food. In the sector, there were S German armies in addition to the Vlasovbattalions, but without armor (tanks), it was not possible to attack them frontally. In the village ofTvorog, there was a tank that was left behind by the Red Army. The mechanics of the tank weredamaged, but a partisan among us repaired it, and we put it back into service. When we reached thebanks of the Shchara River, the Germans attacked us with the help of Ukrainians. We managed to73ford the river, despite the fact that we were in the heat of battle, and only after several days did wereturn to camp without casualties, even though we had been given up for lost.In groups of ten men, among them Lifshovitz, Ogulnick, Basiak, Blizninsky, and I, we went out onmissions, and we engineered the blowing up of trains, and of railroad track in several places. Wereached the town of Rus, a distance of 50km firom our base, in two wagons, and we attacked acement factory. We eliminated the guards, and herded the workers outside, and put sbcteen kilos ofdynamite into the factory boiler system, destroying it completely. In this way, we eliminatedproduction capacity equivalent to three trainloads a day.In the summer of 1943, the Jewish group obtained the mission to destroy the E>ereczin city hall, andto obtain supplies. Eighteen of us went out on this mission. After a basic scouting by a formerresident of Dereczin, Joseph Blizninsl^, fifteen men, supplied with dynamite and instructed indemolition, set up the charge on the b^t side of the building, and as we fell back, we attacked asupply convoy that was bringing provisions to the police camp at Ruda Jaworska.From command headquarters, we received notification to carry out a mission: at 9:00AM, a supplyconvoy consisting of fifteen wagons loaded with foodstuffs and munitions will be on the road passingby the village of Sluzhy. There will be three units participating in the mission, and I was in number2. Their role was to hide themselves about twenty meters off the road, give the convoy theopportunity to pass them, and to go into action only if the convoy attempted to retreat. Unit 1 wasto wait for the convoy on the other side of the road, and Unit 3 was to lead the attack. In accordancewith our timetable, we allowed the convoy to pass, and only when they reached the firing range ofUnit 3, did that unit open fire, and the convoy escort began to fall bac^ and it was then that we gotthem in a withering crossfire, and after us, Unit 1 with fire and shouts of victory.Results of the battle: 20 dead, 11 captured, all police. We brought all the spoils, food and ammunitionto camp, and it consisted of: 5 heavy mortars, 2 light mortars, 15 rifles, 5 mortars, hand grenades, alarge supply of bullets, and supplies for a large populace. As we reached our camp in triumph, thebase commander greeted us with great pleasure. He immediately sent for 3 wagons from the villageof Azyurky, and on them, he loaded 20 of the dead with the following note:Honored Commissar!We ask that you for^ve the sender's untidy packa^g. Next time well straighten out the mess!Our leadership anticipated a sharp reaction by the Germans, and sure enough, the attack wasn’t longin coming. At 12 o’clock a large force began a rifle attack on the village of Sluzhy and a part of thefor^t not far from our camp. They assumed we would return their fire, thereby revealing ourpositions, but instead, we held our fire, and they stopped their advance about two hundred metersfrom the village. In that location, a stream meandered by, and over it was a small bridge. We blewit up, and when the Germans began to t^ and ford the stream, we opened fire on them from allsides, and they started to retreat in panic, leaving behind a tank which we burned, many dead,wound^ and prisoners. On our side, Moshe Ogulnick, Levit Maustrov, and Lipman were wounded.The prisoners were brought to camp. Some of them were shot immediately on the spot, and the restafter interrogation. After this incident, the Germans did not move supplies through this territory.74One of the partisans caught his brother and brother-in-law, and turned them over to the commander,Bulak. They were shot by him for treason and spying.After one operation, when the Germans sent in a punitive expedition against the village of Sluzhythat consisted of 300 men, our unit of 18 men was sent to meet them (this being an error made byheadquarters). Needless to say, we didn’t hold our ground for very long, and we beat a hasty retreat,but not before Fanya Lifshovitz from Dereczin was mortaUy wounded and died. There were 4 Gghtersfrom the Lifshovitz family: Eliak, a division commander, Ghaim-Yehoshua, Gersbon and their sister,Fanya. Fanya and Chaim-Yehoshua were killed in battle, while Gershon was wounded and remainedan invalid. Not once did Fanya ever want to stay within the confines of the camp, and like herbrothers, participated always in all the fighting. We brought Fanya back to camp, and buried her withfull military honors in the presence of ail the members of the camp in the partisan cemetery in theforest of Ostrov Borolum. Our unit there was called Ilofieita [Pobaia] meaning, ’Victory."We moved to a new location that was near the Shchara River, near Chornaya Kolonya. Our missionthis time was to repair a tank and use it to attack the Germans in the area. This plan became knownto the Germans, and in the month of September 1943, they attacked us with the objective of hittingthe tank and destroying it. After the Germans captured the village of Peshchinka and burned it, weretreated and entered the forest. Our command then canceled the above mission, and we began toprepare for winter. We crossed the river and entered the forest of Dobrovshchin. Every unit in onecamp set up dweUings and outhouses. My brother and I were the builders. Apart from the quartersfor our section, we also built a hospital, bakery, kitchen and bathhouse. After we put up thesebuUdings in the end of December, several additional partisan groups joined us, and they appointedofficers to head new units. I was attached to section 172 which consist^ of 4 divisions of mine layersand one which was administrative. Our mission was to sabotage the movement of the Germans onthe Vilna road between Slonim and Krulevshchina.In one operation, when we were advised to destroy the Ostrov camp, all three sections participated,180 men. In the dead of the night we attacked, all the partisans, with unending fire, llie Germanshad their sleep interrupted, and after we dealt them losses in tens of dead, and many wounded, wetook 26 prisoners, a great deal of booty, which included a cannon, 2 heavy mortars with two stands,many rifles, 45,000 rounds of ammunition, food, and a variety of other types of armament We losttwo men. After this attack, the Germans put us under siege, and with the help of Ukrainians andByelorussians, sealed all the principal roa^ from the forest to the railroad tracks. They attemptedto tiy and advance on our campsite. We allowed them to close in on us, but as soon as they reachedfiring range we opened fire on them and inflicted loss of life on them, and they fell back.During the period when we carried out operations on the Vilna road, our section organized an attackon a supply convoy of 20 wagons loaded with armaments, clothing and food. This convoy wasearmarked to suppfy the needs of the encampment at Krulevshchina, but all of this was captured. Amonth before the great offensive launched by the Red Army, the Germans made all preparationsrequired in order to attack us and wipe us out They sealed all the roads with a large army, andcovered all the roads leading to the forest with tanks and cannon. Our command decided to moveto the Niliebuki forest On the third day, we reached the road leading to Zelva, and we opened anoffensive in order to enable our force to advance. The fighting was extremely brutal. The commander,Avromov, was killed, as were Misha Ogulnick, Tuvia the Fighter, Shlovsl^ and his sister (anothersister was killed by our leader, Bulak), and 4 other combatants. This enabl^ our force to reach thevicinity of Baranovich. Our crippled section ceased to exist The survivors broke up into smaller units75to facOitate logistics. Our new commander was Kanoplov. In the course of a month, we moved fromplace to place. At the end of June, we re-joined a unit of ours in the Niliebuki forest that hadsuffered casualties in the heavy fighting it had been obliged to undertake. It was in those battles thatChaim-Yehoshua Lifshovitz and his wife, Galia were killed, as were the commanders Yuvlev,Kostrankov, and Zerbtzov. We began to get ready for more operations.On July 12 the Red Army reached us. The siege was lifted, and we advanced together with the RedArmy. I was attached to the engineering corps, construction battalion 269 near the Svyslutz River,and we fought for over two days. In our advance, we approached the vicinity of Bialystok. There washeavy fighting there, but we carried out all the missions assigned to us. After these battles, theGermans retreated fi'om Bialystok, and fortified themselves in the city of Choroszcz on the NarewRiver. Our army constructed iron drums within two days, and put boards across them, and our forcesadvanced on these boards. The Germans took heavy losses, but so did we. In our advance, wereached the city of Choroszcz on October 10,1944. In the attack on the city of Makov I lost a leg.HERE IS THE CITATION I RECEIVEDCOMMAND OF THE WHITE RUSSIAN PARTISAN MOVEMENTBARANOVICH DISTRICTJULY 16, 1944The head of the Pobeda Partisan Unit, Lieutenant Colonel Bulak, and theOfficers Krylov and Smirnov hereby:Certify herein that MOSHE and KATRIEL, the sons of MORDECHAISLUTZKY of ZELVA, joined a fighting partisan unit on November 6, 1942as combatants in the AS. Saborov Brigade and served until June 12, 1945.Attached to this is a medical certificate because Moshe lost a leg in battle.76A Family Amot^ The PartisansAlta and Ephraim (Foyka) GelmanTranslated by Y. MoorsteinWe and our two children were among the few survivors when the Germans entered Poland as far asBialystok, in accordance with the pact between Stalin and Hitler to partition Poland. Our city, Zelva,was captured by the Russians, and we began life under a Communist regime. The well-to-do, theBorzoi to the Communists, the Borodetzky, and Spector families, Moshe Lantzevitzlty, and Wallsteinwere exUed to Siberia. Whoever couldn’t prove that he was a worker, was not considered Gt toreceive gainful employment. I left to go Bialystok, and there, I received a Soviet visa, and I workedup until the time the Germans invaded Russia in June 1941. When I returned to Zelva, the Germansbombed the city. The houses were burned, and the city was left in ruins, along with eighty dead andwounded.After several days, the Gestapo men arrived who then ordered all the men to report immediately totheir leader. In that same instance, forty members of the town’s intelligentsia were taken to theBereshko Forest and shot to death. In this undertaking, the Germans were assisted by Polish youthswho were deputized as police for this purpose. Starvation began to squeeze us. It was impossible toobtain a piece of bread, in view of the fact that everything had been burned and there was nothingto offer the farmers in the way of an exchange of value. When seven butchers were caught on thesuspicion of smuggling meat, aU the Jews, and the rest of the residents were compelled to watch themhung in the marketplace. After the Succoth holiday, all the Jews were deported, along with thoseliving in the surrounding villages around Volkovysk, with incredible overcrowding, and under inhumancircumstances into colonies, and from there — to the gas ovens of TrebUnka.We lived in one of the cellars until the Germans came on July 6,1941. When the Germans arrived,Alta and I packed our belongings, and with our two daughters, headed for Dereczin. There were stillhouses standing in this city. We lived there for about seven months. When they started to organizea ghetto in that place, we returned to Zelva, but were it not for the fact that we were not registeredin the list of Jewish residents, we would have been marked for death. Consequently, we wanderedto Volkovysk, and there I was given heavy work building roads. I worked about 14 hours a day. Wefound a place to live in a house with 5 other families. When they were getting ready to deport theJews from this place, we managed to sneak out of the city at night After 10 days of wandering, wecrossed the Zelvianka River and reached the forests between Dereczin and Zhitiel. We had severaladventures until we met up with a number of partisans, who brought us to the camp of ”Bulak”, inwhich 150 people lived, among them families from Dereczin, the brothers, Moshe and Katriel andtheir cousin, Nathan Slutsky from Zelva. We were accepted into the camp that operated undermartial law, and we lived there for 26 months. Our Jewish brigade undertook sabotage operationssuch as blowing up trains and railroad tracks in the midst of heavy Gghting. In the Gghting against theGermans, losses ran about eighty percent among us, over the years. The details about this dreadfulGghting, and the revenge we exacted for our dear ones, are covered in Moshe Slutsky’s narrative.In July 14,1944 we were liberated by the Red Army, and we left... to return home to our city. There,we found only heaps of ruin. From all the houses, schools and the Great Synagogue, all that remainedstanding was one wall...there was no place to bed down for a night The gentiles were certainly nothappy to see us. They were afraid that we might perhaps recognize the property of Jews in theirpossession. To our surprise and joy, we found Mordechai (Mottel) Loshovitz in Zelva, who survivedby a miracle, and arrived to this shattering sight of 2^lva. We did what we could for him. In77September 1945, we left our town, and reached Salzburg-linz (Austria) by illegal means. We livedin Austria until 1951. From there, we emigrated to the United States, where we raised our family andlived to see our grandchildren come into the world.We are extremely fortunate to have survived, but our hearts ache for those victims, who gavetheir lives in sanctified martyrdom. WE SHALL NEVER FORGET THEM !!!Alone In The Forestby Mordechai LoshovitzI was drafted into the Polish Army prior to the outbreak of the war in 1939. In the Gghting againstthe Germans at Chomy-Bor, I suddenly heard someone calling me my name. In an ambulance, layShmuel Konkevitz, a ^end from home, wounded by a bullet that lodged close to his heart, and noone was attending to him. He begged me to convey news of his condition to his family, and his wife,whom he had just married two months previously, when a heavy bombardment started, and we wereseparated.After several days of heavy fighting in the vicinity of Lomza, our camp fell apart, and I found myselfa prisoner of war. In the concentration camp for prisoners, which was organized in threes, I saw IsaacMichal Kabintovsky, one of my relatives, in one of the rows. I ran to join him, but received blows tothe head &om a cudgel, and was forced to return to my place. From that time on, I never saw himagain. There were many, many prisoners in the camp. That night, a horse whinnied, and the Germansthought it was the beginning of a prison break, and they opened Gre. The screams of the dying andwounded reached the gates of heaven itself In the morning, the place looked like a slaughterhouse.One of the wounded was Jonah Garzabsky, whom we managed to drag over to us. The Germanstransported us to Germany where we were interned at Stalag One which housed about six thousandprisoners. In the camp, I also encountered Leizer, the brother of Jonah. Both of them were ultimatelykilled in the Holocaust. Shmuel Varinsl^, another townsman of mine, was left with me. We livedtogether for a year and a half Through the efforts of the Red Cross, I received one letter fromhome, and a food package.They planned to transport us to the Bilew Podolski camp that had Ukrainian guards, where livingconditions were said to be sheer hell. From what we heard, they used to take the inmates toconcentration camps Gom there. On the way there, I jumped off the train and began to wander, atperil to my life. I changed my clothes so I would look like a gentile, and in this manner, I reacheda village near Brest where I was taken on and given work as a carpenter. In the entire area that Iwandered through I did not see a single Jew.In September 1942, they became aware that I was Jewish, and it was then that I Oed to the forest andhid. I dug ditches and lived in them. I stole potatoes from the yards of farmers; occasionally Isucceeded in trapping a rabbit, and it was only through sheer instinct that I managed to survive.In the summer of 1944, the Russians broke through. I emerged from hiding on to the road -- tofreedom, with the feeling that I had somehow managed to overcome the Germans. With my innerear, I heard the bells of my home town, Zelva, but my path was laden with pitfalls. After considerabletribulation, I Gnally did reach Zelva, but to my great sadness, I did not Gnd even a single Jew there;not a single house was left standing. Only one wall of the Great Synagogue still stood in place. The78cemetery, the roads and streets, were all covered with wild undergrowth.From one of the houses that had somehow managed to survive in town, a gentUe emerged whom Iknew, and he invited me into his dwelling. From him, I learned of the terror that befell our lovedones before th^ were deported to Volkovysk and from there ~ to Treblinka. In this gentile’s house,I saw candlesticks, tablecloths and bedding...The entire city was consumed in flames from the very first bombardment They (The Germans) killedoff the intelligentsia inunediately, and afterwards, in their madness, they totally cleaned out the Jewsfrom the city. The Germans also hung five Jews, among them, Abba Poupko, the community leader,David Vishnivitzl^, and Noznitzky. The only one who survived was Malka Lifthitz, who had takenill, and was confined to bed. When the Germans found her, they butchered her in an unusually cruelmanner. I was the only Jew in Zelva until the return of Shayna Loshovitz, Moshe Slutsky, and FoykaGelman, the latter being the only one to return with his family, excepting Shayna Loshovitz. Ourfocus was to reach the Holy Land. I got there in 1945 by illegal means.Mining Gold Above The Arc^ Cirdeby Shmuel KaninovitzMy life as a youngster was not materially different from that of other young boys my age. I was amember of Haskomer HaTza’ir and participated in a number of Zionist activities.In February 19381 was drafted into the Polish army, and in May 1939, my company was assigned tothe German frontier. We camped down there, and dug trenches to fortify our positions. OnSeptember 3, a dark night, the Germans attacked us with rifles and bayonets, and we returned thefight with vigor. In the battle, I was hit a dum-dum bullet in the leg, and fell wounded to theground. Our company dispersed aU over the countryside, and I quickly found myself a prisoner in afield hospital in the cify of Kutno. We received notification that anyone who wanted to, would receivea discharge that would enable him to go home. I switched plans and reached Zelva at the end ofOctober after considerably dangerous travels. It was there that I learned of our comrades missing inaction, Jamovsl^, Loshovitz and Novikovsky.In May 1939,1 was drafted into the Russian Army at Baranovich, and when the enemy began to gainthe upper hand in the war between the Russians and the Germans, I was given the opportunity togo home, or to continue with the withdrawal of the Russian forces, and it was in this marmer that Ireached Smolensk. I was outfitted for battle, and was thrown into brutal fighting. Out of my unit of25 men, only 2 survived, and 4 were wounded, and I was among them. The conquering Germansfinished off their job by massacring anyone they found alive. I lay without moving among the battlecasualties, and when one of the Germans stepp^ on me, he must have decided that it was not worthwasting a bullet on me, and that’s how I was saved from a hell that is difficult even to describe. I badbeen wounded in the arm, and I was taken into a unit that brought me to a military hospital inNovosibirsL There, I was ordered to set down my memoirs in writing. In those writings, I mentionedthat I has served in the Polish army. Because of this, the N.K.V.D. detained me, and accused me ofbeing a German spy. It did me no good to explain that I was Jewish, and that the Germans wereexterminating us. My sentence was banded down in a matter of seconds: exile to Siberia for sevenyears.79In view of the fact that our food intake was 400 grams of bread a day, I became a mere shadow ofmy former self. My weight dropped to 42kg, until after two years, I made the acquaintance of a cookwho had me assigned as his assistant in the kitchen. From that point on, I no longer suffered hunger.On the contrary, I was in a position to help others. In 1944,1 recognized a young Jewish man fromPoland who had managed to establish connections in the Holy Land. I remembered my sister’saddress in Haifa, and I let them know of my existence. They started to send me packages, and madeefforts to have me freed from the labor camp in Novosibirsk, but instead of letting me go, I was sentto Kolyma, above the Arctic Circle where the temperature falls to fifty degrees below zero. They gaveus the job of mining for gold at a depth of 20 meters below ground on meager rations and underconditions so difficult that they were unbearable. I managed to hold on until 1947, but at that pointI began to fail. My legs wouldn’t respond, my eyes closed up, and I lost my ability to see. It was atthis time that a rescuing angel appeared to me in the form of a Russian, who found some hot soupthat he fed to me. Slowly, but surely, I regained my strength. After this, they assigned me to cleanout offices.The camp commandants, Iosif Bobrov, Kovalevsky, Tchlitzl^, and Shaklirsky were Jewish. I told themmy story, and how I had gotten there. With their help, and through a long, tortuous journey, Imanaged to Onally reach our own dear, dear Land!!!Two Years In The PUby Faygel GerberAbstracted from Yiddish by Y. MoorsteinWhat I racperienced during the war was shattering and terrifying, until I was rescued.My brother, Isaac Nahum, went to VUna to study at a Yeshivah. Several days before the outbreak ofthe war, I left to join him at his urging, but when I arrived, I no longer was able to locate him. TheRussians had sent him to Siberia. We learned that the Germans had begun a terrifying bombardmentof Zelva. Because of this knowledge, I did not return there. I was rounded up with the Jews (ofVilna) and put into a ghetto. Here, the Germans ordered us to line up in rows, and with terribleblows raining down on us, they separated part of us, myself among them, and the remainder weretaken outside the city and ordered to dig pits, and over them, thousands of Jews were shot to death.The cries of the victims must surely have reached the ends of the earth.Left alone, with no means of support, I joined up with a woman, a mother with two children, whosehusband had been taken outside the city to be killed. Together, we sought some means to escape,and whUe we were able to get out and reach the city of Varanova, there too, we found slaughter.Somehow, we managed to flee to the village of Rezin, and you can imagine how happy I was to findmy townsman, Joseph Krinsovsky there, who afterwards was killed in the ghetto. We hid on a roofalong with several other Jews. After the Germans finished their job of exterminating everyone athand, they began to look for surviving stragglers. We had a baby with us that burst out crying, andhis parents could not make him keep quiet. With my own eyes, I saw his father smother him todeath...In the night, we slipped away from our hideout, and reached a factory building. We stopped to resta little, and a farmer passed ly who took pity on us, and invited us to hide in the yard of his house.He even brought us bread and milk. From here we began to wander. We were warned not to try and80return to Vilna. Again, we were fortunate with a fanner, certainly one of the righteous people in thisworld, who dug a pit behind his house and "settled” us in it Even though he did not have manymeans, his wife and daughter cared for us and fed us, and when the snows came and covered the pit,the daughter walked through the snow in order to offer us assistance. Sanitary conditions under thesecircumstances were, needless to say, not very good. My whole body was covered in sores. More thanonce I prayed for death to finally come and take me. The farmer’s family, whose name wasAdamovitz, lived very frugally, yet it shared with us whatever it had. You should understand that westill correspond with this family, and from time to time I send them packages.I traveled to Zelva after we were liberated, and all I found there was destruction and ruins. Therewere only a few houses left standing in the city...It is our obligation to do all we can to preserve the sacred memory of our dear ones who perished.I married Moshe Yarkonsky, he also was a Holocaust survivor, and together we emigrated to the U.S.where we had relatives who lived in New York. We have a son and a daughter.IJumped From The Death Trainby Sandor SpectorTranslated from Yiddish by Y. MoorsteinIn 1930,1 opened a warehouse for building supplies in Grokhov Warsaw, in which twenty laborersworked daily, who were members of the Grokhov community. When the war broke out in 1939,1 leftWarsaw together with the chief accountant, Ze’ev Vamivky, but we got separated along the way, andalone, after great difficulties, I reached Zelva. At the same time, my brothers, Jacob and Shalom,returned from the army, and my parents were very happy. In 1940, my younger brother, Shalom wentto Warsaw because he could pass for a gentile by his appearance. After a while, he wrote that Ishould come. When I got to Warsaw, it was still possible to live there. We were permitted to liveamong the Christian population provided we tied a blue and white band on our arms.The Judenrat of the ghetto was held responsible for providing hundreds of laborers every day, andthey were given bread for their work. This condition persisted until 1942. At that time orders werereceived to produce 10,000 people a day and to march them to a field. From there, they were takento an unknown destination. When the head of the Jewish community, Chemikov, became aware thatthe Jewish people were being exterminated, he committed suicide. Had he reacted differently, andwarned the people, it is possible that many Jews would have survived and joined the partisans andothers who were rescued.My brother, Shalom, couldn’t stand the predations of the general populace and he left, going to asmall town called Rambrotov, provisioned with silver. We made up to meet in a certain place on thefollowing day, but when I got to the rendezvous point, there was not even a trace of Jews. They hadall been transported to Treblinka. I got in touch with several members of the Polish police who wereknown to me and of good character, and made a request for them to try and get him out of there,but their answer to me was that it was impossible. No one returns from that place. I then went to thetrouble of obtaining a hacksaw that could cut steel, having decided, that if I ever got put on such atrain, I would be able to cut my way through the train raUings and jump off, and that’s exactly whateventually happened. When I was loaded into a train car, I immediately began to saw the railings, and81when the train slowed up after leaving a station, I jumped off. This was at night, and I continued tolie absolutely still In the morning, a farmer found me, and took me to his home, fed me, and refusedto any payment from me. He pointed out the way to the train station, and that was the way Ireached Grokhov. I turned to several people whom I Imew, and asked them to take me in, but theywere too frightened to do this. I recall^ a Polish acquaintance who lived several kilometers from thevillage, and I went to him. His wife took me in, b^use, in the meantime, her husband had beensentenced to two years in prison. I offered to pay her a suitable sum of money for her to be able toprovide me with sustenance, and she agreed to do this. I remained in hiding with her for about 18months until the Red Army reached us on August 18. One of the officers was a Jew, and I becamefiiendly with him. He told me that he hadn’t encountered a single Jew along the entire way he hadcome.My brother, Shalom, who was transported to Treblinka, was put to work there gathering together thevaluables taken from those to be executed. All of these valuables were then loaded into train carsdestined for Warsaw, and from there to Germany. In one of these round trips, when he was loadingail this booty into the train car, he managed to hide himself in the car and didn’t return to the camp,and when the train reached Warsaw, he jumped off, and in this manner, he too was saved, and Poleshelped him. Yes, there were some like that too...My parents survived by virtue of being exiled to Siberia during the days when the Communist regimehad control in Zeiva. My father died in Siberia.Today we live in Melbourne, Australia.On The IPqy To Concealmentby Avraham LapinIn 1945,1 left Russia on my way to Poland, in the hopes I would find some members of my familythat remained in Poland before the war, but my hope was in vain. I reached Poland by train. Wedisembarked in the sector of Germany that was ceded to Poland, at the city of Shvednitz. There, weorganized ourselves into a group that had the objective of one day emigrating to the Holy Land. Ina matter of a few months, I was sent to Lodz, where I participated in training for group leadership,and after I finished the course, I was sent to head a branch of the Irgfin in the city of Szczeczin. Oneday, Zvi Natzar arrived, who was an officer and representative of the Haganah in the Holy Land, andhe deputized me along with a number of my colleagues, to organize the infiltration of Jews into theHoly Land by all sorts of Ulegal means.At the same time, the number of Jews that were uncovered and identified to the Central JewishCommittee in Poland, established after the liberation, began to grow. In the first count, 80,000survivors were found out of a population of three and one half million, and it was necessary toevacuate them out of Poland, but first, we bad to get them organized.The emissaries who came from the Holy Land, together with the existing workers on site, establishedin the German sector ceded to Poland, resettlement camps for adults, young people and children. Thecamps were built with abandoned German materiel. The Joint Distribution Committee tookresponsibility for providing food and clothing. While we, the workers and evacuation agents preparedthem for the daring evacuation to come.82As it happened, many Poles concealed Jewish children in monasteries, in villages, and other hidingplaces, in order that these children be caused to embrace the Christian faith, but we exercised everymeasure to Gnd these children, and to bring them to the gathering places for Jews, and from there,we took them in trucks out of Poland by illegal means.The Communist regime viewed our efforts on behalf of the Jews favorably. The regime had its ownproblems to deal with. It had the problem of trying to reconstitute a ruined nation, to care for thewounded, and repatriate refugees returning from Russia. There were incidents where the Polesattacked our settlements and even killed Jews. The Polish police authority, which included peoplewho were greatly ashamed by these incidents, supplied the people in these settlements, and even gavethem arms to defend themselves. The police leadership was not disposed to assuming responsibilityfor our protection in the face of these bands who preyed on us. With all this, they also neverconsidered the idea of these Jews departing Poland.The evacuation leadership, consisting of Zvi Natzar and his staff, who were responsible for bringingall the Jews to staging centers, also were responsible for finding the various means by which thepeople could be taken out. Access through Czechoslovakia was closed off. The Poles prevented anyexit, and the Czechs denied entry. We found a gateway into Germany through the city of Szczeczin.The essential means of escape were set up with the help of the Russian Army that occupied Poland.By paying them heavy sums, they evacuated Jews using their train transports, but it became rapidlyclear that even after having taken bribes, they were not averse to plundering the Jews, and therewere even instances of murder.The evacuation leadership obtained vehicular transport, and used this to evacuate Jews, butunfortunately, even this means was cut off when the Russian secret police uncovered a largecontingent of refugees in the process of being smuggled out. They were exiled to Russia, where theywere sentenced to long prison terms. There were many dangers hanging over us, and those whom weasked to provide us with help.A terrible thing came to light in 1946 in the Polish town of Kleitz where a cluster of 40 Jewishrefugees was found in the community house, comprised of old people, women and children. Membersof the police arrived there, and demanded that the Jews turn over the arms in their possession thatthey were using to protect themselves, claiming that this was necessary in the name of security. Afterseveral hours, a mob of undisciplined rabble descended on this group of Jews, who were nowdefenseless, and killed 18 of them with knives, axes and staves, while many others were wounded. Onthat same day, Antak Zuckerman (may he rest in peace), representative of Polish Jewry, met withMaryan Sapikhalsly, the Polish Defense Minister. Antak described to him the very difficultcircumstances confronting the Jews in Poland, after what had happened to them, and after they hadmanaged to survive Hitler’s extermination plan.I was of the impression that the slaughter at Kleitz caused a change in attitude by the Polish regimetoward all those engaged in evacuating Jews fi'om Poland. I recall that the Polish-Czech border wasopened, and every night we would take 4 or S truckloads full of Jews to Czechoslovakia, and fromthere to Austria. This was a successful period for us.In 1947, I was taken to Italy (our operations center) along with some other members of theevacuation staff. Our objective was to assemble the Jews of Poland, Rumania, and Czechoslovakiathat had been gathered into a variety of camps in Italy, and transport them in sealed freight trucks83to the ports. There, ships were anchored whose destination was the land of Israel. We worked dayand night, Saturdays and holidays. I recall that on more than one occasion, when we were ferryingthe refogees out to the ships in small rubber craft, a distance of about 2 kilometers, a sea stormwould blow up and the smaU craft capsized and the Jews raised a terrible clamor of screaming andyelling. The screams frightened us, b^use we were apprehensive lest our activities be discoveredby the Italian authorities, but despite the difGcult and dangerous circumstances, we achieved our goalswith room to spare.In Siberiaby Sima BorodetskaI am the daughter of the late Herzl and Rachel Borodetsky of Zelva. My father was the son ofShmuel Borodetsky of Zelva. My mother was the daughter of the last Rabbi of Slonim up to WorldWar n. Rabbi Judah Leib Fein, who was brutally put to death at the hands of the murderousGermans and their accomplices, may their names be eradicated.In Zelva, my father owned a sawmill, a grain mill that he inherited from his father, and an electricpower plant he built to provide electricity to the town and its environs. We owned a gorgeous villafull of beautiful things. Many people visited us, and who were only too happy to be guests in ourhome. In the summertime, my mother would send me and my twin sister to the health spa inBereshko that was near Z^lva. Our governess, Zhenya, would accompany us there. We owned 4 villasthere, and our relatives also used to come to visit us there. My mother and my oldest brother, Jacob,would travel to a somewhat more distant health spa.My father had university training. He was a graduate in pharmacy and business administration. Mymother had high school education, and had completed a course of study at a Gymnasium. We werethree children at home. My oldest brother, Jacob, may he rest in peace, who studied at theGymnasium in Slonim, my sister, and I who attended a public school in Zelva. My father and motherhelped many people. Each one helped in his own special way. My father’s employees were fond ofhim because of his good relationship with them. Our life evolved with good fortune and plenty untilthe outbreak of the war when Hitler invaded Poland in 1939. The sawmill and the grain mill wereburned. Only the electric power plant remained.In 1940, the Russians occupied Zelva. Many Jewish refugees from the towns captured by theGermans fled to the areas under the control of the Russian Army. In a short time, the Russiansdetained my father, may he rest in peace, in the city of Kobel. From there, he was sent to aconcentration camp far into Siberia, Ost-Okhta, and he died there in January 1942.Many Jewish refugees also reached Zelva, who settled down in public and private places. Several ofthese refugee families lived with us as well. After a while, they installed two commissars from Moscowin our home, and armed soldiers guarded them 24 hours a day. After the commissars left, they cameto us, and told my parents that they had to prepare to evacuate our home, leaving all its contentsbehind, at a specific time. We moved, at that time, to live in the home of the Mansky family, and westayed there up to the day in 1940 when they sent us to Siberia. My mother had a sister in Moscow,who when she found out that we were in Siberia, immediate^ sent us financial assistance andpackages. One day, she personally appeared from Moscow with two suitcases full of aU sorts of goodthings. She also brought two cameras. One had a 5-second shutter speed, and the other a standard84speed, along with a lot of photographic supplies. My mother learned to take pictures from a smallpamphlet that was attached, and she photographed many people at no charge, just to be able toacquire the skill. Afterwards, she worked as a photographer for several months, and my brotherassisted her with developing the prints.After returning to Moscow, my aunt travelled to Slonim with her little daughter Zhenya, to visit herfather, the late Rabbi Fein, and her brother whom she hadn’t seen in many years. When Hitlerinvaded Russia in 1941, my aunt did not manage to get out of there in time with her little daughter,and return to Moscow. She was seized in Slonim, together with her daughter, with her mother, theRebbetzin, and our uncle, as described in the Memorial Book of the Survivors of Slonim.In Siberia, our mother was very active in her concern for us. She drove herself with all her might, andlooked after us in every respect My brother, Jacob, also helped a lot There were times that we wenthungry, and there were times when we had enough to eat If we managed to have a pot with areasonable amount of potatoes, well, then we had something to eat after all.The cold was unbearable, several tens of degrees below zero. There were gale-like winds that blewthrough the place, called buranyii [BypaHKit]. With the onset of such a wind, it would suddenly getdark in the middle of the day, and it wasn’t possible to see your the way to get home. A person whowas not indoors, and happened to be out of the city, would freeze to death from the cold.My brother Jacob completed his Gymnasium studies in Siberia, and even my sister and I studied ina regular school. After graduation, my brother worked at appointed job in an office. It was notpossible to survive on his salary, because a pail of potatoes alone cost several months worth of hissalary. During the war, we also received packages from America, which were sent by my mother’suncle. Rabbi Kosolwitz of New York. We also received packages from Israel occasionally. Thesepackages contained clothing, foodstuffs, vegetables, and other provisions. This was of tremendous helpto us.In 1946, we were given an amnesty, because we, as citizens of Poland, were entitled to return hometo Poland. We lived in a commune in the city of Voroltava for several months. Together with the restof the commune membership, we crossed the border into Czechoslovakia, from there to Vienna inAustria, from Austria to Germany, and from Germany back to Austria. From Austria, we went toItaly over the Alps. We lived in Milan, and after a whUe, in 1948, we emigrated to Israel from Naples.My mother passed away in Israel a couple of years ago.As to my brother Jacob, may he rest in peace, there were so many good things about him, you coulddivide his qualities up among many people. He was handsome, good-hearted, diligent, he was verycapable, happy, witty, he stood out in any group, and loved to be helpful with all his might. We wereproud of him, and we admired him greatly. He fought against the Germans, and was wounded threetimes. The last letter we received from my brother Jacob was from Konigsberg, on March 3, 1945.The city had changed hands several times. In his letter, he wrote:"Mother, I am going into battle. If you receive letters from me, you will know I am stillaUve."Two days later, on March 5,1945, we received a letter from my brother’s friend, who advised us thatmy brother Jacob bad been lightly wounded, even though an army officer wrote to us that he had85been heavily wounded in battle, and that they had sent him to a hospital in the Konigsberg area. Theofficer speciGed the address of the hospital. My mother immediately sent a letter to that very hospital,and they answered us that my brother Jacob never got there at all. He was believed to havedisappeared - missing in action.I am obliged to cite at least one of my brother Jacob’s letters, in which he wrote that after one battlewith the Germans, he was separated from the Russian soldiers who fought beside him, and he wasleft alone. As he was searching for the Russian soldiers, he sensed the presence of two Germansoldiers, hiding at the side of one of the houses in the area. My brother understood, that if he didn’tface them and confront them, they would kill him, so he approached them with a show of conGdence,and ordered them to get their hands up. The Germans Ggured that he was apparently not alone, sothey complied, and in this manner, he herded them off untU he found the Russian soldiers.Fnm Zdva To The United Statesby Joseph Kaplan (U.SA.)Translated from English by: Aharon FreidinThe following is a description of my life from the time I completed my studies at the HenliyaGymnasium in Volkovysk in 1939 until I came the United States in 1941:During this period of time, I experienced very great difficulties, as did ail the Jews of Poland priorto the onset of the Second World War. I had to struggle with a difficult and terrible future beforeI could achieve a situation to my liking. To my good fortune, my sister, Lillian, reached America sixyears before I did, and she was assisted by Mottel Perlmutter, who had reached America in 1929.Both of them looked after obtaining visas for me to enable me to continue my studies in the UnitedStates. From September 1, 1939 when I was in Zelva for several months with my father and sisterBeileh, I attempted to Gee to Vilna, which at that time was in Lithuania. I was hoping to receive thevisa there, that had been bought for me. In that city, about 10,000 Jews had gathered from all comersof Poland. At the end of 1939,1 succeeded in reaching Vilna together with young Jewish people, andamong them was Isaac Gerber. After staying there for several months, and after many efforts on mysister’s part, Gnally, the visa to America arrived. In those days, there were no conventional means toreach America. After further waiting and delay in that place for months, the Russians opened theTrans-Siberian Railroad with which it was possible to reach Japan. In September 1940,1 boarded thetrain in Vilna together with 3 other young Jews who were also leaving Poland, and our objective wasto reach The United States. We spent one day in Moscow, and then boarded the Trans-SiberianRailroad. We travelled on the train for seven days to Vladivostok, and after a week’s wait, weboarded a Japanese ship and reached Japan. There, we also stayed for a couple of months, and aftermany additional efforts by my sister to renew and extend my visa, I reached Seattle, Washington inJanuary 1941. From there, I travelled for four days after which, at long last, I reached New York, andthat is how my long journey, full of hardship, from 2^1va to the U.S. Gnally ended.86The Farmer^ Prophecy That Saved My Lifeby Yitzhak Shalev(Does each Nation and Human Being Have a Fate in Life?)In the summer of 1938,1 was on the way from the town of Huma to Zelva. Because of the deepsand, I walked on foot at the side of the road, with my bicycle at my side. A farmer was walking onthe same road. In the course of a conversation we struck up, he told me about a book in hispossession that had been passed down in his family from generation to generation. The book waswritten in the Russian language, and contained prophecies on events to occur in the future. Thisfarmer had predicted the outbreak of the First World War before it happened. On what was to occurin the future, the book said the following: a nation will rise in the West that will assert its dominanceover several other nations ("this is undoubtedly Germany", added the farmer). After this, the nationfrom the West will attack a nation found in the East, a nation that does not believe in God(6e3B0»:Hiift Hapoii [byezbozhrui narod]). The Western force will capture a large part of theterritory of the nation to the East It will capture the entire grain producing land of the Easternnation ("this is the Ukraine", said the farmer, by way of clarification). In the end, the nation of theEast will assemble a large and overwhelming force of its own, it will throw off the force from theWest, and liberate its territory from the hands of the conquerors. The war will be terrifying. Over you,will fly birds of steel, and they will destroy your cities ("so it was written"). One capitol city will betotally destroyed, and the dead wfll roll in the streets, and there wUl be no one to bury them ("that,it seems, wUl be Rome", said the farmer). It appears that in this instance, the farmer erred. Thedescription was more apt to Warsaw.It will be the Jews who will suffer the most in this war. Out of 100 Jews, only 11 will survive ("thatis what is written")."According to all the signs, this war is about to break out," the farmer said. T advise you to selleverything you own, and leave Poland. Travel to any and all lands where there is passage, to an oceanor sea that you can reach. But, if you are unable to leave Poland, and the war breaks out, you musttravel to the East (Ha Boctok [Na VostokJ), and not to the West. Because, in the book it is writtenthat Jews who flee to the East will not perish fi'om hunger, and will live. The Jew that flees to theWest will not return, that is what is written..."When I reached Z^lva, I went to my aunt. I told her about my encounter with the farmer. She toldme that she knew this farmer; that many knew him. His name was Tarlokov, and she knew all of hisstories. He argued and advised, in each store and Jewish home that he entered, that everything shouldbe sold, and to leave Poland, because the Jewish people of that land stood on the brink of a greatand terrible calamity. My aunt dismissed his warnings sarcastically: A Nayer Novee - behold, a newprophet! Are there now gentiles among the prophets?! And I also relegated the farmer’s stories tothe category of mystic tales and legends that one hears from time to time and forgets. And after awhile, I stopped thinking about the encounter.In 1941, when the war broke out between Germany and Russia, I was working in the city ofKrulevshchina. In accordance with the orders for mobilization, I was to present myself at the officeof the commanding officer of the city. At that place, companies of 20 to 30 men were drafted andorganized and sent to Slonim. I was in the last company. The commander of the city, who recognizedme firom my position at the bank, appointed me as head of my company, and gave me the files of the87draftees. Our objective was to reach Slonim by foot, and present ourselves to the commander of thatcity. I decided to take my bicycle, and with the consent of the company, it was up to me to reachSlonim before them and to verify what awaited us in that city. On the way, I encountered a seniorSoviet official returning from Slonim. He recognized me from my job as well. When I told him whereI was heading, he ordered me to turn back, with the draftees, and to advise the commanding officeron his authority to cease sending men to Slonim, because the city had been bombed by the Germansand the commander of the city had abandoned his post. I tum^ back, and advised the men of thecompany to do likewise. When I reached the office of the commanding officer I did not evenrecognize the place. Everything was packed, tied up and packaged for shipment. The officers ranabout in great confusion and fright and were in a hurry to leave the city. I reported to thecommanding officer of the city, and asked what I was to do. The answer was: "I can give you neitherorders nor advice. You must decide what to do yourselves." I left the files of the draftees on one ofthe tables, I took out my own file, and left the building.Chaos reigned in the streets. The Soviet Command ran helter-skelter, and concerned itself withlogistics to leave the city. The local population was docile and passive, and waited for events toui^old.I set my sights on Zelva. Here I was, again a free man, discharged from the Red Army draft. Onceagain, I will be among friends, dear ones, and relatives. Our home, commandeered by the Russians,would revert to my ownership (I did not work in Krulevshchina out of my good will). The fear of theGermans, I thought, was probably exaggerated. After all, everyone used to tell, in the First WorldWar the Germans got along very well with the Jewish population. In a conversation with my aunt(who was married to David Vishnivisky), she told me once: "If war breaks out, and the Germanscome, we have nothing to fear from them. Th^ will probably relate with understanding to all this,that the Russians took over our homes." I, agreed with her assessment.After some deliberation, I got on my bicycle in rather good spirits, and headed for Zelva. On the way,I came across a Russian family, with packs on their backs, moving with great haste down the roadIn response to my question,Vhere are you heading?", a 15 year-old boy, bringing up the rearanswered me that they were fleeing to the East, Ha Boctok (Na Vostok).1 stopped cold. I stayed in that spot for a moment. These two words had an electric effect on me. HaBoctokI I said to myself. These are precisely the words that I heard from the farmer three years agoin the summer! This is the war he predicted! All the words of the farmer rushed back into my memory,every word, every sentence rang in my ear, as if I were hearing them right now:"From every 100 Jews there will remain only 11 living! Whosoever will flee to the East(Na Vostok) will not perish from hunger, but will remain alive. A Jew who will go to theWest will not return."Everything in me changed. All my thoughts of Zelva, friends, dear ones, relatives, the house I wouldreclaim, all were erased and disappeared. Every link that tied me, and pulled me to Zelva was brokenin an instant: NA VOSTOK - these two words took complete control of me.I changed my plan. I rode after the family crossing the road. They explained to me how to reach themain road leading to Minsk, because this was the way East, to the old Soviet border. "See!" said thehead of the travelling family," The smoke filling the skies to our left is Slonim burning. And to the88right, Zelva is burning, and the Germans are at our backs. Travel quickly!" I did as he said, andtravelled with great speed. In every village that I passed, I sought bread, because I believed everyword that farmer had said:"Whosoever shall flee to the East will not perish from hunger, but will remain alive."In one of the villages, I bought a loaf of bread and tied it to the bicycle. Rested and confident, Iresumed my journey. Qose to one of the towns, I met my &iend, Jejna Bublecki. He was heading forZelva. Quicldy, I explained to him that it was critical for him to travel with me to the East. A tragedywould occur in the West I bad even seen Z^lva burning in the distance. He was convinced, and wetravelled together. After several kilometers, he stopped. "You are travelling much too quickly," hesaid, T haven’t the strength to keep up with you." v^ain, I tried to convince him. I suggested that heride first, and I would follow him. He waited a moment, hesitated, and said that he wanted to reachZelva, and began to weep. And he turned his bicycle around and headed back. I continued along myway and thought: two fiiends: one to the East, and the other to the West.The next day, I reached the main road to Minsk. From that moment, I entered a hell on earth.Thousands of people streamed eastward, while low flying German planes sowed death with machinegun fire. I was able to see the laughing faces of the pilots. The way was covered with hundreds ofscattered corpses, dead horses still hitched to their wagons, suitcases, bundles, countless possessionsabandoned by people, and bicycles. Old and new automobiles were abandoned at the sides of theroad when they ran out of fuel. It is impossible to describe the terrors of that road of blood. In mymemory, the image of a young woman is indelibly etched. She was beautiful, and she ran about,clutching her dead baby girl in her arms, killed by a bullet that split open her skull. The child’s bloodhad spurted all over the mother’s face, arms and clothing. People that passed by her side said to themother that her child was dead, and that she should bury the child by the side of the road, and tocontinue to flee. The mother screamed hysterically: "Leave me alone!! My baby is not dead!! She’llnever die!.'" And this mother continued to run about aimlessly, with her baby dangling in her arms.With nightfall, the hell abated somewhat. The planes did not fly night sorties, and the road was ridof its dead and wounded. I continued to flee as fast as possible, because the Germans were rightbehind us. Desperate people, retreating soldiers, officers who had stripped off their insignias, ail thesefell upon me and wanted to steal my bicycle. I resisted them with all my strength. I received blows,but I also returned them, and didn’t lose my bicycle. Eventually, I used it to reach the city ofSmolensk. In Smolensk, I succeeded in getting on a freight train heading into the heart of Russia.I got into the train after stepping over the heads and bodies of people weaker than L On the trainroof, on the stairs, in every comer where it was possible to hold on, people were crammed in. Dayand night we rode standing, and we even slept standing. When I used to awaken from such a sleep,I would always ask the same question: Ts the train heading East?" The people around me named me"the youth who always dreams of the East" In this train, I reached the city of Kazan, and it was therethat I spent the entire war.To this day, I frequently think about my meeting with the farmer, Tarlokov, about his prophecies andtheir meaning. And always, a single question stirs within me: Is there a fate for each nation, and eachhuman being?89The Bdvei Extermination Campby Yitzhak ShalevThe year was 1946. The freight train in which we were travelling on our way from Russia to Polandentered a side rafl and stopped for a full day at the BelzeC train station, not a great distance fromthe BelzeC Extermination Camp where over one million Jews were killed.My travelling companion, a young man from Czechoslovakia, proposed that we insp>ect the camp. TheGrst Pole we encountered, whom we asked the way to the camp, took us for Poles, eagerly explainedto us with no trace of emotion, how to get there, and he ended by adding:"There’s nothing to see there. I can tell you how it was, and save you the trip: they killedthem - thousands a day. They arrived here in crowded, overflowing freight trains, andwhen they opened the cars, many of them woe dead already. They stripped them naked,and took them on foot to a field, and there, they lined them up alongside wide, deeptrenches, and shot them. They are laid out there, rows and rows, one on top of another.Now, there is nothing to see there. On top there are a few skeletons and rotting corpses.The farmers from the vicinity dug them up out of the ff’OuruL They are looking for goldfilling in their teeth."When we got close to the place, we saw a circle of women sitting on piles of ashes and digging withmetal or wooden eating spoons. This is the place th^ burned the clothes of the Jews," theyexplained to us. "If you search patiently, you find gold rings here, gold coins, and occasionallydiamonds. It’s probably not worth your while to rake here, you should go on a little further, over thehill, and turn to the right, and go straight up the road. It will bring you to the field where they killedthe Jews. There, it is possible to extract gold teeth from their mouths. There’s a lot there. It’s justhard to stand the stench there in the field. It’s a little difiBcult to breathe. But for strong young menlike yourselves this should not be a problem. Youll also find shovels there to dig with.""I suggest to you that you dig a little deeper," said one young woman, "because the upper levels havealready been dug through, and it’s difficult to find anything. But deeper, there is still quite a bit ofgold. Look! Look how pale these men have become!" said one of them. "Apparently, they’re afraidof dead Jews! Go, go! If you put up with a little smell, there is gold!"With quivering legs, we distanced ourselves from that place behind the hill. "Hey! Boys!" yelled oneof the women after us, "Dig deeply, and a lot, so you find a lot of gold, because you owe us a sharefor the directions you received from us!" And the women burst into a loud laughter, whose echo washeard in the distance.We approached a narrow road that was bounded on both sides by high barbed wire fences, and theroad opened onto a wide sandy field. A fledgling forest grew on tteee sides of the square perimeter.The open side of the field was where the narrow road we were walking on joined it From a distance,we could see people digging in the ground. Heavy odors encumber^ our progress, and caused usheadaches and nausea. We entered the field.Hundreds of skeletons and rotting corpses of men, women and children were spread all over the field.90Skeletons of women with hairdos, in which the combs and pins were still in place. Fingers with nails,on which there was still polish. Skeletons and corpses of children, with doUs and toys still clutchedin their hands. Heads of young girls with pigtails, with a ribbon tied in the end. Heads, with beardsand sidelocks. Tefillin that had b^n tom and shredded. TefUlin for the head. TefUlin for the arm thatwere still intact. Tefillin bound around a hand. Pages from a Tehillim, pages from prayer books,stained with dried blood. Skeletons that were still recognizable as bodies, and corpses that werealready skeletons.AU my senses were overwhelmed to the point of fainting. My legs, my hands, my body, all seemed tobe responding to forces outside of my control, and my thoughts were blacked out I was stmck dumb.My lips seemed to be whispering incoherent phrases. Walking and stumbling, stumbling and walking,we left the Geld.We returned to the train. I laid down on the seat My eyes were riveted on the ceiling. My lipsuttered the same sentence, over and over, a hundred times. A tkmsand times. For an hour, perhapstwo hours. Th^ whisper and return to the same sentence:...and the sun shines there, the wind blows, and the forest there is green, and the birdssing there...WHERE IS GOD ???91The Rescue of Rabbi Kosovskyby Yitzhak ShalevIn 19381 lived in the city of Ivtzvisk for business reasons. In 1939, with the entry of the Soviets intoour area, I returned to Zelva. These were the initial months of the establishment of the Sovietregime. The town changed completely, the people changed, the way of life changed and the meansof livelihood changed. The man of means and renown tried to hide his worth, because he feared thefuture. Merchants and storekeepers tried to end their businesses, and turn to labor. Smart lookingclothes were hidden away in closets. People dressed in simple clothes that didn’t stand out or lookunusual in any way. Everything took on a drab appearance: people, as well as the surroundings. Inthese times, I met a man in the street, who greeted me. His identity was unclear to me. When heinquired as to my doings, he approached me and said:T am Jacovitzky, the lawyer Jacovitzl^.” Beforeme stood an old man, sloppy in his dress, bent over, with hair that was streak^ with white, and witha beard, also streaked in white. He bore no resemblance to the lawyer Jacovitzky that I knew notlong ago, who was young, with an athletic build, athletically inclined, and a good dresser. I stood infront of him dumbfounded. After a moment of silence, he asked if I was prepared to escort himhome. He had something unique to tell me. When we entered his house, he turned to me and said:T am about to tell you something terrifying. You are the only one to whom I am revealing this secretI ask your word of honor that what you hear from my lips will remain between the two of us only."I promised him this, and here is his tale:On one of the nights when there was no government in the town, because the Polish authorities hadleft the town and the Red Army had not yet arrived, some people knocked on my door, representingthemselves as officials of the Soviet Regime, and demanded that I open the door. Two men enteredthe house, both armed, with red armbands on their sleeves. They ordered me to get dressed, andfollow after them. When we left the house, they directed me to go to the municipal building, and theyfollowed me with drawn revolvers. In the municipal building, they took me to a room where they toldme to sit down and keep quiet. A short while later, the "American” was brought into the room (thiswas a descriptor used for a rich gentile who had come from America and had bought himself a smallpiece of property near Zelva. Everyone knew him as the "American"). After him, they brought in twoother men who owned property in the area (whose names I don’t remember) and finally, they broughtin the young Catholic priest from the church on Razboiaishitza Street.During all this time, we were under the surveillance of three armed men, who did not permit us totalk among ourselves. From the behavior of our guards, and from the fragments of sentences I wasable to hear, I gathered that one other individual was still to be brought into the room. After anextended wait, two armed men with red armbands entered the room, and informed the three that theydidn’t find the Rabbi at home. They organized searches in all synagogues, but he was not to be foundthere either. After a short conference, they decided to send the two original men back to the Rabbi’shouse and the remaining ones would begin with us. Up to that moment we had no idea of whatawaited us.The first one was the "American." He was ordered to get up and go to the exit Behind him walkedtwo of the guards with drawn revolvers. One was left behind to guard those who were left in theroom.They left the building, went around the structure, and brought the "American" to the wall of the92building that was about three meters from the window of the room in which we were sitting, andwith no delay, proceeded to shoot him. When he fell dead, they picked him up and threw his bodyinto a wagon hitched to a horse that was tied up near the window. All this took place in the full viewof the rest of the detainees who were sitting in front of the window.After him, they took one of the men who owned property in town, and his fate was the same as the"American’s," and then the second man who owned land. When it came to the priest’s turn, the dawnstarted to break. I saw him standing against the wall, crossing himself continuously. He was also shot,and his body thrown into the wagon. I was left for last I heard the steps of the executioners gettingcloser to the room. I also heard the wagon moving firom its place. The door was opened swiftly, andthe two entered the room, and ordered me to get up and leave the place as quickly as possible. Theywarned me, that if I revealed what had happened during the night, my blood would be on my ownhead. Apparently, after daybreak, when the residents of the area arose to go to work, they didn’t havethe nerve to continue with their activities.After an extended silence, and after gaining control of his emotions, he added:"Thanks to your Rabbi who was not at home, they lost a lot of time, and were unable to Gnish theirwork before dawn, and that is how I survived."Several weeks after I had met with Jacovitzky, four corpses were discovered in the earth in theBereshko Forest. The new regime organized an investigation, and the evidence led to Gve younggentiles from the village of Borodetz that belonged to the communist underground. They were alsoregular employees at the factory owned by Borodetzky. The Soviet regime wanted to demonstratethat there is law and justice in the socialist order, and arranged a public trial for them.I attended several of the sessions at the courthouse. The defendants sat on the bench for the defense,with broad and insolent smiles on their faces. They didn’t lie, and didn’t admit anything. All thewitnesses that appeared for the defense testiGed to the appointments the defendants had in theunderground, and their heroism there. The spectators at the trial had the impression that the courtwas on the verge of awarding the defendants laurels of honor and heroism, llie trial continued withrecesses of weeks, from one session to the next The defendants, meanwhile, went free, and continuedto do their normal jobs.Naturally, the lawyer Jacovitzi^ kept his secret to himself, and I also kept my word of honor to him.Both of us knew that our testimony would not harm the defendants, but probably would harm us.During the hearings, rumors and stories spread about the night of the murders. It was told, that ashort time before the Red Underground reached the Rabbi’s house, that Ephraim Moskovsky reachedthe Rabbi and warned the Rabbi about what was about to happen. He advised the Rabbi to Gee hishouse and Gnd a place to hide, until the threat passed.When I reached Israel after the war, my townsfolk told me about what they had heard from themouth of the Rebbetzin Kosovsky. Therefore, it was Ephraim Moskovsky who came to the house ofthe Rabbi that night and told him what was about to happen, and in this manner, the life of theRabbi was saved.93Rachd The Teacherby Yitzhak ShalevShe to Zelva ftom the big city of Bialystok, coming here as a teacher at the Tarbut School. Ina short time, she endeared herself to everyone. The parents loved her, the students loved her, andwe, the Mends, loved her. Her laugh was captivating and stimulating. She had a sweet voice. She sangas a solo, and she sang in groups. T love this enchanted little town, and its inhabitants," she was heardto say more than once. She loved the Gelds, loved the river, and the mountain that overlooked thenearby forest. A forest that close to a town she had never seen before in her life. We enjoyed beingin her company. She was always laughing and singing. We used to say, that Rachel was bom to laughand sing.She stayed in our town only for a year. She did not return for the second year of schooL She marrieda childhood Mend and stayed in Bialystok. We kept in touch with her untU 1939. With the outbreakof the war, the contact was stopped.♦ ♦♦♦♦In Cyprus, 1947, as I stood on a bridge between camps 66 and 67, a woman approached me. Herattention was focused on traversing the steps leading in my direction. She called out my name, andI stopped from moving on. Before me stood a woman that I did not recognize. "I am Rachel," shesaid, "Rachel the teacher Gom Zelva." My reaction was effusive and deep from both happiness andsadness. The woman who stood before me bore absolutely no resemblance to Rachel the teacher. Shelooked to be a full generation older.In the evening, I visited Camp 67 and entered the barracks in which Rachel lived. She was sitting onher bed (the one piece of furniture the English gave to the detainees in Cyprus) and I sat across fromher on the bed of her roommate in the barracks. I listened to her story. Her gaze was fixed on theoil lamp made from a watchbox mounted on a faceless stone. The flame flickered up and down. Thinstreams of smoke rose from the wick, reaching the cathedral-like ceiling of the barracks where theyvanished into the darkness. She spoke softly, as if she were speaking just to herself:"Winter, nighttime; the snow has covered the ground. People sat in the forest, in the depths of the earth.They sat in the pit that they had dug for themselves, under the ground, a place set aside for the dead.They wanted to guard their lives. There were six of them. Nighttime, all of them are asleep. In the comerof the pit, Shhimeleh sleeps, twelve years old. Several months ago, the Germans took him, his motherand older sister and herd^ them into the forest, and stood them together with other Jews at the edgeof a great pit, artd shot at them. When the mo^r fell into the pit, Shloimeleh, still living, was mixedin with the bullet riddled bodies, with one bullet wound in Ids arm. At nigfu, he freed himself from themass of bodies that were piled on top of him, and he got out of the pit. He crawled on his knees allnight, because he was unable to stand up on his feet At daybreak, he spied a village not very far away.He drew near to the first house, and when the farmer’s wife opened the door and saw Shloimeleh, whowas half naked and all of him covered in dried blood, she crossed herself and fled in great fright.Shloimeleh remained staruUng there, apathetic with regard to his fate. His senses were totally dulled.Within an hour, the farmer’s wife came out, and brought Shloimeleh to a stable where a horse wasstanding washed him down, baridaged his arm, clothed his bare body with an old, worn jacket, too largefor his ste, gave him half a loaf of bread and a whip in his hand and said:- ’go to the forest! They saythat in the forest there are your land of people wandering about. If they ask you questions along the way.94say that you are going to the fields to gather fruit. And now, promise that you will not return to thisvillage, and don’t tell that you have been here.’Shloimeleh wandered for many days in the forest. Most of the time he would sit on a tree, and sleepthere as well When his bread ran mu, he ate the bark off the trees that he peeled off with his fingernails.Now he is among the six. He is asleep. Drops of water from melting snow that get into the pit, fall onhis face. He dreams: he is at home, sleeping on his bed, the drops of water falUng on his face are kisseshe gets firm Mamma, just like every ni^ before he falls asleep. A happy smile suffuses Ms entire face.In the pit, silence reigps, all one hears is the breathing of the sleepers. Suddenly, they all awaken. Thecry of a little child has awakened all of them. FrigMened, they get up and crawl on their knees. Eachgropes in the dark with their hands to find the narrow opening of the pit, this path only an air passage,in order to close it quickly to stifle the ay of the child. In the center of the pit a young, bearded mansits, his eyes are tired filled with resignation and fear. ’Rachel’ he says, ’What will be the erui of all this?You have to find a solution concerning the child Without Mm, maybe we will succeed in saving ourlives. Because of Mm, they could find us, and in that case, not one of us will survive. We have to resolvethis issue tomght. ’The baby boy continues to cry. The mother presses Mm to her body, covers Ms mouth with her palm,and presses on his little throat. In the dark, she saw no eyes. Eyes of many children, looking at her,beggjng mercy from her, and from all the mothers of the world. Her hartds relaxed ond sloped to theground from lack of strength. The infant fell sUera. The pit grew still The mother got up, and wrappedthe infant arul went out of the pit. It was cold outside, and a heavy snow fell and covert the earth. Themother stood for a moment, inhaled the clear, cold air, wrapped the irifant tigMly, and began to walktowards the village. In the village, all was silent, every house was covered in white. From the other sideof the village, a dog’s bark was heard; the noise was heard all over the area. The mother stopped at the^t house, exposed the face of the child presses her cold lips against Ms warm face, wrapped him uptigMly again, knelt, arul laid the child on the doorstep of the house, left the place quickly, and returnedto the forest. The snow continued to fall; it fell arid covered the trucks of all living things... and thefootprints of the mother.Three years went by. The svc wandered from forest to forest, from pit to pit. Three survived the motheramong them. The Day of Victory came. A day of liberation, a day of freedom that they thougM of anddrearned of so much. But it was so sad oppressive and heavy on the heart. Where sMndd they turn?Whom will they meet? Their hearts were tom.The mother has a hope arul a consolation: she has a son in the village. She will go there, approach thefarmer and tell him, that the boy that theyfouttd on their doorstep in the winter, is her son, and she willtake him from them From this time forward they will be together, arul will never again separate. Themother went, practically running, to the village. The village was far. She rides in wagons, walks on foot,crosses fields and other villages, arul does not rest; every minute is precious to her. In her mind’s eye,she sees again all the tribulations she went through, the night that she left her cMld on the doorstep ofthe farmhouse. Is he alive? Of course he’s alive. He didn’t freeze that nigM. When he became cold andhungry, he certainly would have started to cry. He always cried lustily. The farmer certainly would haveheoM the baby’s cry, found him, taken pity on Mm, and brougM Mm into his house. That’s what shekept thinking all those years. She was certain that it happened exactly that way. He must be a big boyalready. What will Isay to him? What will he say to her? She sees the village from afar. She draws near,identifies the house. This is it! In the summer, everything looks so different. She stops. She lodes around95perhaps she’ll see the boy beside the house. How can she stand this? She is shaking all over. She knockson the door, she is in the house, the farmer and his family are eating the midday meal There is no childat the table. She attempts to ask. She doesn’t hear her own voice, she speaks half words,incomprehensible half sentences, the floor is spinning under her legs. She sees many tables, manywindows. The farmer gets upfrrmi the table, approaches the mother and sits her down on the bench thatis against the wall He orders water to be brought to her.7 understand, I understand, ’ the farmer whispers. You are undoubtedly Grisha’s mother. We called himGrisha. He was a beautiful child, but he was not strong. He got sick several months ago, and he cougfieda great deal and then died. ’ After a short pause, he added: ’We buried him ten days ago. ’And when the mother, who had suffered all these trials and tribulations, overcame the devastatingdiscovery that awaited her at the farmer’s home, she was able, finally to stand on her own two feet, andwent with the farmer’s wife to the village cemetery.On approaching the small fresh grave, she pressed herself to the yellow earth that covered him, and afountain ~a fountain- that had been stopped up and locked inside her during all the years of tribulationand suffering burst open, and flowed, and flowed without end, as if aU the Jewish Mothers in the worldwere weeping together with her..."Yam Kippur, 1940 In The Soviet Sectorby Yitzhak ShalevBy Yom Kippur of 1940, all of the synagogues in Zelva had been converted to warehouses, includingthe Great Synagogue, with its splendid Holy Ark. All Jewish workers, in all places of work, reportedto work that day, like any other day.On that same day, I visited the tailors and milliners cooperative, that was located at the Moiehr nextto Wallenstein’s home. Each worker was chained to his station. Part of the workers sat by sewingmachines, part of the workers sat by the cutting tables with scissors and chalk in their hands, readyto mark and cut the cloth that was spread before them. And so they sat, ready for the possibility thatan officer of the regime should happen to pay a visit to the place. In this way, there would be no wayto lodge a complaint against them, and they would be able to immediately turn to their work, despitethe holiness of the Yom Kippur Day.My neighbor, Kolishevsky, Getzel der IGrschner (the milliner), sat beside a sewing machine, and infront of him were cut sections of hats. He turned to me and said: "Look! All of the workers in ourcooperative are good, loyal communists. Communist doctrine says, that whoever doesn’t work, doesn’teat Therefore, since we are not working today, we will accordingly not eat today either. Everythingis according to communist doctrine!"The Escape From German Occupied TerritoriesShlomit Becker-LaykinI, Shlomit Becker, write these things in memory of my late father, Moshe Yitzhak, Vt of the Beckerfamily, his mother, Shosha-Hama of the Ziotnitsky family, his father, Tuvia Becker, my brother,Meir, Vt, who were murdered and wiped out 1^ the Nazis.96The town of Zelva, my birthplace, where I was bom in 1920, was located between nine large citieson the railroad line to Volkovysk, between Slonim and the provincial center at Bialystok. The townwas surrounded by pine forests, where the young people of the town would go for picnics, particularlyon Lag B’Omer in the summer season. The most noteworthy forest was the Bereshko Forest,approximately two kilometers from town. It was a pleasure to stroll through its leafy, entangled trees.It was the most beautiful of the forests in the area. Every Shabbat, the townsfolk would go into theforest to enjoy the fresh clean air, and the ambience. The forest also served as a meeting place forthe young people who belonged to the Zionist movement The residents of the town of ^Iva werein part Jewish, and in part Christian farmers.There were three schools in Zelva: The Tarbut School, The Tachkemoni (religious) School, and TheGeneral School My late father was among the founders of the Tarbut SchoolAfter I graduated from the Tarbut School my parents sent me to Slonim to continue my studies atthe Gymnasium run by Professor Kunitsa. Studies there were conducted in Polish. After completingmy studies there, I returned to Zelva.In 1939, the Russians captured Zelva. My mother Rachel, from the Marminsl^ family of Slonim,a graduate of a Russian teacher’s seminary, wanted very much that I continue my studies, and inparticular that I learn a profession, but she did not live to see this. She died suddenly, four monthsafter the Russian invasion. I was left with the responsibilities of a mother to raise the children. Myfather, ^T, devised an approach to the issue of the children, by sending me to Novogrudok to studyaccounting at the academy there, my sister, Chaikeh, to study teaching at the teacher’s seminary inSlonim, and my brother Meir ^T, to Baranovich to study at the academy for railroad technicians, andmy youngest brother, Yaacov, age ten, was left with my father in Zelva, and studied at a RussianschoolIn 1941, after completing my studies, I did not return to Zelva. I married a young Jewish Russianman, who was a lecturer of mine at the academy, and then I brought my brother Yaacov and sisterChaikeh to Novogrudok. One month later, on June 22,1941, the war broke out.My husband was drafted into the Red Army, but he was discharged a day later, to allow him to bringhis family to a place that was further from the border. My husband succeeded in getting us as far asthe railroad station in the city of Kritsyov. We proceeded under a hailstorm of bombardment, and Ididn’t think we would make it. There were many dead on the road to MinsL Every minute, we sawdeath before our very eyes. In the end, we succeeded in covering the distance of 400 kilometers onfoot, and my husband returned to the Red Army. We lived through a very difGcult time, four yearsof suffering, but thank God, we survived. I managed to save my brother and sister from death. Myobjective was to bring them safe and sound back to my father.I returned to Zelva after the war, in June 20,1944, to locate my father and whatever relatives mighthave survived. In every place there was chaos and devastation. I could find no one who had survived,except for Shayneh Lmhovitz, the daughter of Berel Loshovitz, Vt. She told me how they hadrounded up the Jews of the town of Zelva, who were carrying small bundles in their hands, weighingnot more than a few kUograms, and they crowded them into stables and Glthy bams, in which thecrowding was awful; and in the end, loaded them into cattle cars transporting them to camps, andfirom there - to the gas chambers.97The objective of the Nazis was to dispose of the Jews in a clandestine manner, and they did this tosix million Jews. However, we, the living, who have preserved the memory of our martyrs, inscribedin our hearts, now are entering our memories of them on the pages of this Memorial Book in orderthat they remain with us forever.From Shayneh I learned that a relative of ours from Kolona Sini, Alter Becker, was in Dereczin. Itravelled to visit him, and he told me about my father, who had fled to Kolona Sini, and was capturedthere by the Germans in July 7,1941 where he was killed on the spot Alter brought him back to beburied in Zelva. And in a like fashion. Alter told me that my brother Meir, returned to Zelva fromBaranovich and lived in hiding for years with the Novish family, however, at the end of the war, hewas informed on by the gentiles, and he was apprehended and executed.As my mother’s entire family from Slonim had emigrated to the Holy Land before the war, as earlyas 1935,1 decided to send my brother, Yaacov with Alter Becker to Poland. From there, thqr wentto Germany, and they enter^ the Holy Land in 1948 with the refugees aboard the ship, "Exodus."My sister and I and our families came to Israel in 1959. My son was twelve years old, and mydaughter, two. My husband began work at a dyeing factory, and retired at age 65, and I turned toteaching. I studied at a teacher’s seminary in Haifa in order to become a graduate teacher. I workedtill age 60, and then retired.My son graduated from the Hebrew University in Jerusalem. He studied medicine, and today worksat the Rambam Hospital in Haifa as an oral surgeon, and serves in the army as a Major. He is alsoa graduate of the Rubin Music Academy of Jerusalem. These studies he did in parallel with medicalschool.My daughter graduated from the Harieli School in Haifa, and Haifa University, and is a graduateteacher of Biology. She decided to continue her studies at Tel Aviv University for a second degreein cancer research, and graduated successfully and began working on her Doctorate. She too, is agraduate of the Rubin Conservatory in Haifa, and is a pianist.In 1962, when I completed my own studies, and began to work as a teacher at the Geidim School atKiryat Yam, I volunteered to join a group to fight cancer as the secretary of the IQryat Yam chapter.One needs to be bom to public service. This inclination, I inherited from my parents, the foundersof the Tarbut School in Zelva, and who helped look after charitable causes: warm meals for needychildren, and in the winter: shoes and clothing.My parents were Zionists, and from my earliest childhood, I was raised with the Zionist ideal. Aportrait of Dr. Theodore Herzl hung in our home from the time I was bom.At this time I want to underscore the efforts of my husband, Laykin, who saved us from certain death.For this, he surely deserves our very special gratitude.My relatives who were killed by the Nazis are:My father’s only sister, Rachel, who was married to Itcheh Bereshkovsky.Their oldest daughter, Judith, their son, Lyuba, and their daughter, Shlomit98THE DESTRUCTION OF ZELVAThe Destruction of My Familyby Sala KoyatIt was not given to me to place even a small flower on the graves of my family, because I do notknow where they are located. I think of my loved ones, that were destroy^, day and night, and I willnot forget them so long as there is life within me.I had three sisters and a brother, and three uncles from both my father and mother’s side, and I begtheir forgiveness for having left them in Zelva, and making atyah to the Holy Land to fulfill thedream of my life.It was in 1939, three months before the outbreak of the war, when all my ties to you were severed,and I heard nothing from you. Where did you go? There were among you, tiny youngsters who hadn’thad the chance to have a taste of life, and what a brutal and bitter fate to which you werecondemned! I cannot forgive myself, and occasionally I think that if I were only with you, and I wasthe oldest one, perhaps I could have helped to save some of you. This matter constantly interfereswith my peace of mind, even though I am the mother of three children and a grandmother.Oh, mother, I am today much older than you were when I last saw you. What sort of evil and bitterfate befell our family, as befell the rest of the members of our town. Not one single member of ourfamily was saved, and I was left alone, without a relative with whom to eat, or speak, to simply chat,and vkdth whom to exchange memories about our wonderful little town that we had - Zelva.I remember every doorstep, every street, every nook, the place where I grew up, the place where Iobtained a Jewish and Zionist education.My father was an educated man. In the wintertime, he used to bind books and sacred texts. Iremember seeing him absorbed in a book, reading and learning instead of working, and afterwards,he would tell it all to the children. He used to say to us: "children, learn and read a lot, because thereis a great deal to learn"We had a home that was very warm and full of love, and our parents always used to talk to us andtell us things.I belonged to the HaShomer HaTza’ir movement. We thirsted after knowledge and understanding ofthe Holy Land. Our town was far from the big cities, and we were always thirsty for new ideas, butwe had teachers and leaders who satisfied this need and we learned a lot from them.Even though we had a meager sustenance in our household, the children all got their education atthe Tarbut School.Others have already written a great deal about our Zelva, and I won’t repeat this.With the encouragement of my parents, I left to prepare myself in order to accelerate the hour offulfillment of our dream. There were parents, though, who were opposed to this approach.99It is now 45 years since I came to the Holy Land in June 1939 as part otAliyah Bet. My life on thekibbutz was outstanding. I left the kibbutz, because I had the idea that I would leave the countryafter the end of the war to try and bring some of the children back to the land of Israel. To my greatpain, all of this turned out to be in vain.The first one to bring us any news of Zelva, was Moteleh Loshovitz, who visited the town after thewar and found not a single person there. The wound is very great, and it will never heal. We takecomfort in our land of Israel, that was established in our time, and we are commanded to guard her,and to persevere in budding her up, and strengthen her for the sake of our children who will comeafter us!!!We have to offer a Yashir Koach to our friend Yerachmiel Moorstein for his effort, his dedication,and his stubbornness to perpetuate the memory of our beloved town, and for putting down in writingits history, and a blessing too on all our other comrades, who lent a hand in this undertaking toproduce this Memorial Book.I pray that my children and grandchildren will read this sacred Memorial Book, and that they willlearn about a chapter of the life of the Jewish Diaspora, and it its midst, the town of Zelva in whichtheir mother, Sala Koyat was raised and educated.Elialdm The Avengerby Yerachmiel MoorsteinFor their entire existence, the Jews suffered pogroms and persecutions, but could they conceive thatin our lifetime in central Europe, that a cultured and advanced nation would rise up and come toZelva, destroy its Jews, and erase the entire community without leaving so much as a trace?Many of the young people in Israel, and elsewhere in the world ask this question, and return to thissame question: how did such a thing happen, that complete communities of Jews were herded intogas chambers and crematoria and were destroyed without resistance? What were those Jews madeof? Did they go like sheep to the slaughter?From the pens of witnesses who survived this inhuman assault on life, these solitary survivors told andbore witness, and their stories are in this book, stories of heroism and sacrifice, especially in thecamps of the partisans in the forest, there the Germans were unsuccessful in penetrating, despitetheir many divisions that were equipped with heavy artillery and ordnance.In one of the [partisan] camps, which had about three hundred men, most of them from the town ofDereczin, the partisans carried out many sorties against the Germans, and inflicted many losses onthem. They engaged mostly in railroad sabotage. The fighting with the Germans was bitter and fierce,and continued for 26 months, and from the entire camp, only about twenty men survived.During the First World War, Eliakim was orphaned when his father did not return from the frontHis mother fell ill, and she too passed away, leaving the young orphan boy to be raised by relatives.At that time there were no institutions such as orphanages. Like other boys his age, Fliakim received100his primaty instruction at the Heder of Shlomo the Melamed. During recesses, the other childrenwould play all sorts of games, but Eliakim hardly participated. He was always serious and lost inthought, and his large dark eyes seemed focused far away...While he was still a youngster, Flialdm sought out a means of earning a livelihood, and since therewasn’t much choice, he joined up with a group of wagoners, who used to haul wood from the forestto the train station. In time, he grew up to become a big strong man, and a talented horseman, whoengaged in haulage. A good-hearted man, he was ever ready to use his strong muscles to help theweak, he was tough and brave in dealing with imruly people, and he always came out on top... duringthe days of the draft army, the gentile draftees us^ to cheer themselves with a little" vodka, andfrom time to time, th^ would come into town and fall upon the stalls of the Jewish merchants in themarketplace, and at times like these Eliakim would show them the bravm of his arm, and he wouldinspire the Jews with his display of courage, returning the Gght to its perpetrators, and these unruly[drunken soldiers] would be scattered all over.When news reached the town that Jews were being rounded up from the neighboring towns, beingbrought to the horse stables of the cavalry in Volkovysk, and from there - being sent in sealed trainsto an unknown destination, that night thirteen young men left to rendezvous in the forest armed withrifles, but very few got there. In the ruins of the city, there were few hidden survivors left, and amongthem was Eliakim. According to the story of a gentile neighbor, a German reached his doorstep totake him prisoner, and Eliakim jumped him and beat him with a steel rod until he killed him. Hestripped the soldier of his weaponry, jumped on a horse, and began to ride through the fields to getcover in the forest, but after he emptied his magazine of ammunition, he was shot and killed,sanctifying the name of Israel with his death.May His Memory Be Blessed!The Suicidesby Yerachmiel MoorsteinNot all the Jews of the town were expelled and taken to the stables in Volkovysk and from there tothe gas chambers and crematoria in Treblinka. There were those, who chose with courage to ...commit suicide. They chose "to remain" in the city of their birth, the city of their fathers andforefathers for many generations before them.The most venerable was Reb Abba Poupko, in his role as the head of the community. Even duringthe First World War, he played this role for about three years, carrying out the orders of theoccupation regime honestly and with justice, for the benefit of all sides, and even the occupyingGermans respected him and placed value on his abilities, and in addition, he carried out his dutiesusing the German language. After the Germans captured Zelva following the heavy bombing, whichdestroyed nearly all the houses in the city in its wake, and killed about eighty people, it was naturalthat they would appoint Abba Poupko to serve as head of the communify. In July 1941, about twentySS men arrived, and they ordered all the Jewish men to assemble in order to be counted, and to forminto lines, and in front of them, they put a young woman down on a bench and proceeded to give her24 lashes with a whip. This terrifying scene left a painful impression. The head of the SS explainedthat he has to foUow his orders, and including the heads of the community, no - he had them shot!And in a similar fashion, he ordered, that all the teachers, among them my sister Sarah, the101accountants, rabbis and scholars, should step out of the line. To the question from these, for whatpurpose were they being selected, came the answer: knowledge work. They were taken to theBereshko Forest, and after they dug pits, they were shot to death on the spotJews were involved in all sorts of occupations, and because of their work, they were shot and killed.In front of all the citizenry, including the non-Jews, the Head Officer sentenced seven Jews to deathby hanging. The Jews were ordered to erect gallows, and to sign an affidavit that they were allcriminals and to cany out the hanging. Those hanged were: David Vishnivisl^, Joshua Niznitsl^, andfive other Jewish refugees. The bodies were left hanging for three days.According to what we have heard, Abba Poupko joined these seven martyrs and at the same time,and committed suicide.The family of Reb Joseph and Shifra Shulman and their daughters were the owners of the biggeststore in the center of town, and were counted among the most respected families of the community.Reb Joseph had rabbinic ordination, and he occupied a prominent place in the Moiehr Synagoguewhere he used to pray. Between Mincha and Maariv, he would give a lesson in Talmud. Althoughhe scrupulously ol^rved the 613 commandments, his dress was that of a modem and contemporaryman. He used to read a daily Hebrew newspaper, and he was a Zionist, who donated to variousfoundations in addition to the charities in town. The Jews respected him, and the Christianleadership, the PorUzim, the landed gentry of the area, sought association with him as an honest andstraightforward individual, and patronized his magniOcent store for all manner of things. He made agood living.Reb Joseph, Shifra and his daughters were not driven out with a knapsack in hand. They committedsuicide together in the ceUar of their last abode, and remained somewhere in Zelva, the city of theirbirth.May Their Memory Be A Blessing Forever And EverAmong The Rest Of The Martyrs Of The Jewish People!The Final Victimby Yerachmiel MoorsteinIn the typhus epidemic that spread through the town during the days of the German invasion [WorldWar I], a mother of Gve children died, and the youngest of her chQdren was named Malka. She wasa tall, pretty girl, with blue eyes and long blond hair, which made her look Christian. She was giftedmusically, and with her sweet, soft voice, she would perform lovely songs which enchanted all thosewho listened to her.After three of the chUdren grew up, they left the nest and got married, and Malka was left at home...She Glled the place of her mother for the one sister who was younger than she was. Her father, apious man who performed as a cantor during the High Holidays, used to work in the forest, and spenta great deal of his time away from home.When Malka grew up and reached maturity, there were no suitors of her age and station in town,102because around that time, six young men had made aUyah to the Holy Land, others went to Russia,the United States and Argentina. Malka did not have much time to spend with those of her own age.One fine day, the city was stunned, and the news went firom mouth to ear: Malka had run away withthe young Polish policeman to his hometown, a village in the environs of Warsaw.Several young men volunteered immediately to go and secretly seize her and return her to her home.After quite an adventure, they managed to tie up Malka, and after a considerable and tiring travaO,they got her back home, broken and depressed.At about the same time, a family of refugees reached the town and they settled there. One of theirsons knew how to play the violin, and thanks to him, after many years, the sweet sound of romanticmusic spiUed all over as he played.According to the stories of the gentiles, Malka was the final victim, after she was [mistakenly] takenfor a Christian, but one of the neighbors informed on her. The brutal Nazis dragg^ her out of a bedin the clinic, and after th^ raped her, they killed her. With this final victim, the tie between Zelvaand her Jews was sundered.Mordechai Loshovitz, a native of our town, heard about Malka’s bitter end and shocking death fromthe gentiles in the town, when he visited en route to the Holy Land.The Destruction Of Zdva(Jewish Daily Forward)Shmuel Yamivslgr[Note: The following text is taken from an article that first appeared in The Jewish Daily Forward,Saturday, December 25,1948. The original Yiddish text was translated into Hebrew by YerachmielMoorstein. It is this Hebrew text that is translated into English below].When the war broke out in September 1939, the population was about 1800. With the strong influxof refugees, this number reached approximately 7000. All of these unfortunates were accepted withsincerity, they were placed in homes, and the townsfolk shared with them whatever food th^ had.Because of the great cold in the winter of 1939-40, epidemics of disease broke out, that resulted inmany deaths. The people of the town accepted this without complaint. They continued to help therefugees with all the means at their dispose.With the entry of the Red Army, the order of life was changed. Most of the refugees left the city,a part returned to Poland, in the German sector, and the other part drifted into the center of Russia.Those that stayed behind, integrated themselves into town life, and continued with their lives untilJune 1941. From across the Polish border, the terrifying news of the mass murder of Jews began toreach us.Close to this time, the following families were exiled into the depths of Russia: Borodetzky, Spector,Rotni, Moshe Lantzevitzky, Rabbi Kosovsky and others. Others went to VUna in the hope of beingable to cross the sea, and some did succeed, while others were exiled to Siberia.103On Sunday, June 22,1941, the city was bombed without quarter, and burned continuously for threedays, after which only a few lone bouses remained standing. There were about 300 victims, amongthem my brother, VelveL The dead were left unattended in the street without any opportunity to burythem because of the intense bombing. The Germans reached this terrible scene on June 26,inunediately ordered all the survivors to gather in the city center, and ordered all the teachers andother people of intellectual pursuit, about 40 in number, to step forward, and according to theaccount of gentile witnesses, they were taken and shot in the forests in the Zelva vicinity. And in thisfashion, the hell of hangings and shootings continued from day to day. Among those who werehanged were: David Vishnivisl^, Joshua Niznitzl^, and the remainder were refugees. Those thatremained alive in the streets and in the few remaining houses, began to feel the awesomely terrifyingdoom begin to approach. They began to go out into the forests like the residents of neighboringDereczin, but the Germans began to spread the word that nothing bad would befall the residents ofZelva, because the city now belonged to the Third Reich, and in the Reich, it is the responsibility ofeach person to work, and this representation mitigated against many of the young men firom joiningthe partisans in the forestOn November 20,1942 an order was issued that all Jews were to leave Zelva and go to the armoryin Volkovysk. There, a ghetto would be constructed for all the Jews of the area.Veiy few escaped to the forests: Nathan Abalovitz, The brothers, Moshe and Katriel, their cousin,Nathan Slutsky, and Shayna Loshovitz. With the active participation of the Christian residents of thecity, the expulsion of the Jews was accompanied by loud cries of "Hurrah." About 40 of them weretortured to death. Cbaya Bublecki, a young girl of age 18, was taken out from a place of hiding, EizikKovlevsky from his home, and others.In Volkovysk, the Jews were imprisoned in the camps of the armory in the cold, in hunger, and inunsanitary conditions. The old and the weak were put to death by gassing. Mottel Maggid, who lostboth of his legs in the First World War, dug a hole in the ground for his head with his bare hands,and managed to remain alive until a German beat him over the head with a club and killed him.The tragic end of the Jews of Zelva had begun. Day by day, people were taken to the exterminationcamps, Treblinka in particular. In the days of December 5-7, they were killed and annihilated in aterrifying manner, by inhuman torture, inflicted upon them by their cultured German murderers.104On the Return Jnm the War...hfy Town, Zdva - In the Year 1957by Shmuel Kaninovitz(Translated from Yiddish by Yerachmiel Moorstein)A. On the heels of the Hitlerian beast of prey, the bus continues to speed toward and get closer toplaces that are known to me, and are increasingly recognizable...From here it isn’t far, the Medukhova Forest in its green valley, into which we would go tocelebrate Lag B’Omer. The forest would take us in, the young student boys, and we would spendpleasant times in its bosom, occupied in play and other activities.B. And here is the Bereshko Forest, in which we spent many a Sabbath, young boy and girltogether... but sixteen years have past since that time. The forest hears the terrified shrieks of theJews being murdered, they are the eternal visitors, the Rabbis, Teachers, Scholars, Shochetim...the forest has disappeared, the trees have been uprooted. A few remain as witnesses, repositoriesof the secrets of the lives lived by the generations...C. Here is the calm Zelvianka River, in which we would bathe during the hot summer. We werecaressed by its clear and pure waters, which made life more pleasant, on the shore, in the grass,where we would get tanned, and make love... the shore has disappeared, the grass had beenuprooted, and is no longer there. And also you, the paddlers and regular swimmers [are gone].The waters still flow, with tears and blood...D. A small distance away - the train station. I left it in 1941. In June, my brother, Yaacov Moshe,my dearly beloved sisters, Chaya and Yenta, and many good friends and acquaintances. And noone even conceived that the Holocaust was drawing near, like a thief, that with the fury of astorm, would wipe out and erase the city in a fundamental way, and leave not a single Jewbehind...E. On my way to my home town, I meet two elderly Christians. They tell me about the tribulationsand the tortures. In one of the mornings in 1^2, the Murderers assembled all the Jews withstrings of pails tied to their hands, and drove them to the train station. The sick and the weakwere packed into cattle cars. They were brought to the cemetery, shot, and their screams wereheard over great distances...F. I return to the city in which I was bom. My house is not there. It no longer exists. There is abomb crater there. A short distance away lives Shayna Loshovitz, the sole survivor of all the Jews.She was saved from the hands of the Murderers. She went to the Minsk Forest to the partisans,and with an amazed look in her eyes, she recognized me only with great difficulty. And when theunfamiliarity faded, she told me about Moshe Slutsl^, who several years before, had lost a legfighting with the partisans. An emotionally moving meeting with Mottel Loshovitz, and with Altaand Foyka [Gelman]. It is possible to lose one’s mind. They told how they were saved andremain^ alive, they fell on the graves of their beloved ones, they left broken-hearted, and theyleft the city of ghosts forever...May die German Murderers be remembered for all eternity in shameand abomination, along with the Christian resident neighbors.105The Liquidation of Zdvaby Ephraim (Foyka) Gelman(original text in Yiddish)2^1va! I, Ephraim Gelman, one who survived the destruction of our beloved town, will try to describe,though inadequately, what I recall of my youth up till that day about our town, Zelva, which wasamong the oldest towns in the area encompassing the broad plain of Poland, White Russia, andPalesia which was built on the banks of the Zelvianka River, from which lumber was floated from theBelevezer Palesian forests, and whose waters then cascade into the Neman river near Grodno, andfrom there to the Vistula Gulf, to Danzig, for export to foreign lands by ship, and Zelva was also themidpoint on the railway between Warsaw and Minsk!Zelva, which was founded in the 1400’s by the Polish aristocracy, also belonged to competingnationalities. Until the Russian Czar occupied Lithuania and Poland, and then the town belonged toRussia until 1914, and the First World War. Zelva, which was at a crossroads, derived its economicsustenance from wheat, which was sent out by train to port cities, where it was exported by ship toforeign lands. In Zelva, there were also large fairs, which were attended by merchants from Poland,Germany, and Russian Lithuania, who would come to buy horses and cattle which the peasants fromthe surrounding villages would come to sell. From this, half the town’s storekeepers larger or smallermade a living, also quite a few merchants, and workers, such as shoemakers, tailors, milliners,carpenters, all could be found in our city, lived there and raised famflies, each according to his means.Also, Zelva had manufacturing mills built on the river, driven by the waters of the Zelvianka. TheBorodetzkys and Sedletzkys, who were the rich people in town [owned the mills]. The Borodetzkysowned the mill by the river, where hired help would come from the Belevezer forests, and in thefactory, they worked the [raw material] over, making it suitable for building material, which was thensent by train to Poland and Germany. Also the millers would send wagons of flour to the larger cities.There were people, who had the means, and took up with wholesale trade, like the Bereshkovskys.Four brothers, ^man, my brother-in-law, Jacob, Lieber and Yitzhak, Avremel, the Pashtiva’s father,with two sons, Samuel Kaplan, the Spectors, father and sons. Larger storekeepers with moremerchandise, and smaller storekeepers from whom they made a living! There were heads ofhouseholds who were ordained rabbis, like Joseph Shulman, Dayanim, and also Jews who studied apage of the Gemara every day between Mincha and Maariv in the synagogues. There was a TalmudTorah that taught both poor students and those who paid tuition. There was a Tarbut School, aYameh School, a Tarbut Library from which the youth of the community benefitted. There were alsoorganizations, such as HaShomer HaTza’ir, HeHalutz, Mizracfu, Agudah, and also the Bund andCommunist circles. A city that breathed deeply with the knowledge of Zionism, from which our youthoccupied no small place in the activities and ^bbutzim of HeHalutz, HaShomer HaTza’ir, Betar, andalso a portion of them worked in the central administrations of these organizations! In other cities,the youth urgently wanted to uproot themselves from their locales, but it was simply not possible foreveryone to uproot themselves in this fashion and go to the Land of Israel to build and create, andit was truly a small portion that participated in the building up of our land, Israel.I must also recall specific people from our town, who were the organizers of our culture and thefoundation of our Jewish heritage, as manifested in our synagogues and Zionist organizations, rhaimRosenbloom, the director of Tarbut, Shmuel Boruch Freidin, and Rabbi Joseph Shulman fromMizrachi, and others as well, and my classmates what we learned together in such organizations as106Keren Kayemet, the Tarbut Library, which was a part of our library which a group of us young peopleestablished in 1921/22 which we named HaTechiya. The group consisted of the friends, MosheRafilovitz, Yerachmiel Moorstein, Mordechai Perlmutter, "Sholom Langer and Ezekiel Kaplan,” whoare in Argentina, Zelig Nivick, and also, Ephraim Gelman, Shmuel Yamivsky. This was the impetusto bind us to Tarbut, and from this, the Library was created from which the youth of the town drewthe spirit of Zionism. Also from the Keren Kayemet Committee, I must recall those who workedtogether: Yerachmiel Moorstein, Mordechai Perlmutter, Moshe RaGlovitz, Moshe Futritzlq^, EliezerFutritzky, and also Ephraim Gelman, and [Dr.] Nahum Gelman, director. And that’s how life wenton. We got older, and grew up to be a youth which set itself to work in facilitating its abUity, andpreparing itself to go to the Land of Israel, among which are those here in our Land. Not to mentionall the others, like my brother Joseph, who was in preparation, my sister, Liza, who belonged toHaShomer HaTza ’ir, also my brother Noah, and many others, about whom it is difGcult to write about,from our beloved town Zetva, acquainted with its residents, friends who stayed behind, vanished insmoke and fire, young and old alike, children, who didn’t even have a chance to see the world. I willnot sufficiently impart to the world and my fiiends, the nature of the struggle that our brothers andsisters waged for their lives under the murderer Hitler, may his name be eradicated, and for our town,Zelva, which no longer exists for us.28 Nov 1983In 1933, when Hitler came to power, the entire foundation of Europe was shaken, and along withit, Poland. Anti-Semitism also increased sharply. Many Jewish businesses were confiscated, also inZelva. Young people tried desperately to get out of our city, those who had good fortune were ableto reach the Land of Israel, Canada, and Argentina, but these were the minority. In September 1939,Hitler’s war machine marched into Poland, and because of bis pact with Stalin, they divided Poland,so that up to Bialystok, the territory remained in German hands, and the territory up to Minsk, thatis. White Russia, went to Russia, for which we Zelva Jews thanked God. The new regime began topromulgate its laws, which caused us Jews the greatest distress. The more likely ones, and oppositionparty people, like Zionists, lived in fear of being deported as political prisoners of the state. As lifeunder the communist regime began to crystallize, both forms of the schools were changed to Russianand Byelorussian, and specific teachers took up specific subjects such as Metek [Mordechai] Basyuk.My brother-in-law, Liza’s husband, became inspector of the schools in the PaftoH [district] that isZelva and its environs. We acquiesced to the fate of living under the new regime, which we thoughtwould be permanent The regime arrested the richer, well-to-do families, like the Borodetskys,Spectors, Wallsteins, Moshe Lantzevitzky and his family, and sent them to Siberia. Also, it was veiydifficult to get work if you were previously a merchant, and as a result, I traveled to find work inBialystok. [I worked there] after having obtained a passport from the Soviet regime as a worker, andup to six months before the outbreak of the war in 1941, after which I returned to Zelva, where Iworked up to June 1941, when Hitler’s army marched into Zelva after 14 days.The fighting that took place between the German army and the Soviet army, which becamesurrounded, caused the town of Zelva to be eradicated, leaving behind only solitary wrecked buildings.During this fighting, there were 80 dead and wounded casualties among the Jewish citizenry of thetown, but we had no idea of the terrible misfortune that was yet to come. Three days after theoccupation, the Gestapo came to town, and ordered all the men to register themselves with theauthorities, and I was among all of these. It has fallen to me to be the witness of what transpired inthe next three hours. We lost 40 of our best intelligentsia from all of Zelva. And that is the way they107[the Gestapo] conducted themselves on entry into every city and town, taking away the intelligentsia,so that there will be no one to organize the life of the Jewish community. Th^ took them away bymechanized transport to the Bereshko Forest, and shot aU of them. From that day on, under thedirection of the Polish Jugend Polizei, they ordered with their active help, the liquidation of theJewish population of Zelva.Hunger and deprivation was great, because neither food nor other necessities were available anylonger. Everything had been burned up. Only one thing: we did not have a Judenrat, with Jewishpolice, as was the case in other Polish cities. And in this fashion, we lived in cellars, in constant fearand fatigue, and to earn enough for a little bread, one had to risk one’s life. A few butchers, whowere caught selling meat, were hung in the middle of the street in the marketplace. The Jewishpopulation was ordered to come and witness the execution. This is the way they lived in fear for oneand a half years, untQ after Succoth of 1942.They then gathered all the Jews of Zelva, and the Jews from around Volkovysk, and brought themto the stockade in Volkovysk, the stockade for the Russian prisoners of war that were all shot. Toa man, th^ rounded up all the Jews from the surrounding towns, among them Zelva, and from therethey were transported to Treblinka, where they were all gassed to death.Those who saved themselves were Moshe Slutsky, and his brother, Katriel, Leizer YankelLantzevitzky% Nathan Ghana, the Butcher’s, and those who escaped into Russia in 1941, and thosewho are today found in Israel, Canada, Argentina, Australia, about 20 to 25 people. And that is howour Zelva community was liquidated, that was six hundred years old. The story of my survival with myfamily belongs to a separate chapter. Among those taken out [and shot to death] in the BereshkoForest, was Shmuel Boruch Freidin, and other teachers.108My Familyby Ephraim GelmanNow, about me and my family! After Hitler’s army marched into Zelva on July 6,1941, and the citylay in ruins, we lived up to four families in a ceUar. As a result, I, my wife and two children went tonearby Dereczin, because there was more housing stock there, and the town had not suffered asgreatly from the bombing. After living for seven months in Dereczin, we returned to Z^elva, becausethey had begun to construct a ghetto, and in Zelva a ghetto was never constructed. While we werenot burned and killed during the battle, we could not stay in 2^1va for very long, because we werenot on any of the lists of the Jewish residents in town. At any time, we were at risk of beingdiscovered and shot, and the Jews with which we were staying arranged for us to go to Volkovysl^where we were taken in. There, I worked building wagons, fourteen and sixteen hours a day, livingsix families to a house, amidst great hunger and deprivation.About four months later, after Succoth, when they had already started to round up the Jews fromVolkovysk and surrounding towns, in order to exterminate them by gas in Treblinka, an opportunitypresented itself to us to slip out of town by night, and through fields and forests, which took us tendays, we arrived at the forests between Dereczin and Zhitiel, to the camp of the Russian partisanswhose ranks already contained both young and old men from Elereczin, who had run off from theslaughter in Dereczin. They had about 150 horses, in addition to women and children. There, I metup with Moshe Slutsky and his brother, Katriel, and Nathan Hannah Slutsky’s, who saved themselves,escaping fi'om Zelva on the day of the liquidation. That is how we entered the partisan camp, underBulak’s command, and we lived under military discipline for the 26 months until July 14,1944. OurJewish group excelled in the war against the Germans in railway sabotage, destroying railroad bridges,and attacking patrols that guarded the railways, in order to revenge the forgotten blood of ourbrothers and sisters, and that’s how we lived through the 26 months of war against the Germans,during which time, the Jewish group sustained upwards of 80% casualties among those who foughtagainst the Germans.On July 14,1944, we were liberated by the Russian Army. We came out of the forests and returnedhome to Zelva. Desolate, empty, rubble, no residents, no homeowners, no synagogues, no schools,there are no relatives, no fiiends, no one left fi’om our municipal family. But life must go on. Slowly,we obtained a room where we could lie down and get some rest The gentile population was nothappy to see us, because we were the sole surviving vritnesses to their murderous handiwork, and theycould not use the things that they had robbed fi'om the Jews out of fear that we would recognize theitems! Coming back, we also met up with Mordechai Loshovitz, who saved himself, and returned tothe wreckage in 2^1va. We were extremely happy to find Mottel Loshovitz, and we did for him asbest we could. In September 1945, we left Zelva, and through Lodz, we went to Austria, where byfleeing we reached Salzburg-Linz, where we began to lead a normal existence. The children startedto go to school with other Jewish children.We lived this way in Austria from 1945 to 1951. We immigrated to America, where we are today afamily of children and grandchildren, for which we give thanks to God to this day. But we will neverforget our destruction. There is a hurt in the heart for my brothers and sisters, fiiends, family, mytown of Zelva and her martyrs, all who gave their lives to sanctify the Lord’s name, with their battleand will to live, which all of us who remained alive will simply never, ever forgetAs a member of the partisans, I was also designated to assume responsibility for providing food fi’om109time to time for a small group of women and children who today live in Israel and America. Therewere four girls in this group, my wife’s brother’s children, who today are in Israel, and they havelovely families with children.The Fate qf My Immediate Fanuty in Polandby Joseph KaplanMy father, Jekuthiel Kaplan, is believed to have lived in 2Lelva until the Gnal end of the Jewishcommunity in Zelva.My grandmother, Ghana, is believed to have died in 2^1va about 1940.My sister, Beileh Goldin, is believed to have lived in Zelva until the final end of the Jewishcommunity of 2^1va.Befleh’s husband, Ephraim, was mobilized into the Polish army, and was apparently killed in action.Their son, Eliezer, was bom about 1936 or 1937, and is believed to have lived in Zelva untU the finalend of the Jewish community of 2^iva.My brother, Theodore, married and lived in Skidel, near Grodno. He, his wife, and daughter, boraduring the early 1930’s, have apparently perished with the Jewish community of SkideLnoThe Last Visit to Zdva in 1965Chuma Zhchinskyabstracted £roin the Yiddishby Yerachmiel MoorsteinWith the end of the First World War, and with the coming of the October Revolution of 1917, CxarNicholas n was overthrown, and in his place, a Soviet Regime was established in which there wereprominent leaders from our people. They called to the Jews to embrace the tenets of communism,on whose flag was etched the words: justice, equality, and even-handedness. Several of the youth ofZelva responded to this call, and they went to Moscow, among them, Akiva Z[hchinsky]. In a fewyears, his sister, Chumka, left home to follow in his footsteps, and she too cros^ the border, firstjoining a hospital as a nurse, and in time - as a doctor. During the Second World War, she gave aidto the many countless wounded. After the war, several families from our town who lived close to herwent to our Land, and maintained contact through letter correspondence. It was through these lettersthat she became aware that the members of her town that had settled in Tel Aviv were planning tocommemorate the martyrs of our town by publishing a Memorial Book. This matter moved her verygreatly, and stirred a very strong yearning in her that gave her no rest.She turned to me with these words:Greetings to my honored Yerachmiel!It is over fifty years since I left home, but my recollections return to me as if these thingshappened just yesterday, and before my eyes, my parerUs stand, my friends and mycompanions. In 19411 visited Zelva. Little was left of the houses as th^ were, and thesame as regards the residents. Everyone came oitt to greet me. I saw my mother for thelast time. My brother, Mottel, was a prisoner of war, and I used to send him foodparcels. He was killed in Maidanek in a camp of3000 soldiers. I am enclosing a copyof his picture, and I ask you to preserve it [in your Memorial BotdcJ.In 1965,1 visited a second time with my brother Akiva. I thought that I would be ableto pay my respects at my mother's grave, but to our great sorrow, the cemetery no longerexists. In its place is a soccer stadium, and what used to be the center of town is nowa public garden. All that is left are churches, and one Jewish woman and her child...I wanted very nuich to participate in this sacred undertaking in the publication of thisbook, in substance and in spirit, but sadly, it is not within my means to do so...Perhaps the dream to be united with you and all the members of the town will yet cometrue, to talk to one another...With best regards to all of you, and with hope to see each other.IllVICTIMS OF THE HOLOCAUSTTo The Readerby Yerachmiel McMrsteinIn White Russia, on the banks of the Zehianka River, in the Grodno Province, on the rail line fromWarsaw to Moscow, there was a city in which about two thousand Jews lived for hundreds of years,simple people, who made do with very little, who worked hard for their meager sustenance, andobserved the mitzvot of the Torah, among them spiritual people, that were inclined to a love of Israel,a life of tradition, honesty and justice. The few who were well off, took care of the poor, the sick andthe widowed. The creative and educational life was centered in the synagogues, that were overflowingwith Torah scrolls, scholarly works, and it was from them that the people drew comfort and hope ofsalvation.At the end of the First World War, when the Balfour Declaration was announced, most of the peoplebelieved that this was the beginning of the Messianic era, and the youth began preparing itself invarious ways to fulfill the Zionist ideal, and to make atyah to the Land of Israel.Yet, only very few accomplished this. The remainder were interdicted by the terrorizing Nazis, andtheir accomplices, our neighbors, who killed and burned them, and the survivors were herded off tohorse stables in Volkovysk.In the winter of 1942, they were roused in a deep snowfall, and in their tattered clothing, were hauledinto death trains which brought them to Treblinka. There, they were taken into gas chambers wherethey were suffocated to death, and then cremated, and all that was left of them were piles of ashes...only very few were saved from the death camps, these were the partisans who came to us, in orderthat we do all that is in our power to preserve the sanctified memory of our brothers and sisters. And,indeed, this is what we are doing. We are assembling the names of our dear ones, and we areentering them in the aimals of martyrs and heroes. And now, reader of this book, bow your head asa sign of mourning and respect in memory of these innocent souls that were destroyed in the terribleHolocaust112The List of the Hdocaust Victims of Zelva[The list in the original text was alphabetized in Hebrew. This list has been re-arranged to be inEnglish alphabetical order for ease of reference.]A name followed by an asterisk (*) indicates that the entire farmfy that goes with this name wasdestroyed.Alpert, Israel, Michal, Tzipa, Rivkah •Becker, Tuvia *Becker, Moshe Yitzhak *Beckenstein, Jacob Chaim *Bereshkovsl^, Friedel *Bereshkovsl^, Zalman *Bereshkovsky, Yitzhak *Bereshkovsl^, Jacob *Bereshkovsky, Abraham and Rasha(of the Slutsky family) '*Bliecher, Zvi *Blizniansky, Yitzhak *Blizniansl^, Mottel and HindaBeckenstein, Leib *Bobovik, Z^idel *Bobovik, Shmeril *Bobovik, Mottel *Borodetzky, Herzl *Borodetzl^, Z^vulun (Zavel) *Borodetzky, Hillel *Borodetzky, Israel *Boyarsky, Zvi *Boyars!^, Eliezer *Bublecld, Jejna*Chazan *Chiiovitzky, Menahem and Zlota, Esther,Moshe, Yehuda, Leibel, Frumah, DoraDubchinsky *Dumbrovisky, Alter •Eliovitz, Jekuthiel *Einstein *Fishkin, Moshe •IHshkin, Leizer *Freidin, Yitzhak Jonah *Freidin, Shmuel Boruch and HannahFreidin, Joseph and EstherFreidin, Yitzhak and AtarahFutritzky, Berel, Beileh, Sonia, Jacob, Bella,MindelGelman, Moshe *Gelman, Liza *Gelman, Joseph *Gerber, Moshe, Feigel and their son, YitzhakGerber, Yitzhak NahumGerzuk, Jacob *Goldberg, Jacob *Grazvisl^ *Iber, Leib •Iber, IsaacDvitzky, DavidInderstein *Inditzl^ *Kaninovitz, Michel, Ghana, Chaya, Yenta,Jacob MosheKaplan, Jekuthiel *Kaplan, Todras *Kaplan, Shammai and Taibel *Kaplan, Samuel *Kaplinsky, Leib *Klotnitzky, Aharon, Rivkah, Lyuba, Melech,Menuha, Ziesel, SarahKoleshevsky, Getzel and Basha, FeigelKonkevitz *Kottlierisky, RivkahKozlovsky, Jedediah *Kozlovsl^, Samuel *Kreiness *Krisnovisl^, Samuel *Kubelsky, Isaac *113Lafin, Raphael and Rachel *Lansky, Joseph *Lansky, ChaimLantzevitzky, Samuel *Lantzevitzky, Joel *Lantzevitzl^, Aharon *Lantzevitzl^, Jacob *Lantzevitzl^, Yitzhak *Lantzevitzl^, Hillel *Lev, Chaim and Ida *Levine, ChanaLevine, Peretz *Levine, Shimshon *Li£shitz, Gershon *Lifshitz, Mordechai *Lifshitz, Nathaniel *lifshitz, Nissanlipsl^ *Lisitzky *Loshovitz, Berel *Loshovitz, Chaim *Loshovitz, Moshe *Maggid, Chaim *Maggid, MottelMeitzik •Melamed, Chaim *Merril, Reuben *Minsky, Sbolom *Minsl^, Bezalel *Moltz^esky *Moorstein, Shifra and SarahMoskovisl^, Ephraim *Moskovisl^, Shabtai *Moskovisl^, Velvel *Motlovisky, Kalman *Nosatsky, Shayna, Sarah, Simeon, RachelNovickovsky, Chaim *Novick *Noznitzl^, Rachel Leah, Shlomo, Michal,Asher, Chaim*Peikovitz, Shlomo *Peskin, GrunaPintlivitz, Moshe *Pintlivitz, Michel *Pintlivitz, Fishel *Plonsl^, David and RachelPlonsl^, SimeonPoltzik, Chaim Shlomo *Pomerantz, Shmuel Yossel *Potztiveh, Abraham *Potztiveh, Noah *Potztiveh, Hannan [Elchanan] *Poupko, Abba *RaOlovitz, Ephraim and TzipaRafilovitz, Moshe and Bashka *Ravitz, Pesach, TzeitelRavitz, Yitzhak David, ChanaRavitz, Rivkah, HillelRavitz, Velvel *Ravitz, Shabtai, Simeon *Ratner, Eiiezer *Ratner, Hillel *Rosenberg, Akiva *Rotni, Elihu Chaim, Gittel, Samuel, JacobRusianslgr *Sakorovsky, Elihu *Sakamik, Malka and LeizerSedletsky, Leizika *Sedletsl^, Benny *Sedletsky, Dr. Jacob *Sedletsl^, Chava *Selman, Yehuda and Freda, Rivkah andZalmanSelman, Katriel, Alteh, Deborah, Sonia,Joseph, ZalmanSelman, Zvi and Leah, Zalman, Benny,Yitzhal^ BatiaShapiro, MottiShevach, Deborah and LeahShevach, Jekuthiel *Shilovitzl^, Nahum Itcheh, Freydeh LeahEphraim, Abraham, Shabtai, BerelShoysky, Dov *Shturmakevitz, AttelShulman, Joseph, Shifra and daughtersShulyak, Moshe, Lipman, Bashka *Shulyak, Eiiezer and Sula *Shulyak, Itcheh and Beilkeh *Shulyak, FrumahShulyak, BlumahShulyak, Sarah Rivkah *114Shulyak, Benjamin and Esther *Slutsky, Yitzhak *Slutsl^, GedaliaSlutsl^, ShaynaSlutsl^, Shachna *SlutsI^, Abraham *Slutsky, Saul *Slutsl^, Mordechai, Hannan, Ephraim, Nathan,Nehama*Spector, LeibSrybnik, David and Esther, Rivkah, Rosa,ZalmanVishniatzl^, Mordechai, Shi&a and son, MosheVishniatzl^, Elihu *Vishniatzky, Ephraim *Vishnivisl^, Jacob and SarahVishnivisl^, David, Sarah Rivkah *Vishnivisl^, Leib, Sarah *Vishnivisl^, Tuvia *Vishnivisky, Ephraim *sons - Lipman, Motteldaughter - RivkahVishnivisl^, Chaim *Vishnivisl^, Mula *Vishnivisl^, Moshe Fishel *Wallstein, Yitzhak and Nacha *Wallstein, Jacob and MinaWeissbord, Abraham *Yablonovsky, Pesach *Yamivisky, Leibush, Mottel, Rachel, Velvel*Yamivisl^, Samuel *Zackheim, Menahem, Sarah Feiga *son - MosheZackheim, Avigdor and SoniaZalman, Chaim *Zelikovitz, Bezalel, Sarah *Zelikovitz, Mordechai, Golda, Jacob, Abraham2%chinsi^ *Zhchinsky, MottelZlotnitzl^, Leib and Leah, Getzel, Jacob,MindelZlotnitzky, Yitzhak *Zlotnitzl^, Alter115116''n ^ "n tt ‘nTi T ^n ^n ^n ‘n ^n t"...For even when I speak against him, I remember him withaffection; therefore, My heart yeameth for him, yea I willsurely have compassion upon him, saith the Lord''Jeremiah 31:20SURVIVING FAMILIESA List of Zdva Natives Who Emigrated to Other Countries(In English Alphabetical Order)RussiaKaplan, ChaimKaplan, BenjaminKaplan, PinchasKaplan, HaddasKaplan, LeibelPeskin, BezalelPeskin, MindelRavitzSlonimskyZhchinsl^, ChumaAustraliaBorodetzky, HerzelSlutsky, Samuel (deceased)Slutsky, Paula (deceased)Slutsky, BerachaSlutsl^, MosheSlutsl^, JosephSpector, SandorSpector, Jacob (deceased)United Kingdom (London^Yablon (Yablonski), HarryUnited StatesEinstein, Jacob MosheEpstein, Lanz-DinaGerber, FaygelKaplan, JosephLantzevitsky, Lanz-LeibelNosatskyPerlmutter, Abraham (deceased)Perlmutter, Mordechai (deceased)Perlmutter, MeirPerlmutter, JacobSlutsky, Moshe (deceased)Slutsky, Katriel (deceased)ChileNovick, GuttelNovick, YitzhakNovick, ZeligNovick, NahumArgentinaBarkleid, BerelBarkleid, ChaimBorodovsky, HillelKaplan, E^kielKaplan, ChaimLansky, NissanUpsky, YerachmielScharfetein, ChaimShoysky, JedediahCanadaBuchhalter, Barka (Helman)Dombrovsky Family, Benny (AlterArevitcher)Eisen, Zelda (daughter of JosephMotlofiQFrum, l^rbara[deceased] & Munay(great-grandson of the D^an [Jacob]Futritzky)Gelman (Helman), Roz (wife ofJoseph [deceased])^ FamilyGelman (Helman), Sarah (wife ofAbba [deceased])& FamilyGelman (Helman), Lilly (wife ofEphraim, (Fqyka)\dccGSi^])&FamilyKarvitzky (brothers) (grandsons ofSyma the Smith)Lantzevitzky, Moshe and Sarah ItkehMarciano (daughter of ShmuelYamivsky)Motloff, Joseph and Jacob(Motlovsky)Pruber, Ethel (daughter of AbrahamGelman [Helman]) & FamilySdiur, Radiel (daughter of AbrahamGelman (Helman)) and FamilyShapiro, Liebeh - wife of Jacob(deceased)Shapiro, Abraham & daughterVigod, Sam (grandson of LeitzkehEinbinder)Waxman, L. and Sarah (daughter ofMendel Shapiro) served as Head ofB’nai BrithYamivsky, Shmuel (deceased)117Zdva Nieves Who Went to Ismd & Their Families(In English Alphabetical Order)Year Family Name1926 Barkleid - Ben-Zvi, Rachel, the children: Zvi, Yisrael - Miriam, Shimon - Michal1939 Bar-Nur (Ravitz), Deborah and Dov, the chQdren: Sarah Robinson-Ben Zion, ZilaWeiss-Yossi, Benjamin Bar-Nur - Iris1939 Bar-Tov (Kointovslqr), Anshel (deceased), his wife Sarah, their children: Ehud, Aiyeh,Yisrael, Leah1936 Blicher (Bar Am), Samuel, and his wife Leah, their children: Joseph, AmosBlutreich (Kointovsky), Bella, her children Uzi, Ark, DalitBrand, Eugenia (Moshkovsl^), the children: Esther, Ephraim, Osnat1935 Feinstein (Moorstein) Batia, her husband Meir (deceased), the children: daughter,Shafirira and her husband Yitzhak, grandchildren: liat, Shiri; daughter Sarah(deceased), grandchildren: Orit, Michal, PazFeldman (Becker), Chaya, and her husband1935 Freidin, Aharon (deceased), his wife Miriam, the children: Dr. Nahum, Rachel, Irit1935 Freidin, Yehoshua, his wife Chaya, the children: Avraham, Sarah1935 Freidin, Moshe, his wife Shoshana, the chQdren: Zvi, Malka1935 Geiger (Srybnik), Dora, her husband Moshe (deceased), the children: Gila, Dan1973 Gelman, Dr. Nahum, his wife Sophie (deceased), the chQdren: Boruch Koppel, Toby1933 GQony (Freidin), Chaim Jonah and his wife Rena (deceased), the chQdren: Riva,Ammihud, Yair, LeahGQboa, Jacob (Moshkovsky)1926 Halperin, Chaim Ezekiel, and his wife, and three daughtersInditzl^, Dr. Alter and his wife Paula, son Boris1935 Kahn (Shulik), Ophra, her husband, the chQdren: Amir118Kaninovitz, TzipporaKaninovitz, Tzipa (Eisen)Kaninovitz, Samuel, and his wife Olga.Klutznick, Dr. Amalia (daughter of Ephraim Vishnitzky), the children: Nili1939 Koyat, Sala, her husband Aryeh, the children: Migo, Menahem, ZuliaKozlovsky, Atyeh, his wife Sonia, the children: Ghana, Zohar, Boaz1932 Lantzevitzky, David (deceased), his wife Dina, the children: Boaz, Jacob, AdahLaykin (Becker), Shlomit (daughter of Moshe Yitzhak Becker) and her husband, thechUdren: Tanya, MosheLefin, Abraham, his wife Rachel, the children: Ghana, Ruth, AyalaLevine (Kozlovsky), Sarah (daughter of Samuel), her husband Avigdor, the children:Yisrael, Hanoch, NahumLevine, Menahem, his wife Dina, the children, Samuel, MosheLoshovitz, Mordechai, his wife Zipporah, the children: Tzivia, Ze’evMakovsky, Jacob, son of Ghana Sedletsky, his wife Kona, the children: Ghava, MiriamMakovsl^, Joseph, son of Ghana Sedletsky, his wife Ava, the children: Irit1933 Meiner, Ghaya (Siybnik), her husband Eliezer (deceased), the children: Joseph,Esther, Duda1939 Merill, Aharon (deceased), his wife Hasia, the children: Samuel, Naftali, Zvika(deceased)Miller, Aryeh, his wife Ghaya, the children: Zahava, Ze’evMiller, Shimon, his wife Rachel, the children: BellaMinsky (Grunberg), Baba and her husband Jacob, the children: Tzafrir, Dan1935 Moorstein, Yerachmiel, his wife Ghana, the children: Nitza, Aviah, Dorit, JacobMoscovisky, Faygel, and her husband, Ephraim (deceased)119Nosatsky, Ze’ev, his wife Elka, the children: Rivkah, AdiNosatsky, Jacob, his wife Esther, the children: EldadOfek, Mordechai - Skorobovsky1946 Peskin, Abraham (deceased), his wife Ghana, the chUdren: Aliza, BosemetPeskin, Beni (sons?) Jacob1928 Pomerantz, Mordechai, his wife Tova, the children: Michal, Nili, TovitPomerantz, Yitzhak (deceased), his wife Alla, the children: Sarah, SamuelRaGlovitz, Pesach (deceased, son of Ephraim and Tzipa), his wife Rachel, thechildren: Tzafirira, Ephrat, Bat-Zion1937 Ritz (Futritzky), Eliezer (deceased), his wife Manya, the children: Odded (wifeJocheved), Maxima (husband Eli-Emil)Rogozin, Milrad, son of Masha, daughter of Abraham Shapiro1929 Root (Shulik) Rivkah (deceased), her husband, the children: AiyehRotni, Aharon, his wife Fradel, the children: Leah, Shimon (deceased)1935 Sabarov (Freidin), Miriam, her husband Samuel, the children: Roni, Uri, YoramShaCrai (Borodetsky), Sima, her husband, the chOdren: Tova, Naftali-Herzl1948 Shalev (Shulyak), Yitzhak, and his wife AdinaShpitz (Zlotnitzky), AhuvaSlutsky, Chaim, his wife Hadassah, the children: Gad, Sarah, Rachel1945 Talmon (Torc^mski) Zlotnitzky Hadassah, and her husband, the children: Lilly, Dalia,]^nnyUtyon (Futritzky) Moshe (deceased), his wife Malka, children Uzi and DaliaVishnitzky, Joseph, the son of Shifra and Mordechai, the children: Gideon, MotiVishnitzky, Emanuel and Zhenia, the children: Deborah, Shafrirah, EliezerWallstein, Joseph, and his wife, a daughter and sonWansower (Shoysky), Sarah, the children: Ammi, Benjamin, Yitzhak120193019331939Zakai, Havivah, the daughter of Ghana and Israel Grunberg, her husband andchildren: Hanan, UziZelikovitz, Asher and his wife, the children: Sarah, ZviZelikovitz, Isser and his wife, the children: Yehudit, Sarah, Dov121Zdva Natives Who Died in IsraelBar-Am, Shmuel (Blicher)Meiner, EliezerBar-Tov, Anshel (Kointovsky)Merril, AharonBen-Zvi, Rachel (Barldeid)Merril, ZviBorodetzky, RachelMintz, AbrahamDimant, Leah (Shulyak)Novikovsky, JacobFreidin, YitzhakPeikowitz, ManiaFreidin, MalkaPeskin, AbrahamGeiger, MoshePomerantz, TuviaPomerantz, BatiaGoldberg, MeirPomerantz, YitzhakGrunberg, IsraelGrunberg, CharmRafUovitz, PesachGrunberg, TzipporaRatner, ShabtaiInditzky, AlterRitz, Eliezer (Futritzky)Root, Rivkah (Shulik)Kaplinsky, EliezerLantzevitzky, DavidRotni, ShimonUryon, Moshe (Futritzky)WaUstein, JacobWallstein, RaizelZhtnitzky, MordechaiBlessed Be Their Memory !!122RESIDENTS OF OUR TOWN IN THE LAND OF ISRAELThe Alfyah of Familiesby Yeracbmiel MoorsteinAfter the Balfour Declaration, loyal and idealistic Zionists began to dream of the realization ofZionism; to go to the Land of Israel! These were young people, like Ezekiel Halperin, MenahemLevine, Rachel Barkleid (may she rest in peace), and Eliezer (Futritzl^) Ritz, may he rest in peace.Every one of them invest^ considerable effort before they were able to reach the land to which theyaspired. It took Menahem Levine nearty two years to reach the Holy Land.My uncle, a Zionist sympathizer, was on the staff of the newspaper, Tzefira, and nonetheless,considered me something of an idler for my aspirations to make alfyah. His argument was; "What willyou do there in the desert, where there is no rain? "What will you accomplish? Look, there are nogentiles there..."We were surprised to hear that one of those who decided to make alfyah was a member of the PoaleiZion of the "Borochov" school, the carpenter, the elder Yisroel Grunberg, who also a head of afamily.It was our pleasure to see this fortunate family off; Yisroel, Hannah, the talented and charitabledaughters; Tzipporah, Zahavah, Baba, and Havivah, and with all our hearts, we prayed for their well-being during the severe depression that gripped the Holy Land at that point in time.The second family that made aliyah was the Pomerantz famQy; Tuvia, his wife, and their three sons,Mordechai, Samuel, and Ze’ev, who helped found kibbutzim, Mordechai - at Giveat Shehsha, andSamuel - at Giveat Chaim.An additional family was able to make alfyah because of the efforts of their oldest son, Chaim JonahFreidin (today called Chaim Gilony, a lawyer). Chaim attempted to reach the Holy Land the first timeillegally, and was seized in Lebanon, and returned with his entire group to Poland. The second time,he succeeded in reaching the Holy Land while still less than 18 years of age. Because of his efforts,and thanks to his stubbornness, he succeeded by various means to cause his parents and the rest ofhis family to come to the Holy Land as well; the parents, Malka and Yitzhak (Itchkeh) Freidin, andthe children; Aharon, Miriam, Yehoshua and Moshe.WE FEEL A PAIN IN OUR HEARTS FOR THOSE THAT NEVER MADE IT!!!123The Kibbutzniksby Yeracbmiel MoorsteinWe are approaching the Jubilee Year of the time when members of our town were among those wholaid a foundation for the growing kibbutzim, and on them is the pride of the entire natioiLThese people accomplished the great miracle: the transformation of roclqr mountains, full of thornsand pricklers for over two thousand years, into flowering and open settlements.There is no financial substitute that can do all of this. Only the pioneering spirit, the strength of will,and the ideal concept of redemption of the land of the people, made it possible to withstand all thedifficult tribulations involved. The pioneers literally took hold of the land with their very fingernails,they removed the stones, they plowed, sowed, planted, and the result: settlements that derive theirsustenance from manual labor for over three generations, to the everlasting glory of the people ofIsrael and to the wonderment of the other nations of the earth.They were not angels, but ordinary human beings, but their way of life was based on the notion ofequality of means, and the creation of a just community which would serve as an example to thosethat would come after us.In Zelva, they lived and grew up just like their brethren, until the time that the Nazi Destroyer andhis accomplices descended upon them, uprooting them, and annihilating the residents of the town inthe extermination camps that are known and held up to obloquy.Most of the families in Zelva were blessed with children, but lacking in the means needed to financethe trip. Making aliyah to Israel was a difficult undertaking, and in addition, the British, who at thattime ruled the land, did not give permission to immigrate. The few who managed to reach the HolyLand were fortunate indeed.They came to a desert, a land not worked, and with their hands they created something out ofnothing. At the beginning, they lived on a little bread and measured amounts of water, but in the endthey realized their dream: the establishment of fertile settlements.We are proud of their work, and in the name of our townspeople, I convey the list of pioneers andwarriors who have left us a legacy of symbol and example.Let us remember these who follow, that came out from among us:Shmud Bar-Am znAAnshd. Bar-Tov (may they rest in peace) - among the founders of Kibbutz Ramat-Hashofet.David Lantz0vitzky (may he rest in peace) • among the founders of JGbbutz Noan.Aharon MeriU (may he rest in peace) - among the founders of tSbbutz Giveat HaShelosha.Let us convey our sympathy to their families.124And blessings and good things to those who cany on after them:Rivkah Wasserman (Ravitz)Mordechai PomerantzShmuel Pomerantz-HadariZe’ev Pomerantz-HadariThe Rogosin Family, GrandsonAbraham Shapiro from CanadaChaim Slutsli^Ki1)butz EfekGiveat HaSheloshaGiveat ChaimBe’er ShevaGiveat ChaimRamat HashofetThose Who Died In The EbbiUzimAt Ramat HaShofetAt NoanAt Giveat HaSheloshaAnshel and ShmuelDavidAharon MerillTHEY BUILT FOR THE FUTURE OF THE NATION!The Hills of Ephraim,Received a Gghting pioneer.Who with the sweat of his brow.Tore up deep-sunk roots.Dedicated to the task.To master the wilderness.To revitalize the land.For the sake of the nation.The prickles and thorns.From the valley and hills.The pioneer uprooted.And in their place - a marvelous settlementHe smoothed the roads.He worked with blood and sweatPlanting greenery amidst rock, that would grovin the future.To this laboring people, th^ gave fruit 'resting place and shade. The pioneers, Ansheand Shmuel wrought miracles in Israel.And also David and Aharon,On the Land of Zion.I raise to you a memorialWe will cany you in our hearts with pride!!!125Hu Heroism of EUezerby Yerachmiel MoorsteinOnly after the fourth day of the Yom Kippur war, after he was wounded, and EUezer lost hismemoiy, did substantial Egyptian forces capture the forward post under his command amid a tankbattle. Tliis command post was defended only by EUezer and five other soldiers, but the Egyptiansthought that they were facing a very substantial force.After being captured, EUezer received medical attention, and many blood transfusions. The Egyptiandoctors performed a series of veiy difficult operations on him. He went for two weeks without hismemoiy. However, with the passage of time, he began to heal, and he even helped out with otherhospitalized wounded.Among the last of the Uberated wounded firom Egypt, 17 soldiers, was EUezer. His family and friendsaU received him with great honor.Eliezer’s father, a scion of our town, Emanuel Vishnitzl^, was a watchman in the days of the bloodygueriUa fighting with the Arabs during the time of the British Mandate. His mother, Zhenya (mayshe rest in peace), was a Holocaust survivor. His sisters are - Dvorah and Shafrirah.WeU, the apple doesn’t fall very far from the tree... also Eliezer’s grandfather, Reb Mordechai, a sonof Zelva of course, was a good-hearted man, and also proved the strength of his arm, when largerabbles of gentile farmers were pressed into wreaking havoc on the Jews of Zelva, after they hadgotten themselves drunk on vodka. He beat them forcefuUy, left and right, and this immediatelycaused other brave-hearted Jews to come to his side, and they smote the rioting mobsters "hip andthigh” and routed them in aU directions...The Lady Pionear and Her Son The Pabnadi Manby Yerachmiel MoorsteinRachd Barldeid (May She Rest in Peace)Rachel made aliyah to Israel in 1926. With her first steps in the Holy Land, she became an activeparticipant in the capture of Ra’anana and its settlements. She married Zevulun Ben-Zvi, and hadthree sons: Zvi, Yisrael and ShmueLIn the War of Independence, her oldest son, Zvi participated actively, and he was wounded, and hasremained disabled for all his life. While he did not lose his legs, they have been paralyzed.Zvi undertook a program of physical therapy for the upper body, and continued with this for severalyears. In this manner, he succe^ed in rehabilitating himselfi He drives a car, and participates in theOlympics for the handicapped in aU parts of the world, and wins medals. He also extends support toyoung handicapped people who have the same infirmity as he does.Rachel’s parents, Moshe and Sarah, and her brothers and sister, Dov, David and Hannah, emigratedfrom Zel^ to Argentina with the help of Baron Hirsch, along with about ten additional familiVs126THE FREWINS OF ZELVAby Jacob Solomon BergerThe present history of the Freidin family of Zelva extends back to the late 18th century. Much of thishistory has been constructed &om the family’s own process of oral transmission from one generationto another. Written evidence of the family’s existence is rarer, being restricted to a handful ofpublished scholarly works./. Basic Family GenealogyThe earliest verifiable ancestor of the Freidin family is Tanhum TOzhak Freidin. To the best of ourknowledge, he had only two sons,i4Aar0R and Yehoshua. All of these ancestors were long-lived, havingsurvived well into their nineties, as shown in the figure below:TANHUM YITZHAK FREIDINfT’Tspns’ Diran(1780 - 1875)AHARON FREIDINpn«(c.1820 - 1916)YEHOSHUA FREIDIN(c.1827 - 1919)n. Tanhum Yitzhak FreidinOur earliest verifiable ancestor was also known by his Yiddish nickname, Tanneh Itcheh. Qosequestioning of our older relatives revealed that the name of Tanneh Itcheh’s father may have beenJekuthUl, but we have no source at our disposal by which to verify this. Tanneh Itcheh was a butcherand shochet (ritual slaughterer) in the town of Zelva. We also were told that he was a Menaker. Thisspecialty involved the proper removal of blood vessels from the hindquarters of a slaughtered animal,so that the meat from the hindquarters would be rendered kosher for consumption by observant Jews.It is said of Tanhum Yitzhak Freidin that his knowledge of kashrut ritual was so thorough andrespected, that his opinion on the status of the kashrut of a slaughtered animal was always acceptedwithout recourse to higher rabbinical authority.We date Tanhum Yitzhak’s age from the telling of his grandson, Benjamin Freed. In these telling,Benjamin would often refer to the fact that Tanhum Yitzhak lived to be ninety five. Moreremarkably, Benjamin recalled hearing from his grandfather that he, Tanhum Yitzhak, rememberedseeing Napoleon’s Grande Armie on its march to and from Moscow. The influence of this grand oldman is seen by the perpetuation of his name down through the seven generations of the family thatis descended from him Descendants named after Tanhum Yitzhak have been called Isidore, Lsidor,Izz and Ian in Pngiuh; Itzel and Itchkeh in Yiddish, and various names in combination with Yitzhakin Hebrew.127in. The Family of Aharon FreidinThe older son, Aharon, carried on his father’s occupation as a butcher. Times were hard, and withinthe memory of our family elders, Aharon Freidin had difficulty making a living. Zaydeh Ahareh, ashe was known, also had a large garden in which vegetables were grown for sustenance. Mygreat-uncle Isidore Freed recalled plucking vegetables from this garden. My great-uncle Morris Freedrecalled that if a calf a day was slaughter^, he was fortunate. Aharon Freidin begat eight children,Gve sons and three daughters. We do not know the name of bis wife, but the pattern of names amonghis female grandchildren suggests strongly that she may have been named Hannah. The eight childrenof Aharon Freidin were:1. Jonah 5. Zvi Hirsch (Hirschkeh)2. Boruch 6. Liebeh (Liebetcheh)3. Abraham (Avromcheh) 7. Haya Beileh4. Etta (Etchinkeh) 8. Benjamin {’Niomkeh)Except for Etchinkeh, the daughters of the family were known to be married, however, their marriednames are lost to us. All known surviving generations descended from Aharon Freidin are descendedfrom the three sons, Jonah, Boruch, and Benjamin. My grandmother, Anna Freed, told me, that thefamilies of Abraham (Avromcheh) and Zvi Hirsch (Hirschkeh) were destroyed in the Holocaust,though bow she came by this knowledge is uncertain. Aharon’s wife died in post-natal confinementafter bearing her youngest son. This child was named Benjamin in keeping with the biblical traditionstarted by the Patriarch Jacob, when his favored wife Rachel died in childbirth (Genesis, 35:16-19).Family lore has it that divine intervention was sought to pass the sentence of death from mother tochild with no avail. The migration of Aharon Freidin’s descendants truly begins with his grandchildren,although his youngest son, Benjamin Freed, came to the United States in mid-life. There are twoseparate parts to this migration. The first, beginning shortly after the turn of the century, brought themajority of this branch of the family to the United States. The second, which took place in 1932-3,brought the family of Itchkeh Freidin to the Holy Land. Descendants named for Aharon Freidin havebeen called Arnold, Harold and Aaron.III. A. The Family of Jonah FreidinJonah Freidin followed in his father’s occupation, and also was a butcher. He married Laskeh Heligfrom Slonim, and they had six children of which five survived to adulthood. Of these children, all butone, and their families emigrated from Zelva. Laskeh Helig was the sister of Simon Helig who wasthe founder of the Alliance Colony in Vineland, New Jersey. Simon Helig brought his mother,Hannah Rachel, and his sister Malka, as well as his own wife Hannah Sarah and their two nhilrfrffnto the U.S. Many descendants of this family continue to reside in the Vineland area. Jonah Freidindied early in life, as a result of a mishap at the communal bath. His wife, vividly remembered by hergrandchildren as Bubbeh Laskeh lived to age 88 but is reported to have died of hunger at the onsetof the Second World War. The five children of Jonah Freidin were:IIIA.1. Hannah Sarah BublecldThis oldest daughter married Reuben Bublecld by whom she had three children, Jejna, Katriel (Kami),and a daughter, Chaya. Reuben died as a young man, however, the family was relatively well off, and128resisted pleas to leave Zelva in the inid-1930’s when evidence of serious trouble for Jews becamemore pronounced. They fell victim to the passions of anti-Semitic townspeople, who, sensing the tideturning against the Jews, killed them in a pogrom. Evidence from the testimony in the ZelvaMemorial Book suggests that Chaya was captured, tortured, and then killed by the Nazis subsequentto the German invasion of Russia in June 1941.niA.2. Charles Fried (Bezald)Tzalkeh or Tchalyeh, as he was affectionately called, was the first member of the Freidin family toemigrate from Zelva, and he chose to come the U.S. Charles Fried married Shushka Novick. Hearrived in New York after having served in the Czar’s Army during the Russo-Japanese War. Familylore suggests that he had either fallen asleep at an army watch post, or otherwise not fulfilled his dutyproperly, and sought to escape punishment After arriving in the U.S. in 1905 he sent for his wife,and daughter Rose. The family settled on the Lower East Side, where members of his family live tothis day. The children of Charles and Shushka Fried are:1. Jacob (Jack) Fried, unmarried, and currently residing in Lower Manhattan. Named in Hebrewfor Jonah Freidin.2. Ben Fried, married to Esther CatrUii, retired luncheonette operator, residing in Brooklyn.Three children, Donna Calcaterra, Alan and Wayne.3. Rose, married to Nat Danenberg, both deceased; two children, Melvin, and Arline Ackerman.4. Sarah, married to Henry Kasen (deceased), retired from trucking business, living in LowerManhattan. Four children: Martin, a retired New York City policeman living in Florida;Zachary (deceased); Andrea Grunberger, living in Wayne, New Jersey; and Charles, living inNew Hope, Minnesota.HI A3. Ida Diruies (Chaya Lasheh’s)Ida Freidin came to the U.S. very shortly after her brother Charles, as a result of the efforts of heruncle, Simon Helig. She met and marri^ Samuel Joseph (Joe) Dinnes, and they lived their eptirelives in Brooklyn, N.Y. They had three children:1. Abe ("Red") Dinnes2. John Dinnes3. Molly MoskowitzJoe and Ida Dinnes are deceased. Their son,"Red", nicknamed for his distinctive hair color, was afighter pilot, who was shot down and killed in the Second World War. John Dinnes, now deceased,was a dentist, who had two children, Martin, a renown veterinarian in the entertainment community,and Marjorie Cohen, who both live with their families in California. Molly and Irving Moskowitz livein Brooklyn. Irving is a retired window shade and Venetian blind manufacturer. The Moskowitzeshave three children, Donald, Philip and Amy Schoenfeld, three grandchildren and a great-grandchild.129inA.4. The Family of Fam^ Shapiro (Frumkeh)Fanny ramp to the U.S. shortly after her brother and sister. She is a surviving twin, her sister,Shushka, having died as a young girl from influenza (perhaps during the great epidemic of 1918-9),She met and married Isadore Shapiro, and the couple resided in Brooklyn. They had one son, JohnShapiro, who today lives in Shaftsbury Vermont where he is engaged in an antique business. Johnmarried Bea Silverman, and they have three children, Paul, Tandy Fixell, and Lawrence, and fourgrandchildren.niA.5. Taahum Yitzhak Freidin (Itchkeh)When Charles Fried left Zelva, he also gave up the trade of butcher, which he had undertaken whenhis father Jonah died. Though he briefly considered this trade when he came to New York, CharlesFried ultimately entered the garment trades like so many millions of other immigrants of that era.Back in Zelva, the youngest son, Itchkeh, was considering work as a milliner. With his older brothergone, however, it fell to him to take over the family business, and so he became the fourth generationFreidin to be a butcher. Itchkeh Freidin married Malka Gebnan, daughter of Avraham andgranddaughter of Yosheh Gelman the Magg^, and continued to live in Zelva, where he prosperedas a butcher and cattle merchant. Itchkeh and Malka Freidin had six children. One daughter died inearly infancy. The surviving five children are:1. Chaim Jonah Gilony 3. Miriam Sabarov2. Aharon Freidin 4. Yehoshua Freidin5. Moshe FreidinThis family is the foundation of the Freidin presence in the Holy Land. It was Chaim who Grstemigrated to the Holy Land in 1933, motivate by the intense Zionism that he had acquired as amember of the Betar movement, and his direct contact with the charismatic Vladimir Ze’evJabotinsky. Chaim was perceptive enough to sense the impending disaster that was beginning todescend on Eastern European Jewry. Although conditions were far from good in the Holy Land, heportrayed the situation optimistically to his father back in Zelva. Eventually he persuaded his fatherto emigrate, and in 1935, Itchkeh Freidin brought his entire family to Tel Aviv, thus sparing them theterrible fate that overtook those who stayed behind. Times were quite difficult, and Itchkehexperienced sufficient setbacks in livelihood to tempt him to return to Z^lva. However, he eventuallyopened a butcher store (Itliz) and continued this business for his entire life. In time, he turned thisbusiness over to his youngest son, Moshe, who is the fifth generation in the Freidin family to operatea butcher business. This business runs today at 174 DizengoCf Street in the city of Tel Aviv, IsraeLniM. The Family of Boruch FreidinBoruch Freidin married Genendel Rubinstein, daughter of Zalman and Pearl Rubinstein. Threechildren were bom fi-om this marriage:1. Anna Freed (Channeh) 2. Isidore Freed (Itzel)3. Morris Freed (Moisheh)130Borucb Freidin contracted an incurable disease as a young man, and passed away, leaving Genendelwidowed with three very young children. To ease her situation, Genendel sent Anna and Isidore, thenaged six and four, to live at the home of Rabbi Yehoshua Freidin in Ozemitsa, keeping two year oldMorris with her. Anna would not stand being separated from her mother, and returned within sixmonths. Isidore would not return to her for Gfteen years.Genendel remarried, to Simcha Mavshovich, and moved to Bialystok. By this marriage, she had twodaughters:1. Rachel Freedman 2. Fagel KrugmanAnna Freed would eventually many her uncle, Benjamin Freed, her father’s youngest brother. It wasIsidore Freed who was the catalyst for bringing this segment of the family out of Zelva to the U.S.He returned to his mother’s home in Bialystok facing the threat of conscription into the Czar’s Army.Family lore has it that Genendel was offered an option by a doctor to inflict a deformity on Isidore,thereby disqualifying him from military service. This she refused, preferring to send him to the risksof the New World. At this point, Isidore did not have the money to buy passage on a ship. Familylore further tells us that he had purchased a lottery ticket which he had been carrying around forsome time. One day, a man came up to him and identifled himself to Isidore as the seller of thelottery ticket. He then told Isidore that he held the winning ticket, and gave him the proceeds. It wasthese proceeds that Isidore used to buy his passage to the United States.Isidore Freed came to New York in 1907. In order to prevent the headstrong Anna firom joining herbrother, Genendel insisted she marry her uncle, Benjamin Freed, and thereby establish a stable familybase in Zelva. This took place shortly after Isidore’s departure. Under similar compulsions as hisbrother, Morris Freed arrived in New York in 1910. In the following decade, Isidore Freed met andmarried Sarah Kirschner, and established himself as a dry goods merchant on the Lower East Side,with a store on Allen Street near Canal Street.Beginning after the First World War, Isidore Freed undertook initiatives to bring the remainder ofhis family to the U.S. In 1921, he brought Benjamin and Anna Freed to the U.S., along with theirsole surviving daughter, Sarah. In 1923, he brought his mother, Genendel, and his two sisters, Rayand Fagel to the U.S. Genendel, a strong-willed woman, would live the rest of her life in comfort anddignity in the home of her son, whom she was forced to send away from home as a child. She wouldlive to see the birth of her first great-grandchild. Jack Berger, before she would pass away at the ageof 77.jn£.l. Isidore FreedIsidore and Sarah Freed settled in Brooklyn where they had three children:1. Leonard Freed, who became a physician and radiologist, and served as a medical officer in theSecond World War. He has two sons by his second marriage, Leonard, Jr. and Frederick. Heis currently employed at the U.S. Army hospital in Fort Rucker, Alabama.2. Beatrice Melnick, who was trained as a social worker, and married Dr. Jacob ("George")Melnick. The Melnicks reside in Brooklyn, and have three children: Arthur, Laurence("Larry"), and Judy Brickman.1313. Arnold Freed, who is a microbiologist. He married Pauline Adelman and they have threechildren: Dr. Jeffrey, Valerie ("Laurie") Brown, and Debra. The Arnold Freeds lived in theMidwest United States for a number of years, returning to Vineland New Jersey, where theydiscovered the Helig kinsmen of the Jonah Freidin family.In 1950, Isidore Freed closed his business in New York, and moved to Florida, where his son,Leonard was practicing medicine. During his later years, he operated a small motel, and then retired.His wife, Sarah passed away in 1975, and he pass^ away in 1977 at age 87.in.B.2. Morris FreedMorris Freed married Goldie CGussie”) Gindin. He also entered the garment trades, and worked hisentire life as a milliner. Morris and Goldie Freed lived in Brooklyn, and had three children:1. Bernard Freed, married to Pauline Goldwasser. Bernard Freed had his own costume jewelrybusiness. He and his family have always lived in Brooklyn, and he has two daughters, GloriaJackelow and Evelyn Nebel.2. Toby Forman, married to Sol Forman (deceased) who worked in supermarket managementon Long Island prior to retirement in Florida. The Formans have two sons, Steven and Joel.3. Jeanette Socks, married to Lee Socks (deceased), residing in Boca Raton, Florida. Jeanettehas three children by her former marriage to Howard Itzkowitz: Gary, Keimeth, and RandiWeidhom.Morris Freed passed away in 1977 at age 85. Gussie Freed passed away in 1989 at the age of 90. Shewas the last survivor of the original immigrant families that came to the New York area.inJB.3 Rc^ FreedmanRay married Jacob Freedman and they had two daughters. Jake, who was a bagel baker, died frompneumonia in 1936. The oldest daughter, Millicent (MoUie) married A1 Smith and had one son, Brian.Subsquent to a divorce, she married Sylvan Kippe, and they are retired in Tucson, Arizona. Her sisterSylvia (Selma) married Nathan Goldstein, and has one daughter, Jacqueline Resch, both living inBrooklyn.IIJS.4 Fagd KrugmanFagel married Benny (Bereleh) Krugman, and they had three children. Fagel tragically died very youngof cancer in 1932. Benny and the young children suffered some of the worst adversities of theDepression years, but in the fullness of time overcame those troubled times in fine fashion. Theoldest son, Sam was bom in Europe. He married Sylvia Bernstein and they recently retired after manyyears of working for the postal service. They have two children, Fran, married to Allan Rosenblatt(their children are Hugh and Joanna), and Mark, married to Marian Schnall (their children areLindsay Robyn and Jason Seth). David, (the second son) and his wife Anita have one son, PaulKrugman. David is retired after a career as a lawyer in the insurance industry, and Paul is adistinguished economist, teaching at MIT. Mildred married Isaac (Ike) Pitchon, and ran a furniturebusiness for many years in Brooklyn. Their children are Francine and Joel.132ni.C. The Family of Zvi Hirsch Freidin (Hirschkeh)Zvi Hirsch {Hirschkeh) Freidin was one of the several family members who was a butcher by trade.Our knowledge of this family is fragmentary, and is reconstructed from the memories of ChaimGilony, and Ephraim {Foyka) Gelman. Hirschkeh Freidin was married to Atara (Kreineh)Bereshkovsky. They had four children. Hirschkeh passed away in 1915, and his wife in 1922. The fourchildren were:1. Yitzhak Jonah {Itcheh Yona) who was also a butcher. He was married, and had two children.2. Samuel Boruch {Shmuel Boruch) who was one of the prominent teachers at the TarbutSchool in Zelva. He was married to Hannah Lifshitz &om 2^1va, but had no children.3. Elijah Zebulun {Elie Zavel) who was also a butcher. Elie Zavel married his first cousin,Hannah Freidin, daughter of Abraham Freidin. Elie Zavel was a business partner both withItchkeh Freidin and Yedidkeh Freidin who were butchers, and all first cousins. He is knownto have had two children.4. Joseph Freidin, who was married to Esther Moorstein, the sister of Yerachmiel Moorstein whoedited the Zelva Memorial Book. They had two children, one of which was a son, namedYitzhak. Joseph Freidin was a manufacturer of leather shoe tops.This entire family is known to have perished in the Holocaust. Samuel Boruch Freidin was amongthe early victims, when the Gestapo entered the town of Zelva and rounded up the intelligentsia whowere immediately executed by firing squad in the Bereshko Forest. The remaining family memberswere eventually taken to the Treblinka concentration camp where they met their untimely end.iIIJ). The Famify of Abraham FreidinThe details of the family of Avromcheh Freidin come from the recollections of Foyka Gelman.Avromcheh Freidin was also a butcher. He was married twice, but the names of his wives are not nowknown to us.Three children were bom to his first wife:1. Tanhum Yitzhak, called Tanhum was a butcher, and married a woman fi-om Bialystok. Theyhad one child.2. Jedediah (Yedidkeh) was a butcher as well, and a partner with his cousin, Ehe Zavel Freidin.He married Leah Zlotnitsky, daughter of Mich’l Mendel the Cooper, and they had one sonand one daughter.3. Hannah Freidin, who married her first cousin Elie Zavel Freidin.There was one son bom of Abraham Freidin’s second marriage, and this was Chaim Freidin, who alsobecame a butcher. He was known to be married, but apparently had no children. Abraham Freidin133is purported to have died before the onset of the Second World Warin£. The Family of Beiyamin FreedBenjamin Freed was a scholar and a teacher of religious studies. He married his niece, Anna Freedand begat three chUdren in Zelva: Boruch, Sarah and Mindel. An epidemic struck Zelva about 1914[very likely typhus] which took the life of Boruch, and deprived Sarah of her hearing, leaving her deaffor the rest of her life. Mindel, named for Genendel’s sister, was to die tragically of appendicitis inher father’s arms, on the eve of their departure for the U.S., for lack of medical care. The familyarrived in New York in January 1921 with Anna eight months pregnant. One month later, she gavebirth to Harold Freed. Four years later, she gave birth to her youngest son, Joshua Freed.The family Grst settled on Orchard Street, but shortly thereafter moved to Brooklyn where theyeventually settled in the Borough Park section. Benjamin Freed continued to practice as a Hebrewteacher, and lived to be 90, and Anna live to be 80. The children of Benjamin and Anna Freed are:ni£.l. Sarah BergerSarah Freed, married Louis Berger. The marriage was ill-fated, and Sarah returned to live with herparents, where she gave birth to her only son. Jack Berger. Jack was raised in his grandparents home,and went on to become an engineer and a banker. He married Carol Lynn Kleinberg, and they havesix children: Sharon Ann (married to Dermis Javer), Daniel, David, Judyth, Rachel, and Robert Ian.The Bergers live in Mahwah, New Jersey. Sarah Berger lives in Monsey, N.Y.in£.2. Harold FreedHarold Freed, married Pearl Goldstein, after serving in the Second World War. He become a HighSchool teacher in the City of New York, &om which he has since retired. The Harold Freeds residein Teaneck, New Jersey, and they have three daughters: Deborah Getman, Susan Hollander and BethSilverstein, and eight grandchildren. He obtained his name when a nurse anglicized the name, Arelwhich she heard from Anna during her confinement.ni.EJ. Joshua FreedJoshua Freed married Harriet Mandelbaum, and after living in The Bronx, moved to New Jersey,where they settled in Hillsdale. Joshua Freed is an accountant, and is employed as the Controller fora fabric laminating company. They have three children: Jonathan, Davi^ and Benjamin. David andBeth Freed have two children, Rebekah and Elliot.134IV. The Family of Yehoshua FreidinYehoshua Freidin ranks as the pre-eminent religious scholar of our family His marriage to ChayaSarah produced five children, all of whom reached maturity and had children of their own. The fivechildren of Yehoshua Freidin are:1. Eliezer Freidin 2. Reuven Jonah Rubinowitz3. Rachel Beileh Pomerantz 4. Hasia Fagel Futritzky5. Esther Leah MednickDescendants of the families of all these chUdren are known to ^dst, with the exception of the famifyof Eliezer Freidin. Reuven Jonah was given a different surname as a defense mechanism. Thenotoriously anti-Semitic Czar, Nicholas I, had issued his infamous ukase, in which he ordered thatevery third male child in Jewish households was to be forcibly conscripted into the Russian Army. Itwas a common practice, in those times, to give a second bom son a different last name to confoundthe authorities. Even though no third son was bom in this family, the name change remained.Yehoshua Freidin was an ordained Rabbi of considerable scholarly reputation. He held a modestpulpit, in the tiny hamlet of Ozemitsa, ten miles east of Zelva. He was well-known in scholarly circlesas the author of two collections of sermons. His first book was published in 1888 under the title,EWEN YEHOSHUA (The Rock of Joshua). In 1905 and again in 1908, his second collection waspublished under the title, BEYT YEHOSHUA (The House of Joshua). Such was the esteem for thisman, that the descendants of his brother Aharon’s family proudly bear his name, not to mention themany who are in a direct line of descent from him. They generally bear the name, Irwin, or Irvin, and,of course, Joshua.IVA. The Family of Eliezer FreidinEliezer Freidin married Bella Sedletsky, and five children resulted from this union. Information aboutthis family is fragmented, and all are believed to have perished either through Russian pogroms,Stalin’s purges, or the Holocaust We are told that "LeaeP' himself was of genius caliber, having beenordained as a Rabbi at the age of 16. In the introduction to EWEN YEHOSHUA, Rabbi Yehoshuagives considerable credit to his firstborn son for the content of that volume. He says that one of thereasons for choosing the book’s name was that the Hebrew word for "rock" - EWEN is an acronymfor Eliezer Ben, making the title read: Eliezer Ben Yehoshua, the name of his son. Eliezer Freidin wasalso a gifted entrepreneur. He moved to a village called Krizi, near Minsk, where he established afactory for the manufacture of boxes which were medicinal containers. Rabbi Isser Yehuda Unterman,who would be Chief Rabbi of Israel was a resident in his home for three years. All of his childrenwere distinguished in their own right as well:1. Jacob Freidin, who was married to Rachel Kapilovich, the Zelver Rabbi’s daughter, was alawyer of some repute. His son was a gifted artist and his daughter a ballerina. All arebelieved to have perished in the Minsk ghetto.2. Max Freidin, was a distinguished doctor and microbiologist. His works were published in135Byelorussian medical journals. He and his son also perished in the Minsk ghetto.3. Jonah Freidin was an actor in Stanislavslqr’s Theater. He went on to become a lawyer aftersuffering a leg injury that curtafled his acting career.4. Tanya (Taibel) Freidin was a noted linguist, and worked as a curator in the HermitageMuseum in Leningrad.5. Faygel Freidin was a dentist who resided in Moscow. She was exiled to Siberia, and her fateis unknown.had his property seized by the Bolsheviks. Although correspondence continued with relativesin the U.S. into the late thirties, even that stopped, apparently under duress from authorities. Thelast word received was that Eliezer Freidin was imprisoned, and in 1942 at age 81, he died in prison.IVJB. The Family of Reuven Jonah RubirunvitzThe second son of Yehoshua Freidin took up residence in the town of Vasilishki, in the LidaProvince of Byelorussia. He first married Nahama about 1895 by whom he had two sons, Karl andIsidor. Tragically, Nahama died, and Reuven Jonah married again, this time to Kahla Rachel Kopstein,Nahama’s niece. There were five chQdren bom from this marriage:1. Leah Rubin 2. Max Rubin3. Nathan Rubin 4. Jack Rubin5. Milton RubinRegrettably, tragedy overtook this family, again and again. Kahla Rachel died shortly after the birthof Milton, and the oldest daughter, Leah assumed her mother’s responsibilities in the household. Theburden on Leah proved too great, and within three years, she too succumbed, and passed away. Itwas in 1908 that both Karl and Isidor left for the U.S. to seek their fortune, and find a morehospitable place for the family to live. Because their uncle. Max Kopstein was in the mining townof Vandergrift, Pennsylvania, Karl and Isidor chose to go beyond New York, to Pittsburgh. In 1914,Karl took his own life, having been overcome by a deep depression due to family problems and thedifficulty of his own inunediate circumstances. Isidor then came to his uncle Max in Vandergrift, andbegan his business in the garment trade as a back pack peddler.Isidor Rubin persevered, and after he married, and began a family of his own, he was able to turnagain to his objective of bringing his family to live with him. In 1921, through Isidor’s efforts, theremaining brothers and his father were brought to the U.S. Reuven Jonah first moved into his son’shome, and after spending some months with the Mednick family in Chicago, he returned to take, thepulpit of the Eleventh Avenue Synagogue in Braddock, Pennsylvania. In 1947, after the birth of hisfirst great-grandson. Jay Rubin, he left for Israel where he wished to live out his remaining years. Helived in Haifa with the family of his nephew, Eliezer (Lou) lUtz [Futritzky], and passed away in 1959at the age of 96. His sons established themselves in and around the Pittsburgh area. They and theirfamilies represent the bulk of the surviving descendants of Rabbi Yehoshua Freidin:136IVSJ. Isidar RubinIsidor Rubin was the catalyst and focal point for bringing the entire Rubin family to the UnitedStates. After working as a back pack peddler, he met and married Lena Wasserman by whom he hadthree sons:1. Samuel Kati Rubin, was a publisher of a movie film magazine. Sam married Natalia Buchman(deceased) and had two children: Jo Anne Chodock, and Jay Yale Rubin. Sam has remarried,and he and his wife, Lois resided in Davenport, Iowa prior to retiring to Scottsdale, Arizona,where Lois recently passed away.2. Irvin ("Daidy”) Rubin (deceased). Trained as a mathematician, and managed a number of thethe family businesses. He was the author of a family history of Yehoshua Freidin’sdescendants. Married Marcia Friedman, father of Marc Rubin and Maida Kay Rubin3. Norman Rubin, a business administration graduate of the University of Pittsburgh, whomanages a number of the family business interests. Married to Rose Sara Altman, father ofSteven and Nancy Rubin.Isidor Rubin always wanted bis family around him, and this accounted for an entire way of life forhim. After he brought his father and brothers to the U.S., he acquired a half interest in his uncleMax’s store. This became the basis for a family business in retail men and women’s clothing, withstores in several towns of the Kiski Valley in Western Pennsylvania. It was in the late 1940s that thefamily officially shortened its name to Rubin. In 1950, "Izz" Rubin was honored as "Citizen of theYear" in VandergrifL He passed away in 1965 at age 72.W£.2. Nathan RubinNathan Rubin, married Yetta Rubin (no relation), and had three children, Corrine Harris, Leah RaeLambert, and Aden Rtd)in. He was incapacitated in mid-life after working in the family businesses.Leah Rae is Justice Policy Coordinator in the Province of Ontario, and Allen is a professor at theUniversity of Texas.IV.B.3. Max RubinMax Rubin, married Glaphy Egly, no children, worked his entire life in the family businesses. Duringretirement in later life he lived with his brother Milton and he passed away in 1990. There was noissue from this union.IV.B.4. Jack RubinJack Rubin, married Frances Silverman and has two sons, Kenneth and Lawrence. He recently retiredafter 53 years of working in the family businesses. Like his brother Isidor, whom he succeeded incarrying on family traditions. Jack is a pillar of his community, and continues residing in Pittsburghduring retirement. Both sons continue the family tradition of working in retaUing.137IVSJ. MUton RubinMilton Rubin, married Esther Jane Rosenthal (deceased) by whom he had two sons, Jeffrey andEdward Karl fBudify”) Rubin. Currently active in managing the family businesses. "Buddy” Rubin diedtragically in an auto accident at age 5. Jeffrey Rubin is a graduate of Camegie-Mellon University andis a practicing Electrical Engineer. He is married to the former Nancy Stone, and they have adaughter, Melissa Carol Rubin.The descendants of Reuven Jonah Rubinowitz have spread over the Northeastern U.S., though mostcan be found in the Pittsburgh area. Many continue to be engaged in the retail clothing business,though they are well represented in many other lines of endeavor.IV.C. The Famify of Rachd Beileh PomerantzThe third child, and oldest daughter of Yehoshua Freidin, married Barnett Pomerantz in the town ofBreza, Russia about 1888. Th^ had two daughters, Lottie and Lena, both bom in Russia. The familyemigrated to the United States, settling in Chicago. "BeryP Pomerantz passed away in 1928 inChicago. Rachel BeUeh survived him and lived to the ripe old age of 91. She passed away in Chicagoin 1956.IV.C.I. Lena Erenstein1. I^na married Sam Erenstein and their was no issue &om this union. Both are deceased.IV.C.2. Lottie SpectorLottie married Max Spector, and there were three children from this marriage. Max Spector passedaway in 1955, and Lottie in 1979. Their three children are:1. Bernice Rosen, married Daniel Rosen (deceased), and is the mother of Janet Ostro and JudyPodolsky.2. Irwin Spector, married to Barbara White, and had two children, Maria and Mark Spector.3. Richard Spector, married to Sondra Smith and had three children, Debra Spector, MarkSpector, and Susan Miller.VD. The Fondly of Hasia Ft^ FutritzhyHasia Fagel married David Futritzky, the son of Rabbi Jacob Futritzky, who was the Dayan of Zelva.There were five children bom in this family:1. Moshe Beryl Ritz 2. Max Ritz3. Rivkah Fmm 4. Izz Ritz5. Eliezer ”Lou” Ritz138The family resided in Zelva for over a quarter of a century. The turning point in this family’s historycame during the deadly influenza epidemic of 1918. Within one month, the dread disease claimed thelives of Rabbi Jacob, David and Moshe Beryl Futritzl^. The burden for family sustenance fell on theolder brothers. Max and Izz, and Rivkah, barely thirteen. Moshe Beryl’s wife Rebecca came from theBemick family, which had already immigrated to Canada. Through the efforts of the Bemick family,a chain of immigration was set in motion that would bring this entire family to Canada. In time. MaxRitz would many Rebecca’s sister, Faye Bermck, further deepening the two family ties.Moshe Beryl’s widow Rebecca, and her infant twins were the first to go in the early 1920s, followedshortly by the older brothers. Max and Izz. In these years, it was Rivkah Ritz who became themainstay of the family, enabling her younger brother, Lou, to complete his education at the ZelverTarbut &hule. Lou, an ardent Zionist, emigrated to the Holy Land. In 1930, Rivkah met and marriedSaul From, and they took Hasia Fagel and also immigrated to Canada. The family officially shortenedits name to Ritz, and settled in Toronto. Hasia Fagel lived the rest of her life with her daughterRivkah. She is remembered for her warmth and selflessness as the "Great Bubbeh," die Motmteh, andTanteh Chashkeh. In Israel, her grandchildren recall that in her mid-eighties, she wrote to herbrother, Ruveh Yoineh, telling him that she was finally going to get glasses because she was havingdifficulty reading his letters. Hasia Fagel lived to be 91 years of age. Her descendants live both inCanada and Israel. Descendants of David Futritzky’s brother, Moshe, live in Israel, where they haveadopted the Hebrew name, Uryon.Moshe Beryl RitzMoshe Beryl and Rebecca Ritz had the fraternal twins, Irwin and Eva. On her arrival to Canada,Rebecca Ritz devoted herself entirely to raising her children. They literally started with nothing,because all their possessions were stolen on arrival. Rebecca went to work as a seamstress and raisedher children with courage and dignity. Though personal health problems would plague this family,Rebecca would live to see her children achieve high levels of professional achievement1. Irwin Ritz would graduate as a pharmacist, and despite having to take radiation therapy tocombat Hodgkin’s Disease, returned to medical school and became one of the leadingurologists in Canada. He married Susan Marie Trinnes, who died six years later of MultipleSclerosis. There were no children. Throughout a distinguished medical career. Dr. Irwin ^tzfought for his life against ever deteriorating health. He succumbed to his many illnesses inDe^mber 1981, and passed away.2. Eva Ritz married Stanley Solomon who is today the first violist of the Toronto Symphony.Their two children, Maribeth Erbe and Leonard Solomon, would also manifest artistic talentand find careers in music. Eva Solomon succumbed to cancer at age 46.IVJ>.2. Max RitzMax Ritz was a furrier by trade. His marriage to Faye Bemick produced their only son David, whobecame a dentist. David Ritz married Lil Schiff and they have one son, Michael.139Rivkah FrumRivkah Ritz was a mainstay of her family. Denied the opportunity for formal education herself, sheenabled her younger brother, Lou to obtain schooling. In 1930 she married Saul Fnun from Lomza,and shortly thereafter, took her mother, and emigrated to Canada. They had one son, Murray Frum.Saul and Rivkah Frum established a fancy food store in Toronto which enjoyed a very high reputationin the community. Rivkah Frum passed away in 1973. Saul ("Sholom") Frum resides in Toronto.Murray Frum went on to become a dentist, and a highly successful real estate entrepreneur. Hemarried Barbara Rossberg [deceased], and they had three children: Matthew (adopted), David andLittda. David, and his wife Danielle, just had a baby girl named Miranda.IVJ}.4. bz RitzIzz Ritz was a top professional upholsterer and married LU Heit, by whom he had one daughter.Honey Ritz. Izz developed palsy in mid-life, which eventually ended his ability to work. Thisunfortunately led to a disintegration of his family, and the whereabouts of his daughter are unknown.IVJ)J. Eliezer RitzEliezer ("Lou") Ritz was the first member of the Freidin family to come to the Holy Land, in 1926.In 1930 he came to Canada to study accountancy at LaSaUe University, and lived with his family inToronto. He returned to the Holy Land in 1934, and in 1936 married Manya Kaganovich. Lou Ritzrose to a senior position with the Israel Power Company in Haifa. He succumbed to cancer and diedin 1970. He and Manya had two children:1. Mojdma, married to Eli-Emil Neutra, living in Haifa. They have three children, Ronen, Osnatand Ilanit.2. Odded Ritz married to Jocheved Olevsky, and is a software engineer, living in Ra’anana withtheir three children, Ayelet, Ronit and Uri-Eliezer.IV£. The Fanufy of Esther Leah MednickEsther Leah married Rabbi Chaim Mednick, who was ordained at the Slobodka Yeshivah, and tookthe pulpit in the Russian town of Shiverin. Their only daughter, Thelma (Hannah Taibel) was bomthere. The town was the scene of frequent anti-Semitic outbursts, and in one fren2y, Esther Talong with some twenty other Jews, were trapped in the main square, herded off, and buried aliveby the rampaging peasants. After 24 hours, the grave was opened and Esther Leah was one of thefew who emerged alive, though her health was broken, and she would never be the same.Rabbi Chaim Mednick was impelled by this incident to go to Moscow to seek the assistance of FagelFreidin, daughter of Leizer, who was able to obtain forged exit papers for this family. Rabbi Mednickdid not even return home. He cabled his wife and instructed her to pack immediately and withThelma, to meet him at the Latvian border. They succeeded in leaving Russia and reached Rigawhere they stayed for several months.140Rabbi Mednick’s sister in Chicago then arranged to bring them to the U.S. With assistance fromHIAS, the Mednick family came first to Quebec, and in 1930, to Chicago. Esther Leah passed awayin 1946, and Rabbi Chaim Mednick in 1955, on the eve of a planned trip to Israel He was buriedin Israel in accordance with his wishes. Thelma, who was unmarried, moved to Tel Aviv where shewas employed by Delek, the Israeli oil company. Thelma continued to live and work in Israelpassed away in 1985.141