D A V I DAND S Y L VIA STEINER YIZKOR BOOK COLLECTIONSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YID DIS H LIB R A R YN O . 14248Lithuania Memorial BookLithuanian Jewish communitiesTHE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY - NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSTHE STEVEN SPIELBEEG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARY PEOVIDESON-DEMAND EEPEINTS OF MODERN YIDDISH LITEEATURE©2003 THE NEW YOEK PUBLIC LIBRARY ANDTHE NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTEEMAJOE FUNDING FOR THEYIZKOE BOOK PEOJECT WAS PEOVIDED BY:Harry and Lillian Freedman FundDavid and Barbara B. Hirschhorn FoundationDavid and Barbara MarguliesThe Nash Family FoundationHarris RosenDavid and Sylvia SteinerRuth TaubmanOriginal publication dataAUTHORTITLEIMPRINTDESCRIPTSUBJECTadd'l NAMESchoenburg, Nancy, 1942-Lithuanian Jewish communities / Nancy Schoenburg, Stuart Schoenburg.New York : Garland Pub., 1991.xi, 502 p.: maps; 23 cm.Jews -- Lithuania -- History.Lithuania — Ethnic relations.Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945) — Lithuania.Schoenburg, Stuart, 1938-THIS BOOK MEETS A.N.S.I. STANDARDS FORPAPER PERMANENCE AND LIBRARY BINDING.PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.LITHUANIAN JEWISHCOMMUNITIESGARLAND REFERENCE UBRARYOFTHEHUMANTTIES(VOL. 1321)LITHUANIAN JEWISHCOMMUNITIESNancy SchoenburgStuart SchoenburgGARLAND PUBLISHING, INC. • NEW YORK & LONDON1991©1991 Nancy Schoenburg and Stuart SchoenburgAll rights reservedLibrary of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication DataSchoenburg, Nancy, 1942-Lithuanían Jewish communities / Nancy Schoenburg, StuartSchoenburg.p. cm. — (Garland reference library of the humanities ; v.1321)ISBN 0-8240-4698-6 (alk. paper)1. Jews—Lithuania—History. 2. Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945)—Lithuania. 3. Lithuania—Hi$tory, Local. 4. Lithuania—Ethnicrelations. I. Schoenburg, Stuart, 1938- . D. Title.m. Series.DS135.R93L556 1991947’.5004924—dc20 91-8566CIPPrinted on acid-free, 250-year-life paperManufactured in the United States of AmericaCONTENTSPreface  viiCHAPTER I: A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE: AHISTORY OF LITHUANIA & LITHUANIANJEWRY   3Lithuanian Historical Period   4Origins of Lithuanian Jewry - The South  8Origins of Lithuanian Jewry - The West  10The Golden Age of Poland  13Jewish Autonomy - The Councils  16Jews of Poland - Cultural Development   19Times of Trouble  21Shabbatai Zvi  23New Jewish Movements - Hasidism  24The Vilna Gaon  25The Partitions of Poland  27Under Russian Rule   28New Jewish Movements - Enlightenment   33Rise of Lithuanian Nationalism   34Lithuanian Independence   35The Jews During World War I andIndependent Lithuania  38World War II and the Holocaust  40Conclusion  41CHAPTER II: JEWISH COMMUNITIES OFLITHUANIA   49Appendix 1: Lithuanian TownsAltemate Spellings and Key to MapLocations 401Maps 419VILITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAppendix 2: Lithuanian Jews and Their TownsAmerican Federatíon of Lithuanian Jews 429Council of Landsmanshaften 432Lithuanian Jews in Soviet Russia in 1943   433Some Jewish Survivors in Lithuania 439Survivors in Lithuania To Whom PackagesWere Forwarded 446Persons in Lithuania Who Were Sent Money . . . 447Remittances That Were Cancelled 450Lithuanian Jews Who Survived The HolocaustFound in Lithuania  451Found in France 460Found in Italy  462Found in Sweden  464Found in Palestine 465Found in Germany  466Jewish Soldiers From Lithuania InjuredDuring the Russo-Japanese War 1904-5 . . 480Jewish Family Names Taken From LithuanianTown Names 481Yahrzheit Dates of Lithuanian JewishCommunities 483Appendix 3: Resources for Lithuanian JewishGenealogy 489Beginning Jewish Genealogy: GeneralInformation 491Periodicals on Jewish Genealogy  492Additional Material on Lithuanian Jewry 492Glossary 499PREFACEThis book resulted in part firom a librarian’s challenge.I was searching for information about the town of Shilel,Lithuania, where my grandfather was bom in 1871 and livedfor four years before the family left for America. Familytradition held that the town had been destroyed and no longercould be found on the map of Lithuania. At the NationalLibrary in Jerusalem, a librarian recommended to me theHebrew book Yehadut Lita, Volume III (Tel Aviv: Associa-tion of Lithuanian Jews in Israel, 1967) as the "best sourceon the subject." I asked her if she had such a book inEnglish. She said she often receives that request and left mewith the charge: "The English version you’ll just have towrite yourself."In Yehadut Lita I found an article on Shilel. The lastJewish residents had indeed been driven out or killed in theHolocaust. But something has been preserved about the for-mer Jewish community in Shilel; moreover, it can be foundon a map. I also found articles on other towns where myancestors had lived and where my husband’s family hadresided in southem Lithuania.When I mentioned my work to íriends and acquaintances,I was surprised at how many English speaking Jews said thatthey too had roots in the towns of Lithuania. I wonderedwhy.Each time I heard about another Lithuanian town, I trans-lated the corresponding article on that town from YehadutLita. Eventually, I began to see a pattem unfolding. In thelast century, generally miserable economic conditions or asudden tragedy, such as a large fire, motivated thousands ofJewish residents to begin leaving for other lands - a migrationthat continued well into this century.VlllLITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe rate of Jewish emigration from Lithuania was higherthan it was ífom other parts of the Pale of Settlement. At fírstnearly everyone went to the U.S. Later, when Americanrestrictions tightened, Lithuanian Jews poured into SouthAíríca. About 75% of all South African Jewry originated inLithuania. A smaller number went to Canada, England, SouthAmerica, and Palestine.During World War I, masses of Jews were exiled ífomLithuania by order of the Russian high command. EntireJewish communities were transported to Siberia. After theWar, not all returned to Lithuania. Some left for other lands,while others stayed in Russia. Many Soviet Jews who haveemigrated from Russia in the last few decades, as well asthose still living there, are descendants of those LithuanianJews exiled during World War I.I found myself translating more and more from YehadutUta for people who said they were seeking information onLithuanian Jewish communities. Eventually, Stuart and I tookup the librarian’s challenge. We put together the kind ofvolume on Lithuanian Jewish Communities that I had beenseeking at the National Library. We hope that others interes-ted in Lithuanian Jewry and family history will find it helpfulin locating their families’ towns and in gaining some back-ground.The Association of Lithuanian Jews in Israel, thepublisher of Yehadut Uta, was not involved in the translationof that portion of Volume 3 used in the book or in thepreparation and publication of this book. The Association isnot responsible for the accuracy or inaccuracy of the transla-tion or other materials contained in the book.The first chapter, "An Historical Perspective," presentsan overview of the history of Lithuanian Jewry coupled witha history of Lithuania itself, with an emphasis on the earlyperiod of Lithuanian history and the origins of LithuanianJewry. "Litvak" means Lithuanian Jew. However, Jews fromPREFACEIXplaces outside Lithuania may be Litvaks. Chapter I explainswhy.Chapter II provides articles on individual Lithuaniantowns and villages, arranged alphabetically by Yiddish name.The information gives an indication of the circumstancesunder which the Jewish ínhabitants lived. In many cases, itcan help to explain what motivated them to leave. Most ofthe information in this chapter is based on the Hebrew bookYehadut Lita, Volume III, which emphasizes LithuanianJewry between the World Wars. Districts cited along with thetowns refer to that period. The Hebrew volumes omit manyof the towns detached ífom Lithuania during independence,1919-1939. As a result, outside sources, as indicated, wereutilized for material on several towns in Vilna Region(Gubemia). Some of the details relating to the Holocaustcame ffom Volume IV of Yehadut Lita.Hebrew dates that appeared in the original text have beenconverted to civil calendar dates. However, as the Hebrewcalendar year begins with Rosh Hashanah (usually in Septem-ber), the conversion may cause an error of one year if thedate fell between September and December.As many readers will use this book for genealogicalresearch, most of the family names mentioned in the articleson towns ífom Yehadut Lita, volume III, have been included.These names make up only a small percentage of the formerJewish population and are not intended to serve as a guide tonames of residents. Moreover, family names, as well as placenames, found in this book are transliterations from theHebrew. The transliterated spellings given here may be verydifferent ffom the way they are rendered today in English.For purposes of this book, we have established a stan-dardized list of town names by transliteration. Appendix 1lists all of the towns included in Chapter II along with theirmap locations. When the map key is given in parenthesis, itrefers to the location of the nearest known town. TownXLITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESlistings and the accompanying maps relate to present-day orethnic Lithuania. Appendix I also gives alternate spellings oftown names. If the town was once part of Poland, it probablyhas a Polish name; if Germany, a German spelling, etc.Some of the differences in spelling are due to the differ-ences in letters used in Yiddish, Hebrew, Polish, Lithuanian,German and English. The Lithuanian language, for example,has several letters that do not exist in written English. It ishelpful to be aware of them since current maps generally useLithuanian spellings. Some of the letters are as follows:c = ch, as in "chow"e = eh, as in "effort"1 = zh, like the "s" in "measure"§ = sh, like the "s" in "sure"j = y, as in "your"3For a more in-depth discussion on the Lithuanian lan-guage, see Dr. Antanas Klimas, "The Letters and Sounds ofLithuanian," Lituanus, Volume VI, No. 1, March 1960,Pages 21-24.In Polish, many "w'”s replace "v"’s. In Hebrew the let-ters for "p" and "f" are the same, as are "b" and "v," whenpronunciation signs are omitted. Because vowels are omittedin modem printed Hebrew, other letters can also be unclear.These are just a few of the points that can lead to confusion.When reading transliterated names, one must anticipate spell-ing variations particularly when these letters are involved.Appendix 2 is devoted to lists of Lithuanian Jews thathave appeared in various disparate sources.Appendix 3 offers additional sources and information thatcan be particularly useful in researching Lithuanian Jewishgenealogy. Resources are rapidly expanding in this field.History, whether of families or otherwise, should not belimited to lists of names and dates. One must strive to createPREFACExia living image in the mind by understanding the environmentand conditions that existed. It is hoped that the informationon the towns of Lithuania will contribute to a feeling ofcloseness with past generations and a better appreciation oftheir concerns, their desires, and their fears. We are pieasedto be able to make this material available to English speakingaudiences.Lithuanian JewishCommunitiesCHAPTER 1A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE:A HISTORY OF LITHUANIAAND LITHUANIAN JEWRYWhat is a Lithuanian Jew (or Litvak in Yiddish)?Sources identify a number of mundane characteristicscontrasting Litvaks ífom other Ashkenazi Jews includingYiddish dialect differences, culinary tastes, and food prepara-tion. They cite the practice of Litvaks in reciting the FridayNight Kiddish sitting,1 and point to the fact that when aLitvak prays, he stands rock still and only moves his lips.But, these are outward manifestations of a divergence ofcustoms within the larger Ashkenazic Jewish grouping. In amore general sense, Litvaks are characterized as being morerational, dogmatic and authoritarian than other branches ofAshkenazi Jewry.Comprising one quarter of Ashkenazi Jewry, Litvakscould not all come ífom that small speck on a modem mapcalled Lithuania. For a glimpse at the answer to the originalquestion, we must first tum to the history of Lithuania andthe ethnic Lithuanians.4LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESLITHUANIAN HISTORICAL PERIODThe Lithuanian people are part of the Baltic branch of theIndo-European Language Group. They are neither a Slavicnor a Germanic people.Indications exist that they arrived in the NortheastemBaltic area from the Steppes as early as 1500 B.C.E. Theyremained for many centuries in primitive seclusion largelybypassed by the great Germanic and Slavic migrations.Although briefly mentioned by Tacitus, Ptolemy and Herodo-tus, only in the beginning of the tenth century C.E. do webegin to get a picture of the area and its inhabitants ffomdocuments written by German merchants. By the thirteenthcentury their history begins to be chronicled.Lithuania of the twelfth century was a sparsely populatedwild area of forests, lakes, and rivers. No cities or townsexisted, although small fortifícations were built for defense.Small groupings or tribes in semi-feudal organizations wereunder local mlers or dukes. Farming was conducted in forestclearings. The tribes were fierce and raided other groups inthe area. The people were pagan, believing in demons andmonsters and practicing human sacrifíce.The Northeast Baltic area was subject to incursions fforntwo directions. From the east, the Westem Rus of Novgorodconducted ffequent campaigns against the Livonians, a peoplerelated to the Lithuanians. From the west, the Danes subjuga-ted Estonia and the Swedes conquered the Finns.Merchants, mainly from Germany, were attracted byamber, fur, honey, wax, and leather products available in thearea, all valuable in Westem Europe. Also, they wereinterested in establishing trade routes to and through theinterior of Russia. However, they were wary of entering thearea without protection against the fierce, primitive, andwarlike natives. In addition, the Catholic Church wished toAN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE5convert these pagans to Catholicism before they could beconverted to the Eastem Orthodox religion by the Russians.From this commonality of interests, the Order of theSwordbearing Knights (the Livonian Qrder) was formed. In1181, the Order landed in Latvia and established fortificationsand a church on the lower Dvina. They founded the City ofRiga in 1201 as a German town and proceeded to convert theLivonians to Christianity. Although successful near the shore,the Order was not able to penetrate into the Lithuanianinterior.The German Knights of the Teutonic Order was a moreominous and formidable organization. Established in Palestineby religious fanatics during the Cmsades, it was committedto spreading Christianity to non-believers at the point of thesword. Driven from the holy land, they were later forced toleave Asia Minor, shifting their activities to the Baltic regionin order to campaign against the "Saracens of the North."Excluded firom Poland, the Order crossed the Vistula in1226 and attacked the primitive and disorganized Old Pras-sian people, a group related to the Lithuanians, whom theyproceeded to decimate to the point of extinction. The Teuton-ic Order reached the Nieman River and beyond, linking upwith the Livonian Knights, which merged with the TeutonicOrder in 1237.As a result of the threat from the Teutonic Order,Lithuania united under the leadership of Mindaugus, one ofthe dukes of a local clan. He accomplished the feat bydefeating his rivals and murdering his relatives.The united Lithuanian armies were able not only to standagainst the Order but also to expand to the South and East.Under Gediminas (1315-1341), Lithuania expanded intoByelomssia. Vilna was established as the capital.Gediminas’ two sons succeeded him. Algerdas, as GrandDuke, ruled firom Vilna and campaigned against Moscovy andthe Tatars. In 1362, he took Kiev. Kestutis ruled firom Troki6UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESand defended Lithuania against the Teutonic Order which wasagain on the move; the Order captured Kovno in 1362.In 1377, Algerdas died and was succeeded by his son,Jagella. In 1386, Jagella married Queen Jadwaga of Poland,was baptized at Cracow and became King of Poland underthe name of Wladyslaw. The arrangement included anagreement to unite Poland and Lithuania on the condition thatno person be both King of Poland and Grand Duke ofLithuania at the same time. Vytautas, son of Kestutis, becameGrand Duke of Lithuania. The agreement, however, was notfully carried out. Although a union between the two countriesdid not yet occur, a close alliance was established.As a result of the alliance, Lithuania became subject toPolish and therefbre Western influence in culture and religionas opposed to the eastem practices of Russia. Polish societywould continue to exert a strong attraction on the moreprimitive and barbaric Lithuanians.In 1387, Lithuania officially became a Catholic country,converted through the Polish Church. However, the vastmajority of the peasant population remained fully pagan untilwell into the sixteenth century and even later.The threat ffom the Teutonic Order ended when acombined Lithuanian-Polish Army commanded by Vytautascrushed the Order at the Battle of Grunwald (Tannenberg) onJuly 15, 1410. The Germans, although defeated, remainedand undertook colonization and settlement rather thanexpansion. Their country was named East Prussia after thepeople the Order had annihilated. The Teutonic Order wasofficially dissolved in 1525.The reign of Vytautas the Great marks the Golden Ageof Lithuania. The border extended to the Black Sea, coveringan area of 390,000 square miles and included the Ukraine andByelorussia. It reached almost to Moscow. This vast areacontained a population of only 2 million people; aboutone-eighth etlinic Lithuanians. The control of the capturedAN HISTORJCAL PERSPECTIVE7lands was not rigorous. The local peoples maintained theiridentities, laws and customs. They paid tribute to the GrandDuke. The leadership and control was Lithuanian.At the time, Lithuania was the great military power ofEastem Europe. It was the bastion of defense for WestemEurope against the Tatars of the Golden Horde whomVytautas the Great stopped in 1399.Vytautas the Great died without heirs in 1430. Jagella’sson, Casimer IV succeeded as Grand Duke. In 1447 he alsobecame King of Poland.The period after Vytautas’s death saw the awakening ofRussian power and its expansion toward the West. In 1514,Russia captured Smolensk from Lithuania. This was followedby a truce until 1562 when a new war broke out. In order tomaintain itself, Lithuania needed Polish assistance. Polandrefused unless Lithuania would agree to fully implement andexpand the unity of the two nations as had been agreed upontwo centuries earlier.The last of the Jagellan dynasty, Sigmund Augustas,wishing to strengthen the union between the two countries,caused to be passed a number of laws between 1563 and1566, the most important of which granted to Lithuaniannoblemen equal rights with the Polish nobility. Union wasfmally effected in 1569 at Lublin. Under the agreement Kiev,Volkynia, and Pordalia were given to Poland and the twocountries fused with a joint King and Parliament. A greatdeal of autonomy was permitted. Lithuania was allowed tomaintain its own army, laws and law courts, fiscal organiza-tion and seal.Of significance was the position of the Lithuanian (andByelomssian) nobility, which long envied and emulated thePolish nobility. Now granted admission and equality, theyquickly ceased to be Lithuanian (or Byelomssian) and becamepart of the Polish nobility, leaving Lithuania without anethnic leadership until the end of the nineteenth century.8LlTHUANlAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe Union of Lublin ended the Lithuanian historicalperiod. It was no longer independent but a part of Poland. Inarea it was reduced to 125,000 square miles which remainedunchanged until 1772. The area was principally EthnicLithuania and ByeIorussia and the population was roughlydivided equally between the two.ORIGINS OF LITHUANIAN JEWRY - THE SOUTHNo evidence suggests that when Mindaugus unitedLithuania in the thirteenth century, any Jews lived or hadlived there. Jews came under Lithuanian rule either byimmigration or by being resident in areas conquered duringthe historical period. This latter situation requires a briefreview of the lands to the south.Major Jewish communities have existed from ancienttimes in the Middle East, Asia Minor, and on the north shoreof the Black Sea. To the north of this area, the Steppes of theUkraine and Volga Valley had seen many waves of conquer-ors from the East. One of the most unusual was the Rhazars,a Turkic people of Ugro-Finnic extraction, who appeared inthe area in the seventh century C.E. They were fierce fightersand from 730 C.E. stopped tíie advancing hoards of Islam inthe Caucasus and prevented their penetration into eastemEurope. The Khazars ruled over a vast territory extendingfrom the Volga River west across the Don, Dnieper andDniester Rivers, and from the Black Sea far into the forestarea to the north. They were the third balancing power in thearea between the Caliphate of Baghdad and Byzantium.What makes the Khazars unique was that about 740 C.E.the ruler (Khagan) Bulan and his court converted to Judaism.Littíe direct evidence exists conceming the Khazars. Thishas led to disparate interpretations conceming their influenceon developing Jewish history. For example, Graetz2 charac-AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE9terizes the Khazar conversion to Judaism as "an event...whichonly slightly affected the development of Jewish history. "3 Onthe other hand the popular writer, Arthur Koestler,4 advancesthe thesis that the vast bulk of Ashkenazi Jewry is descendentfrom the Khazars.5A more reasoned approach is advanced by Baron.6 Hepoints out that although the entire nobility and a substantialportion of the population was Jewish, the majority was amixture of Christians, Moslems, and pagans. It does appear,though, that for many Jewish Khazars, the conversion wassincere and their commitment to Judaism deep.As Jewish communities suffered from persecution byChristians and Moslems, many very likely immigrated toKhazaria. Records of the time indicate that the practice wasnot uncommon. How many sought refuge in Khazaria is notknown. All we can safely say is that there existed in acountry of Jewish dominion a large community of both nativeconverts and immigrant Jews who lived together and co-mingled.The Khazar State was gradually reduced by repeatedblows from the Viking-Russian raiders of the Kieviancivilization in the latter part of the tenth century. It survivedin a reduced condition until overwhelmed in about 1250 C.E.by the great Mongol invasion set in motion by Genghis Khan.Most of the remaining population appears to have beenabsorbed into the Horde. Professor Baron concludes:But before and after the Mongol upheaval theKhazars sent many offshoots into the unsubduedSlavonic lands, helping ultimately to build up thegreat Jewish centers of eastem Europe...During thehalf millennium (740-1250) of its existence, how-ever, and its aftermath in the East European commu-nities, this noteworthy experiment in Jewish state-craft doubtless exerted a greater influence on Jewishhistory than we are as yet able to envisage.710LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAs the conquering Lithuanians moved south throughByelorussia, Volkynia and the Ukraine, they came upontowns with either established Jewish communities or a Jewishpresence. These communities were established by a mixtureof Jews who came via Khazaria, Khazarian Jews and Jewswho came directly firom older Jewish communities. What wasthe proportion of each or their numbers is not known.The first Jewish settlements in Ethnic Lithuania wereestablished during the historic period. The Jewish settlementswere border outposts established for defense against theTeutonic Order. It appears that the Lithuanian rulers broughtthem in for military reasons as the Jews were known to befierce fighters. Grand Duke Vytautas brought Turkic speakingKaraites firom the Crimea to garrison the Troki fortress. Trokilater became a center of the Karaite community.The Mongol invasion, the rise of Muscovite power andthe end of Khazaria mark the end of significant Jewishimmigration into eastem Europe (including both Poland andLithuania) from the south. From the fourteenth centuryJewish immigration principally came ffom the west.ORIGINS OF LITHUANIAN JEWRY - THE WESTAlthough the Jewish immigration firom the south wasimportant, it must be kept in perspective in relation to theimmigration of Jews firom the west. It has been estimated thatat the end of the fifteenth century, after southem immigrationhad practically ceased, the combined Jewish population of allof Poland and Lithuania did not exceed 30,000.8 Most of thisJewish population was centered in westem Poland. It wasestimated that at that time, there were fifty Jewish communi-ties in Poland and four in Lithuania. This estimate does notinclude small settlements or shtetls. From this time, the rateof Jewish immigration ffom the west increased markedly.AN HISTORJCAL PERSPECTIVE11The progress of civilization during the Middle Ages inEurope was marked by population movement and develop-ment in a west to east direction. In the early Middle Ages,the firontiers of civilization were in Bohemia, eastem Germa-ny, Selesia, and westem Poland. Towns would be estab-lished, land would be claimed for agriculture, and thepopulation would increase.Jewish communities existed in the firontier of westemPoland since the ninth century. It is not known whether theseearly immigrants came firom the west or from the south(including Khazaria). These settlers were probably tradersparticipating in the process of opening up the firontier.The development of Poland was severely retarded by thegreat Tatar invasion of 1240/41 which resulted in the deathof half of the population and which utterly devastated thecountry. To help restore the economy, the kings of Polandencouraged immigration, especially by German merchants.With them came Jews firom German lands who established,re-established, or augmented existing Jewish communities inwestem and southwestem Poland.Jewish emigres continued to arrive as a result of persecu-tion in and a series of expulsions firom westem Europe. Thenumbers increased commencing in 1348 with the Germanexpulsions which were followed by expulsions from Bohemia,Moravia, Hungary, Silesia and, afiter 1526, firom the Czechareas. Jews also came firom Spain and Portugal following theexpulsions of 1492-98 and firom Italy afiter the expulsions of1492, 1511 and 1540, although most refugees firom theseMediterranean Lands found new homes in the OttomanEmpire. By the sixteenth century, the only major havensremaining for Jews were Poland and the Ottoman Empire.Jewish immigrants found westem and southwestemPoland to be a comparatively primitive land (compared to thelands firom which they came) with an even more primitiveland, a great underpopulated firontier, to the east. In estab-12LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESlished communities, the Jews were in economic competitionwith the descendants of German merchants who were in theprocess of becoming totally Polanized. This Burgher classbecame the main opponent of the Jews and a major source oftrouble and persecution.In this early period, the economy was young andexpanding. Institutions hostile to Jews, such as the church,were not yet entrenched. The position of Jews in Polishsociety was not seriously challenged. The kings of Polandfound the presence of Jews to be profitable both to thecountry and to the royal treasury. A model charter for theprotection of Jews and Jewish rights was first issued by theking in 1264 and later applied to other Polish provinces. Itwas extended to Lithuania in 1388.Although it is important to differentiate and distinguishthe several communities that contributed to the establishmentof the new community called Lithuanian Jewry, for anindividual it is academic. As each group moved to an area,they were recognized as Jews by other Jews. The Jewsoriginating from these different communities lived togetherand intermarried. After a number of generations, the designa-tions of origin lost meaning as everyone became identified asa member of the new Jewish community. We can see thisprocess occurring today in an early stage in Israel and in amore advanced stage in the United States. An individual ofLitvak origin living today more likely has ancestors firom allof the contributing communities rather than from only one.An exception, of course, is the Karaites, who were pro-nounced heretics and lived separate and apart from thenormative Jewish community.AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE13THE GOLDEN AGE OF POLANDAs the older Jewish communities of westem and southemEurope were disintegrating due to expulsions and persecution,Poland, under the Jagellan dynasty (1385 - 1572), wasexperiencing its golden age. The military and economicpower of Poland was paramount in eastem Europe and thecountry radiated influence in foreign affairs. Members of theJagellan family reigned over Hungary, Bohemia, Poland andLithuania, rivaled only by the Hapsburg dynasty with whomthey were in close liaison. Economic prosperity resulted fromeconomic expansion within Poland, trade, and the develop-ment of firontier regions, all invigorated and fostered by thepolicies of the Jagellan rulers.From the inception of the Jagellan Dynasty, the pro-nounced policy of the govemment was to settle the eastemfrontier, mainly the comparatively empty but rich Ukraine,but also the forest regions of the Grand Duchy of Lithuania.Nobles and other favored people were given grants ín theseareas. Sometimes, the receiver of such a grant was a favoredJew. These grant holders in tum had to find settlers willingto go to tlie new land to clear the forest, drain the swamps orplow the steppes as may be needed. Many of these settlerswere Jews, who welcomed the opportunity to live where anti-Semitic institutions were not yet firmly established and wherethey were not limited in their occupations nor quartered inghettos.The Jewish immigrants from Germany, as a result oftheir numbers, wealth and culture soon submerged the olderJewish communities of Poland. By the end of the fifteenthcentury any outward characteristics of southeastem Europeanor Asian Jewish communities were no longer visible (with theexception of the Karaites). Yiddish was the language of usageand tíie culture and customs brought from Germany prevailed14LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESand would continue to prevail both in Poland and the GrandDuchy of Lithuania.As new Jewish immigrants arrived from the west andsouth of Europe, many times they found that they were notwanted in the established Jewish communities of Poland.They would continue their travels to the frontiers to the east,primarily to the Ukraine but also to Lithuania. Immigrationby Jews to the eastem ffontier was not limited to the new-comers, though. As the westem sections became more settled,Jews found themselves subject to more and more limitations,including where they could live and which occupations theycould pursue. With these restrictions came limitations on howmany Jews could be maintained within an established commu-nity. The excess as well as the dissatisfied joined in the trekto the frontiers to the east.When observing Jewish communities in pre-modemtimes, it is easy to see only the medieval concepts andpractices of the surrounding gentiles. This overlooks themedieval concepts prevalent within the Jewish community.The communities were highly stmctured, with the leadersjealous of their positions. Jews írorn elsewhere were consid-ered suspect and were at times refused admittance and wereeven threatened with excommunication. As the Jewishcommunities of westem and southem Poland became estab-lished, they also became xenophobic which contributed to thetrek of Jews to the eastem firontiers.As Jewish communities expanded and the older areasbecame settled, the burghers sought to limit the rights of theJews. From some towns they sought to exclude Jews or tolimit them to specified ghettos and suburbs. Mainly, theysought to limit their economic activities and ability tocompete in the market place.The Catholic Church, unable to exclude the Jews becausetheir presence was desired by the king, sought instead toimpose the restrictions on Jews prevalent throughout theAN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE15Middle Ages and dating back to Roman Times. Their primaryattack was to limit the number of Jews, both in individualtowns and in the country as a whole. In some of theseattempts they failed but at other times they were successful.For example, the burghers and the church were successful inpreventing Jewish communities ffom legally being establishedin Warsaw until the eighteenth century and in Vilna until themiddle of the sixteenth century.The Jews could only count on the protection of the kingand the nobility, a scant 8% of the population. Even thisprotection was conditional. The king protected the Jewsbecause they provided money for his treasury. The Jews actedas tax collectors and as managers of his enterprises. Inaddition, they maintained contacts with Jews of other lands,especially the Ottoman Empire, and thereby facilitated trade.The king would speak of bringing under his protection onlythose Jews who actually provided income to his treasury.Not all Jews came under the protection of the king. SomeJews were under the protection of an individual noble, one towhom he was useful either as a manager, trader or someother manner by which the Jew added to his material benefit.Some Jews were even under the protection of the church forthe same reasons. And, some Jews found no protection.The sixteenth century saw an intellectual upsurge inPoland due to the influence of the Italian Renaissance and thedevelopment of the Protestant movement. The effect of theseinfluences was not as great nor as long lasting as occurred inwestem Europe. But, this period was the time of Copemicus,Celtes and Janiclri in Poland. Calvinism, ífom Switzerland,was the primary influence in Poland. Lithuania was principal-ly affected by Lutheran teachings emanating ffom theUniversity at Konigsberg in East Prussia. The Protestantmovement made deep inroads in both countries. Even KingSigmund Augustus almost converted.16LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSince Lithuanian society was more primitive, it did notexperience the intellectual and cultural reverberations evi-denced in Poland. The Reformation did have an effect. Itpresented its teachings to the general population in the nativeLithuanian language, a practice later followed by the Catho-lics during the Counter-Reformation. These religious tractsare the oldest extant Lithuanian writing. For the first time,the majority of the population was exposed to Christianconcepts. From this period, Lithuania could be counted as aChristian rather than a pagan country, though aspects ofpaganism remain until the present.The humanistic movement did not build bridges betweenthe Jewish and gentile worlds. The Jews remained a groupapart and were neutral in the conflicts between Catholics andProtestants. The primary effect on the Jewish communityresulted from the weakening of the Catholic authority whichrelieved pressure on the community for a time. In 1573, therewas even a call in the Polish Diet for complete freedom ofreligion for all Christians, Jews and Moslems.The relief was only temporary as the Protestant move-ment became increasingly anti-Jewish, the Counter-Reforma-tion took hold, and economic conditions in Poland deteriorat-ed.JEWISH AUTONOMY - THE COUNCILSIn 1519, a centralized leadership of the Jewish communi-ties of Poland was established. It grew out of the annual fairsheld in Lublin, at which the leading rabbinic authorities metand decided cases. The organization, known as The Councilof the Four Lands, acquired the status of a national beit din.The Council was the ultimate authority for Polish Jewry onquestion of Jewish law and practical questions relating to thewelfare of the Jewish community as a whole. In relationsAN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE17with the Polish govemment, it spoke in the name of theJewish community.The Jews of Lithuania did not come under the authorityof the Council of the Four Lands. Instead, they establishedtheir own Council which was called the Council of the Landof Lithuania. In structure and íunction, the two councils wereparallel. The first documents referring to the Lithuaniancouncil date ífom 1533.Two separate councils were established, probably becausethe secular authorities with whom the councils had to associ-ate were separate and autonomous in internal matters.Another reason could have been the great distances involvedand the primitive state of transportation and communications.Clearly, the reason was not a separation or distinctionbetween Polish and Lithuanian Jewry because such a distinc-tion did not then exist.The two Councils acted in coordination and consultation.The Council of the Lands was the sole authority by which theCouncil of Lithuania could be in contact with the centralgovemment, whereas the Council of the Lands looked to theCouncil of Lithuania for fínancial assistance in meetingnecessary expenses of operation and defense of the Jewishcommunities including the cost of bribing appropriateofficials.Sometimes the two Councils promulgated differentmlings on the same question reflecting the different circum-stances prevailing in Lithuania and Poland. One example wasthe question of whether Jews should participate in taxfarming. The Council of the Lands prohibited the practice astoo dangerous while the Council of Lithuania allowed andeven encouraged the practice.The Councils also served as administrative bodies for thePolish and Lithuanian govemments in collecting Jewish taxes,especially the capitation or head tax decreed in Poland in1549 and extended to Lithuania in 1552. The govemments18LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESwould establish the total amount of the tax and the Councilswould apportion it within the respective communities whichwould collect the tax and transfer it to the Councils which, intum, would pay it over to the govemmental treasinies. TheCouncils would also negotiate with the govemments on theamount of taxes to be collected.The Councils passed ordinances goveming the lives ofthe Jewish community. They passed on such matters aseconomic relations with the non-Jewish community (especial-ly the nobility), credit operations and business ethics, andmoney lending. They were active in many areas. For exam-ple, they would assist poor girls in finding husbands. Theywere the final appellate court on religious matters and itsmlings were even sought ífom communities outside ofPoland-Lithuania. They would promote Jewish education. Forexample, in 1652 the Council of Lithuania decreed that allcongregations with a rabbi must also maintain a yeshiva foradults and youth. They acted as self-defense organizationsagainst threats ífom the outside and provided funds for Jewishdefense against accusations such as blood libels.The Councils were far from democratic. They wereconstituted only from the principal communities. Elections toCouncil positions were held within these communities by theleadership of the communities and not by the commonpeople. Moreover, the Council generally sided with theleadership of individual communities against the commonman. It has been estimated that the leadership of the Councilof Lithuania was elected by 0.7% of the Jewish householdsof Lithuania.The autocratic character was more pronounced with theCouncil of the Land of Lithuania than it was with the Councilof the Four Lands. Originally, three communities constitutedthe Council of the Land of Lithuania, namely: Brest-Litovsk,Grodno and Pinsk. It is interesting to note that none of thesecommunities were in ethnic Lithuania. Although smallerAN HISTORJCAL PERSPECTIVE19communitíes were occasionally represented in the business ofthe Council, these three communitíes jealously protected theirprerogatíves. For a long tíme, the head of the beit din ofBrest-Litovsk assumed leadership within the Council.This state of affairs led to much dissension as othercommunitíes demanded recognitíon and partícipatíon in theleadership of the natíonal Jewish Community. Differentcommunitíes and individuals would at tímes tum to the civil,non-Jewish authoritíes for relief against the Council. Afterstrenuous efforts, Vilna and Slutsk were added to the smalllist of leading communities.Because of the intemal dissension and a new method oftax collectíon established by the Polish authorities, bothCouncils were officially disbanded in 1764. They left in theirwake huge debts and much bittemess, but also pride in theseunique autonomous organizatíons.JEWS OF POLAND - CULTURAL DEVELOPMENTThe Polish (and the developing Lithuanian) Jewishcommunitíes did not live in isolation. Contacts existed withother Jewish communitíes both commercially and culturally.The works of the great centers of Jewish leaming of westemEurope and Africa were known and studied in Poland. Jewishcenters of study were established and grew.Beginning in the sixteenth century, the center of Talmud-ic exegesis passed from westem Europe to Poland.9 Amongthe great commentators contributing original methodology andapproach to the Talmud were R. Meir of Lublin (1558-1616),R. Solomon Luria (Maharshal) (1510-1573), and R. SamueíEliezer Edels (Maharsha) (1555-1631).Included in Talmudic exegesis was the study of Kabba-lah10. The Kabbalah, although a part of normative Judaism,was a subject generally leamed by only a select few along20LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESwith law and rational philosophy. The traditional Kabbalahcontained elements of messianism and apocalypse-utopianeschatology. But, these elements were submerged in favor ofa speculative approach in understanding the mystical cosmolo-gy-With the expulsion of the Jews firom Spain in 1492, theMediterranean Jewish communities witnessed a new emphasisin messianic Kabbalah and a heightened popular interest inmysticism. Scholarly work on Kabbalah, centered in Safed,emphasized the redemption of the universe and the unificationof the emanations of God with the redemption of Israel andits retum to the land. Although the fame of these teachings ofR. Isaac Luria (not to be confused with R. Solomon Luria)and his disciples spread to Poland, the actual texts" werewithheld as being too holy for the diaspora. Some of theteachings, however, reached Italy and later Poland.Kabbalistic study became rife throughout Poland. Localwritings came out under the names of the rabbis of Safed.Ancient texts, once held secret, were published. Mysticism,once the realra of the chosen few, became the domain of themany. The metaphorical redemption of Israel symbolizing theredemption of the universe was conceptually transformed toan actual redemption and return to the land severed ffom itscosmological parameters. Practical Kabbalah, that is, magicand incantations, came to the fore replacing traditionalspeculative study.As Kabbalah spread throughout Poland, the time for thearrival of the Messiah was thought near. From the ancienttexts, the year 1648 was deemed the year of redemption.Instead it was the beginning of catastrophe.AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE21TIMES OF TROUBLEThe struggle between a centralizing kingship and adecentralizing nobility usually resulted in greater centraliza-tion, as occurred in westem Europe. However, in Poland theopposite transpired. During the Jagellan Dynasty the nobilityand its center of authority, the Diet, were able to extend itshold on Poland.The death of Sigmund II in 1572 ended both the JagellanDynasty and hereditary kingship in Poland. Thereafter, thekings of Poland were elected by the Polish Diet lfom amongforeigners. Since the election required the unanimous approv-al of the entire Diet, elections were ffaught with maneuveringand machinations. It sometimes took years to settle on aconsensus candidate.Aíter a brief fíve month reign by Henry of France, theDiet eleeted Steven Bathory ffom Transylvania who reignedfrom 1576 to 1586. Some historians cite the end of theGolden age of Poland with the death of Sigmund while othersextend the era to the death of Steven Bathory who was anenlightened and strong leader. In any event, a series of weakrulers followed resulting in stagnation and economic decline.The decay in power and vitality became evident with theoutbreak of the Chmielnicki Cossack uprising of 1648-52.This uprising also had dire effects on the Jewish communi-ties, constituting the greatest calamity for eastem EuropeanJewry with the exception only of the Holocaust.The Cossacks, temporarily allied with the CrimeanTatars, burst out of the Ukraine. One of their main targetswere Jews, who, as resident managers, represented to theCossacks the hated Poland and all that was Polish. TheCossacks were intent not in just killing and indiscriminatelylooting, but in genocide. Jews that could not flee sought tosurrender to the Tatars who would only enslave them,possibly selling them into the Ottoman Empire where they22LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEScould be redeemed by other Jews. The Cossack armies soondecimated the Ukraine, Galicia and southem Poland. Theirdepredations reached almost to Warsaw before being finallyput down. It has been estimated that over 100,000 Jews diedduring the Chmielnicki massacres.There are two important observations conceming theeffects of the Chmielnicld massacres on the Jewish communi-ties of eastem Europe. First, the Cossacks not only lrilled theJews but destroyed the institutions of Jewish life. Theydestroyed the yeshivas and schools and Irilled the scholars andthe teachers. For those Jews that survived, retumed or camelater, organized Jewish life had to almost begin anew. Thesecond point is that the Chmielniclri massacres largelybypassed Lithuania.Although Lithuania was spared from the Chmielniclriuprising, it was ravished by the northem wars between Russiaand Sweden. The Jewish population of Lithuania was reducedto poverty and suffering. The wars continued until 1661 whenSweden and Russia agreed to relinquish their Polish gains. Asmuch as the Lithuanian Jews suffered, they were not subject-ed to the genocide that occurred in the south. In fact,Lithuania became a haven for Jews fleeing the Cossacks.The Chmielniclri uprising slowed but did not stop theflow of people to the eastem firontier. With the retum ofpeace, the movement to the Ukraine and the Grand Duchy ofLithuania resumed at an increased rate.While Poland had become the center of European Jewry,Lithuanian Jewry remained on the outer firinges until well intothe sixteenth century. Lithuania was still largely unsettled andprimitive. It has been estimated that in 1578 there were27,000 Jews in Lithuania and in 1676 there were 32,000Jews. This latter estimate is probably low. Up to the seven-teenth century, the religious leaders of Lithuania were allPolish trained. Lithuanian Jewry could be viewed at thisan historical perspective23period as an appendage of Polish Jewry.12 This was soon tochange.SHABBATAI ZVIThe survivors of the cataclysmic events in eastemEurope, full of despair and praying for redemption, eagerlyawaited the expected arrival of the savior. Poland, evenbefore the massacres, had been vibrating with the expectationof the near coming of the messiah. The events since 1648would seem to be the prophetic apocalyptical summoning ofthe end of days. The great wonder was that the messiahfigure did not arise in Poland but rather in the OttomanEmpire.1JAlthough Shabbatai Zvi had early visions of messiahship,the movement around him began in 1665 in Palestine. Theyear 1666 was declared the year of redemption. All of thesigns appeared to signify that Shabbatai Zvi was the traemessiah of David who would lead his people back to theland. These signs were heavily weighted by the writings andpropaganda of his followers.In Poland, as among all of Jewry, the people wereecstatic with the belief that not only was redemption near, butalso revenge. Street marches took place and riots againstgentiles occurred. Business was ignored as all classes ofpeople joined in the euphoria. Religious leaders ponderedwhat acts were necessary to hasten redemption. Opponentsand doubters of Shabbatai Zvi were silenced. LithuanianJewry shared in this mad expectation of the coming redemp-tion.According to the Zohar (an ancient book central toKabbalah), when the Messiah comes, he will reorder the ralesby which Jews live. These rales had been promulgated andenforced by the rabbinate. A messianic movement could be24LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESlooked upon as an attempt to undermine the authority of therabbis. It has been suggested that this was the agenda of someof the followers of Shabbatai Zvi.The euphoria of the Jewish people was shattered whenShabbatai Zvi converted to Islam in September, 1666.Although some continued to believe in him, the vast body ofJews went into deep despondency. Some, disillusioned withJudaism, converted to Islam or Christianity.Following the apostasy of Shabbatai Zvi, opponents ofthis messianic movement could again be heard. Rabbis triedto reestablish their authority. In Poland, too few leaders hadsurvived the Chmielnicki massacres. The effort to reasserttraditional authority only sapped what strength was left.The story in Lithuania, where the rabbis were moreeasily able to reestablish control, was different. The Councilof the Land of Lithuania, meeting at Chomsk in 1667,enacted an ordinance forbidding any variation or alteration inthe liturgy. Rabbis issued decrees forbidding a man to studyKabbalah until he reached the age of forty.Between the reaction to the apostasy of Shabbatai Zviand the coming onslaught of the Hasidic movement, Lithuani-an Jewry became conservative and protective of tradition.Kabbalah and mysticism were de-emphasized, whereasrational study was accentuated. Innovation and change wasffowned upon.NEW JEWISH MOVEMENTS - HASIDISMThe destruction of Jewish institutions caused by theChmielniclri massacres, the increase in church persecutionsoccasioned by the success of the Counter-Reformation inPoland, the intemal divisiveness of the Jewish communitycaused by oligarchic rule, and the disillusionment engenderedby the false messianic movement of Shabbatai Zvi, estab-AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE25lished fertile ground for the rise of Hasidism. Founded byIsrael Baal Shem Tov (1699 - 1761), tíie Hasidic movementoriginated in Volhynia and Podolia and quickly spread to theUkraine, Galicia and other parts of Poland.The teachings emphasized that all were equal beforeGod, the ignorant as well as the leamed. Purity of heart wasconsidered superior to study. The leader or tzaddik (oradmor) must always be followed. For many, the tzaddik wasan intermediary with God. Many Hasidic tales grew upconceming the tzaddikim and their magical and mysticalpowers.The Hasidic movement swept unopposed through all ofeastem European Jewry until it came to Lithuania. There, theestablished rabbinic leadership pronounced anathema on suchconcepts as elevating ignorance and putting emotionalismahead of rational study. The only Hasidic movement that wasable to establish itself in Lithuania was that of the Habad orLubavitch in Lyady, Byelomssia.THE VILNA GAONThe dynamic leadership of Lithuanian Jewry by the endof the eighteenth century centered around Elijah ben SolomonZalman, the Vilna Gaon. He represented a synthesis betweentotal immersion in Talmudic teachings, the inclusion ofmysticism, and the infusion of secular enlightenment.The new school of the Vilna Gaon was postulated as aconservative reaction to Hasidim, a hardening of the line, anda reaction. At the same time, it was not just old doctrineswith new wrappings but a natural continuation and advance-ment distinct from Hasidim which was looked upon as adeparture. This new school emphasized individual study andhard work as the prerequisite to the attainment of spiritual26LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESadvancement. Everyone was encouraged to study, even thoseof lesser ability.The teachings of the Vilna Gaon led to the establishmentof a new type of yeshiva for the total study of Torah and thepursuit of leaming as a self-contained goal. The first suchinstitution opened in Volozhin in 1802 and was headed byRabbi Hayyim, who established a fimd collected in allLithuania to support the yeshiva. On this model, yeshivassprang up throughout Lithuania.One of the great achievements of the Vilna Gaon was anew compilation of the Talmud and commentaries, the formthat is in use today.The followers of the Vilna Gaon were called Mitnagdim(later called the Orthodox) meaning the opposers; that is theopposers of the new emotional, anti-rational Hasidim. In1784, the Vilna Gaon ruled that the Hasidim were hereticaland prohibited ritual slaughter performed by them andmarriage with them. The animosity and hatred that existedbetween the Mitnagdim and the Hasidim was intense. Attimes, each would go to the gentile authorities with accusa-tions against the other. When the Vilna Gaon died, the smallHasidic community in Vilna held an open celebration whichled to violence.It was during this period of intense conflict between theMitnagdim and the Hasidim that the term "Litvak” came intocommon usage to differentiate the Lithuanian Jews from theremaining, predominantly Hasidic Jewish world of eastemEurope.The antipathy lessened in the nineteenth century as theHasidic movement began to establish yeshivas of their ownand began to stress Torah education.an historical perspe CTIVE27THE PARTITIONS OF POLANDAs discussed above, the end of the Jagellan Dynastymarked the beginning of a períod when the kings of Polandwere elected by the Diet from candidates outside the country.Since unanimity was necessary, the final selection was sofully compromised as to leave the king without power.Poland lacked centralized leadership.Poland declined until it remained but an empty shell ofa nation. At the end of the eighteenth century, the threesurrounding powers acted. Poland was systematically parti-tioned between Russia, Prussia and Austria in three steps.The First Partition, in 1772, gave Byelorussia to Russia. TheThird Partition, in 1795, gave Lithuania to Russia. Polandceased to exist as an independent nation.On December 23, 1791, Empress Catherine of Russiaissued a decree restricting Jewish habitation to specific areas.This decree applied to White Russia (Byelorussia), theUkraine and other areas taken in the partition. After the ThirdPartition, the decree was extended to include the newlyacquired territories along the Baltic Sea. Thus was born thePale of Settlement, the area where Jews were allowed to live;an area that stretched from the Baltic to the Black Seas.Of the areas then inhabited by Lithuanian Jewry, ethnicLithuania and Byelorussia became an integral part of Russiaand the southem part, around Grodno and Suwalk, becamepart of the Duchy of Warsaw (Poland). Although Lithuaniamay have been divided, the Jewish Litvak communityremained integrated until World War I.It has been estimated that, at the time of partition, 25percent of all the Jews of eastem Europe were Litvak.28LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESUNDER RUSSIAN RULERussia, a country that had always excluded Jews,suddenly found itself sovereign over the largest concentrationof Jews in the world.In addition to the innate hostility toward Jews held bymost Russians, especially the nobiíity, the problem wascompounded by the fact that Jews and the Jewish communalstructure did not fit the feudal structure of Russian society.The Kahal (local Jewish communal organization) wasespecially anathema as it challenged the total authoritydemanded by a centralized and autocratic regime. A motifthat would reoccur was the attempts of the Russian govem-ment to break the strength, standing, and control of the localKahals over the Jewish population.The partitioning of Poland also occurred at a time whenconcepts of the enlightenment were beginning to be felt inRussia. Led initially by Catherine, who was of Germanbirth, the court tended to take a liberal view toward govem-ment and to the Jewish questions in particular.Numerous plans were put forward to "help" the Jews andto solve the "Jewish problem." Most involved altering theeconomic base because it was felt that Jews did not engage insufficient physical labor for their livelihood. Another goal, inkeeping with the enlightenment, was to educate the Jews andintegrate them into society as part of the peasant, artisan ormerchant classes. Some of the proponents of these schemeswere well meaning but many harbored a loathing for Jewsand reflected their prejudices in the programs.Although there was ambivalence in the govemmentalattitude toward Jews during the early period of Russian mle,the overall signs were positive. It was felt that the court ofthe Czar had manifested good intentions.When Napoleon invaded Russia in 1812, the Jewishcommunity largely supported Russia. Although it was knownAN HISTORICAL PERSPECTTVE29that Napoleon had emancipated the Jews of westem Europeand material benefits would accrue as a result of a Frenchvictory, it was felt by Jewish leaders that the Jews would losetheir connection with God if they supported the French.After the Congress of Vienna, the reaction that set in allover Europe also evidenced itself in Russia. Many Jews whohad loyally supported the Czar were soon disabused. Thecourt was no longer favorable to Jews.The period between the end of the Napoleonic Wars andWorld War I, roughly called the Nineteenth Century, was aprofound period for the Jews of Russia as well as a time ofdramatic changes within Russia. This period is one of the bestdocumented in Jewish history, as opposed to the scantmaterial extant for prior periods.Although well known as a period of persecution, official-ly sanctioned pogroms and poverty, the Nineteenth Centurywas also a period of great change and development within theJewish Community.One important manifestation was the phenomenal Jewishbirth rate coupled with a relatively low infant mortality rate,which resulted in a large natural increase in the Jewishpopulation. It has been estimated that in 1820 there were 1.6million Jews in Russia (including Poland). In 1851, thenumber had increased to 2.4 million and, by 1880, it hadreached 4 million. During this 60-year period, the Jewishpopulation increased by 150 percent, whereas the generalpopulation increased only 87 percent.14The main reason that this large natural increase could bemaintained was that the Pale was at peace; Russia’s warswere fought elsewhere. No marauding armies traversed thePale of Settlement.Such events as the forced conscription of Jewish boysinto the army through kidnapping (by "khoppers"), whichresulted in most of them being lost to the community bydeath or conversion, and the numerous pogroms resulting in30LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESdeath, injury, and destruction were certainly traumatic to theJews and remembered with horror. However, from ademographic point of view, they were insignificant.The Nineteenth Century witnessed an extensive shift inthe economic base of the Jewish communities caused partiallyby official policy, but also by the changes occurring withinRussian society. This period saw the beginning of theindustrial revolution in Russia as well as all Europe.Although some Jews had lived in the urban areas and hadbeen involved in commerce, both domestic and intemational,most Jews lived in small, rural, close-lcnit shtetls. Few wereactive in agriculture although most rural Jews had gardens.Most acted as middlemen between the peasants and themerchants of the towns, dealing in crops and exchangingthem for merchandise. In the Pale, Jews exclusively distilledliquor, ran tavems and inns. Clothing manufacture andtailoring was also exclusively in Jewish hands, an industryoriginally developed to meet the needs of Jews for specialreligious clothing. Jews were also cobblers, carpenters,barbers, fisherman and transporters or porters, to name a fewof the traditional trades.The Czarist regime sought to end the middleman statusof the Jews for several reasons. First, it was then thoughtthat this was not productive and the Jews should becomefarmers or merchants for their own good. Secondly, theautocratic regime did not wish direct contact with peasants,especially by Jews, who might upset the established order.One target was Jewish involvement with spirituous liquor. Itwas felt, wrongly, that Jews were getting the peasants dmnk.This policy of expelling Jews from their traditionalshtetls was periodically enforced and rescinded. Some,however, were dispossessed and forced into urban ghettosunder poverty conditions.Even in the areas in which Jews long held monopolies,they began to find themselves in heavy competition from non-AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTTVE31Jews. This was accelerated after the edict of 1861 whichfreed the serfs. The former peasants took on trades and craftsincluding those formerly performed only by Jews. Within thePale, the population was increasing so fast that Jewishcompetition among themselves was intense, resulting in lesscompensation and shoddier work.With the support of the govemment, Russia was industri-alizing. Many of the enterprises were owned and organizedby Jews. However, the number of Jewish capitalists wassmall compared to the great mass of Jews. As conditionsbecame poorer in the shtetls, Jews would migrate to the urbanareas seeking jobs in the industrial enterprises.Some of the traditional activities simply no longerexisted. For example, the transport business rapidly declinedwith the advent of railroads.The process of urbanization of the Jewish masses due tocompetition, population increases, and official govemmentpolicy, accelerated. The urbanization of the Jewish populationwas intense. In 1897, Jews accounted for 52 percent of theurban population of Lithuania and Byelorussia, followed byRussians with 18.2 percent, Poles with 12.8 percent, WhiteRussians with 11.8 percent, and Lithuanians with 1.7percent.15Many westem Jews, in searching their family roots, maywell find that their ancestors lived in a shtetl and brieflymoved to an urban area before they emigrated to America oranother country.Job creation by new enterprises was insufficient to keepup with the rapidly increasing Jewish population. Povertycontinued to increase during this period and the urban areasbecame holes of depredation.Within the Pale of Settlement, the farther north onewent, the poorer was the area. The poorest portion of thePaSe of Settlement was Lithuania. As economic conditionsdeteriorated, Litvaks moved to better areas seelring to better32LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEStheir conditíons. Some settled in Latvia. Others went to theUkraine, northeast Poland, or other parts of the Pale.As the century progressed, tíie official policy of thegovemment was to assimilate and convert the Jews. One ofthe methods used was the inclusion of Jews within theRussian school system. At first, Jews hailed this as a grant offreedom and a ray of hope. It did aid in opening the hori-zons of young Jews beyond the fence of traditíonal religion.Some did assimilate but others sought secularized activitieswithin a Jewish context. The irony for the govemment wasthat this attempt at assimilatíon only led to the inclusion ofmany Jewish youth in the revolutíonary movements endemicin the century.The pressure of repression and economic depravatíonbecame sufficiently great that a westward emigratíon beganin the 1840 to Germany and Austria. With the assassinatíonof Czar Alexander II in March, 1881, all pretense of liberal-ism ended and the repression of the Jews intensified, only tobe ratcheted up again with the ascension of Czar Nicholas IIin 1897. Vast Jewish emigratíon to the West sharply in-creased in the 1880’s. Between 1880 and 1914, over 2million Jews had emigrated. However, even this vast exodusdid not equal the natural increase during the same period.The Jewish populatíon continued to increase.The emigratíon was heaviest from Lithuania. WhereasLitvalcs had constítuted 25 percent of the Jewish populationat the beginning of the century, due to migratíons andemigratíon, they only constítuted 20 percent of the Jewishpopulatíon at the end of the period. Although most left forthe United States, some settled in Palestíne, South Africa,South America, Canada, Britain and other places into whichthey could find entry.an historical perspective33NEW JEWISH MOVEMENTS - ENLIGHTENMENTThe traditíonal manner of meetíng the challenge of ahostíle gentile world was for the Jewish communitíes to turnin unto themselves. They would be part of the economicworld of the surrounding community, but would be immersedin their studies and be closer to God. This practíce waschallenged by the Haskalah, the enlightenment, which cameinto Lithuania firom the west.The movement had its roots in Italy and Holland but firsttook hold as a movement in Germany in the eighteenthcentury. It was based upon the belief that Jewish emancipa-tion could only be achieved by modernizing and westemizingJewish religion and customs. It also advocated the literary useof the Hebrew language. While the Vilna Gaon and his circlecultivated Jewish partícipatíon in westem culture and thestudy of science as an aid in more fully understanding holytext, the Haskalah movement elevated such actívity to themain goal. They looked upon themselves as a mediatorbetween the old rigid Orthodoxy and the radical assimilation-ists.Moving through East Pmssia, the movement took hold inLithuania, especially in Vilna and Minsk. It also took on adifferent character in Lithuania from that in westem Europe,Poland and southem Russia. Rather than manifestations ofnational disavowal and assimilatíon, it centered around thepeople and the language. It developed Hebrew poets, novel-ists and scholars. Lithuanian Jewry, with its tradition ofreason and study was fertíle ground for the enlightenment.The Haslcalah movement was vehemently opposed by theMitnagdim as a further intmsion into the traditions of theJewish people. In this oppositíon, the Mitnagdim were joinedby the Hasidim.As Haskalah ran its course in the 1880’s, it paved theway for two other movements, Zionism and Socialism.34LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESWith the first emigration of disciples of the Vilna Gaonand of Hasidim at the end of the eighteenth century toPalestine, strong ties to the land of Israel were established.Leading Litvak Zionists were already preaching Jewishnationalism and settlement of the land of Israel in the 1870’s.In 1902, the second convention of Russian Zionists was heldin Minsk, the only open convention held during Czaristtimes. Until 1912, the center of Russian Jewish Zionism wasin Vilna.The second movement was the Jewish Socialist move-ment which was founded in Lithuania. It arose fforn theplight of the many thousands of Jewish proletariat and rapidlydeveloped into a revolutionary socialist movement. In orderto mobilize the Jewish workers, the Bund was organized. TheBund not only played a major role in overthrowing the hatedCzarist regime but also in destroying traditional Judaism andin opposing Hebrew culture and Zionism.RISE OF LITHUANIAN NATIONALISMWith the Third Partition of Poland in 1795, the formerterritories of historic Lithuania were divided by the Russiansinto provinces or gubernias named Vilna, Kovno, Grodno,Minsk, Mohilev and Vitebsk. Vilna and Kovno gubemiascovered ethnic Lithuania and became known after 1832 as the"Territory of the Northwest." The provinces were ruled by anappointed Russian govemor seated in Vilna.Until the 1880’s, the stmcture of Lithuanian societyunder Russian mle consisted of an ethnic Lithuanian peasant-ry and a Polish gentry. This gentry may have been largely ofLithuanian origin but had long since become completelyPolanized. They were regarded as Polish by both the Lithua-nian peasants and by the Russians.AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE35Lithuanian society continued to be stagnant, influencedby and reacting to activities arising elsewhere. In 1830-31and 1863, uprisings against Russian rule originated in Polandfrom where it spread to Lithuania. Jews participated in bothof these uprisings.In 1861, serfdom was abolished in all of Russia. For thefirst time, the Lithuanian peasants were freed ffom the landand could develop. By the 1880’s, a new Lithuanian intelli-gentsia of peasant origin began to emerge and with it aperception of Lithuanian nationalism.Lithuanians utilized the historic period as a base. Thisperiod of great military expansion was idealized and Vytautaswas deified. The union with Poland was regarded as the greatbetrayal of Lithuania. Poland was regarded with hostility.Pagan origins were looked on with pride and eontemporarymanifestations of paganism were commented upon withenthusiasm. Links were emphasized with the Indo-Europeanrace and the close relationship with Greece was established onlinguistic grounds.16 These factors were utilized to bridge400 years of societal non-existence, allowing Lithuanianintellectuals to talk of 700 years of Lithuanian history. Thissearcb for national identity led to calls for territorial autono-my and finally independence.LITHUANIAN INDEPENDENCEWorld War I provided the opportunity sought by Lithua-nian nationalists for independence. During the War, Germanyoccupied most of Lithuania, taking Vilna on September 18,1915.Under German auspices, a 20-man Council of Lithuania(Taryba) was established in September, 1917. On February16, 1918, the Taryba proclaimed an independent state which36LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESwas immediately recognized by Germany. A govemment wasformed on November 11, 1918.On January 5, 1919, the Germans evacuated Vilna whichwas immediately occupied by the Red Army, installing acommunist govemment. The Lithuanian govemment first fledto Kovno but again had to flee when the Red Army occupiedthat town on January 17th.The army of newly emergent Poland took Vilna ffom theRed Army on April 20, 1919, which enabled the Lithuanianarmy to recapture Kovno soon after.The major point of contention between the new govem-ments of Poland and Lithuania was Vilna. Although ethnicLithuanians constituted a minority of the population, theybased their claims upon the large Jewish population living inVilna. However, Poland also claimed Vilna and had posses-sion of the city by military conquest. Poland offered twoaltematives, either (1) an independent Lithuanian state basedupon ethnic boundaries without Vilna, or (2) an expandedstate including Vilna but federated with Poland. Lithuaniarejected both altematives. An inter-allied commission wasestablished under Marshal Foch to fix a demarcation line. Hisline gave Vilna to Poland. On March 15, 1923, the Confer-ence of Ambassadors accepted the Foch Line. Lithuaniarejected the decision.The border remained closed with Poland until March 17,1938, when Poland demanded and received recognition ofPolish sovereignty over Vilna. The borders with Latvia andEstonia also remained closed. During this period of indepen-dence, Lithuania remained isolated from its surroundingneighbors, maintaining normal and close relations only withGermany.On September 22, 1921, Lithuania was accepted as amember of the League of Nations. On August 1, 1922, aconstitution was adopted providing for an 80 memberassembly (Seimas) elected by proportional representationAN HISTORICAL PERSPECTTVE37(vote by party, each party receiving a number of seats inproportion to its size of the vote). Elections in November,1922 failed to produce a majority. New elections in June,1923 established a right-center majority. Elections in May,1926 gave a majority to the left wing which was followed inDecember by an army coup d’etat which instituted an extremenationalist government and totalitarian rule. The constitutionwas soon abolished and with it many democratic provisionsand rights.The program of the nationalists was based upon xeno-phobic nationalism and the church. Education was controlledto further these ideals. One of the objects of derision were theJews who were considered foreigners. Lithuanian newspapersin the ’30’s were so anti-Semitic, they easily rivaled Nazipublications in vitriolicity.The secret German-Russian Treaty of August 23, 1939allowed Germany to invade Poland on September 1, 1939,initiating World War II. In the treaty, it was agreed thatLithuania would go to Germany which anticipated thatLithuania would be an ally and join in the invasion ofPoland. When Lithuania refused and declared itself neutral,the Treaty was revised and placed Lithuania within theRussian sphere of influence. On October 10, 1939, Lithuaniawas forced to sign a mutual assistance pact with the SovietUnion which provided for the stationing of Soviet troops onLithuanian soil. The Soviet Union severed Vilna from Polandand gave it to Lithuania. With the establishment of a puppetcommunist government, Independent Lithuania ceased toexist.38UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESTHE JEWS DURING WORLD WAR I ANDINDEPENDENT LITHUANIAThe Jews, having suffered under the Czarist persecutions,sided with Germany in World War I. With the front lines inLithuania, the Russians in 1915 expelled the Jews ffom theprovinces of Suwalki, Kovno, Courland and Grodno into theinterior of Russia. As the German armies advanced, wholetowns were destroyed. Many Jews came under Germanoccupation before they could be expelled. Others moved todifferent locations. Many but not all Jews were expelled. Thetimes were devastating for an already poverty stricken region.During this period, the last great rabbinic work emanat-ing from the Litvak community was completed. Rabbi YisroelMeir Kagan-Hacohen, known as the Chafetz Chayim,published the Mishnah Brurah17 which is now the normativestandard of Orthodox Jewry.With the Russian revolution and the end of World WarI, the Jews of Byelorussia found themselves behind the borderof Soviet Russia, cut off ffom the remaining Litvak Jewishcommunities. Their development thereafter is part of thehistory of Soviet Jewry. The new borders also cut off theLitvak Jews living in Poland. For the first time, Litvaks weredivided and following different paths of development.Following the War, many Jews retumed ffom innerRussia to ethnic Lithuania. But many did not, forming asegment of the present community of Soviet Jews. The Jewsthat did retum, had to rebuild both buildings and institutions.A number of shtetls inhabited by Jews before the war werenot resettled.The Jews supported Lithuanian aspirations for indepen-dence. In 1919, the Lithuanian delegation to the VersaillesPeace Conference sent a letter guaranteeing the Jews ofLithuania the "right of national-cultural autonomy." This wasfollowed by laws allowing Jewish autonomy and a constitu-AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE39tional provision protecting the rights of large minorities.Jewish communal institutions were established and nationalconferences were held. The period 1919 to 1922 was thegolden age for modem Jewish autonomy. Thereafter, itdecayed due to pressure firom reactionary clerical groups andbecause the Jews were no longer needed to further Lithuaniannationalism.In the economic sphere, Lithuanian cooperatives wereformed under govemmental auspices which had the effect ofcutting the Jews out of their traditional middleman merchan-dizing positions. Many Jews eamed their livelihood in crafts,some in the professions and a number in the import-exporttrade. As time passed, the numbers in each declined with theplaces taken by Lithuanians. The slogan was Lithuania for theLithuanians. Coupled with the cutoff frorn traditional marketsby the new borders, the Jews lived in poverty. Many Jewsemigrated to Poland, the Ukraine and abroad. With therestrictions on immigration by the United States, the Jewsleaving eastem Europe largely went to South Africa andSouth America. Many Jews were maintained in Lithuania byindividual and institutional charities ffom abroad.The census of 1923 showed 153,743 Jews in ethnicLithuania. In 1935 about 93,000 Jews lived in Latvia, mostlyof Litvak origin. There were approximately 400,000 Jews inByelorussia and another 400,000 Jews lived in portions ofPoland. The proportion of Litvak Jews compared to alleastem European Jewry had declined from 25% to 20%. Thebirthrate of Lithuanian Jews, as well as Polish Jews, was oneof the highest in the world. The decline represents a greateremigration firom Lithuania than from any other Jewish region,mainly due to economic factors. The census of 1937 showedthat the number of Jews in ethnic Lithuania had increased toonly 157,527 again showing continuing emigration.40LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESWORLD WAR II AND THE HOLOCAUSTAfter the German invasion of Poland on September 1,1939, some Jews were able to flee the Nazis. Lithuanian Jewsreceived refiigees and these poor communities helped the bestthey could. Although the handwriting was on the wall, fewtried or were able to leave Lithuania during the "phony war’period.On June 22, 1941, the Nazis attacked the Soviet Union.On the Lithuanian front, Battle Group North smashed throughLithuania, the blitzkrieg achieving complete occupationwithin days. The Jews farther to the east, including Byelorus-sia, had more time and some were able to escape into theinterior of Russia.Freed from any constraints, the Lithuanians tumed on theJews and began to slaughter them. As the Nazi occupationtook control, the slaughter continued, but in an organizedmanner. Enthusiastically help by their Lithuanian assistants,the Germans would transfer Jews firom the small shtetls tolarger towns where ghettos were set up. Out of these ghettos,the Jews would be killed. By the end of 1941, the job inLithuania had been substantially completed. The Jewishcommunity had been wiped out.Afiter the War, 18,000 Jews remained in Lithuaniacentered in the cities of Vilna and Kovno. This communityand the other Litvak communities in Latvia and Byelorussiawere able to establish the modem Soviet Jewry movement.The first activities centered in Riga. Since that time, mostLithuanian Jews have emigrated to Israel leaving only ahandful behind, not sufficient to maintain a viable Jewishcommunity.AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE41CONCLUSIONLithuania is now a part of the Soviet Union as an"autonomous republic." At times in the past 50 years,rumblings of nationalism were heard. Russification policies,however, prevailed and ethnic Lithuanians were decreasing innumber.In 1989, Lithuania again declared itself independent.How these events will play out cannot be foretold.We retum to the original question: What makes Litvaksdifferent? As can be seen, the answer is many things andmany events.One contributing factor was that Lithuania was, duringthe period of the development of the Jewish communities, apoor and backward country of peasants. The union withPoland robbed the country of its upper classes that could haveprovided cultural development. The Jews felt superior to theethnic peasant population and made no attempt to emulatethem. Therefore, the development of Litvak communitieswere more inward and Jewish and less tempted by outsideforces.The great Litvak community of eastem Europe ended.It had been the bastion of the three disparate movements soimportant in modem Jewish history: Orthodox Jewry,Political Zionism and Socialism. The few survivors movedon, ending the 700 years of physical contact with Lithuania.42LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESNOTES1. See Mishnah Berurah, Laws of Shabbos, Sec 270,Para 10, Note 46 (Jerusalem: Pisgah Foundation,1986).2. H. Graetz, History oftheJews, volume III (Philadel-phia: The Jewish Publication Society of America,1894).3. Ibid., 138.4. Arthur Koestler, The Thirteenth Tribe (New York:Random House, 1976).5. These positions resulted in the Khazar period beingcontroversial. Adding to the controversy, the Palestin-ian Arab movement latched on to the theory of Jewishdescent from the Khazars to argue a negation ofJewish rights to Israel. They claim that modern Jewslack an historical connection with the land, beingsolely of Turkic origin.These extreme positions should be rejected.Too many established facts and rational historicalevaluations must be ignored to sustain them. Some ofthe arguments against these positions are as follows:To sustain Graetz’s position, one must con-clude that a major power, ruled by Jews, existed forhalf a millennium neighboring older centers of Jewishpopulation where the Jews were being persecuted andthese Jews failed to migrate to this haven in substan-tial numbers and establish viable communities. Sucha conclusion is further negated by: (a) other examplesfrom diaspora history where Jews moved to places ofrelative safety: for example, Poland, the OttomanEmpire and the United States; and (b) the existence ofAN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE43enough Jews in Rhazaría to effect the conversion ofthe nobility and a portion of the population.To sustain Koestler’s theory of the "descentfrom the Khazars," one must conclude that traditionalJewish communities, existing from time immemorialunder adverse conditions could convert a portion of asuper power of the time and suddenly lose its vitalityand disappear.Koestler’s theory appears to be based upon twoobservations: (a) the 20th Century disparity in num-bers between Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jewish commu-nities; and (b) racial differences between separateJewish communities.The disparity in numbers between Ashkenaziand Sephardi communities only began to manifestitself at the end of the 17th Century, while the KhazarEmpire ceased to exist at the end of the 13th Centuiy.Where was this large block of Khazar Jews during theensuing 400 years? No evidence exists of such a largebody of Jews wandering through western Asia andeastern Europe during this period. Further, no evi-dence exists of the discontinuity which must have oc-curred if such a large body of Jews were suddenlyintegrated into existing "small eastem EuropeanJewish communities.Clearly, the existence of Khazar genes amongAshkenazi Jews does not negate the existence of aJewish people continuous back to biblical times. Aconverse conclusion would create a standard of racialpurity no people on earth could meet. Khazars con-tributed to the Jewish gene pool as has every hostnation during the diaspora. After such a long periodof exile, the lack of racial disparity between separatedJewish communities would have been surprising.6. Salo Wittmayer Baron, A Social and Religious History44LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESofthe Jews, volume III (New York: Columbia Uni-versity Press, 1957).7. Ibid., 206. At the time Professor Baron wrote thispassage, the collective wisdom agreed with Pro-fessor Graetz. The statement should be read in thiscontext.8. Salo Wittmayer Baron, A Social and Religious Historyof the Jews, volume XVI (Philadelphia: ColumbiaÚniversity Press, 1976), 4. Dawidowicz places thefigure at 25,000: Lucy S. Dawidowicz, The GoldenTraditions (London: Vallentine, Mitchell & Co. Ltd.,1967), 7.9. The Talmud is the central collective cultural expres-sion of the Jewish people. Originating as oral com-mentary on the Bible, it was collected, organized andreduced to writing as the Mishnah during the SecondTemple Period. Further commentary and additionaloral traditions were added in the Gemorah, compiledin Palestine (Jerusalem) and Babylonia. Continuedexegesis was produced in the Babylonian centers untilthey declined in the eleventh century to be replacedby two Jewish centers: the Maghreb (North Africaand Spain) and Europe (Italy, France and Germany).The difference of approach of these schools led to thedistinction between Ashkenazi and Sephardi Jews.With the persecutions and expulsions occurring inwestem Europe, new commentaries failed to appearfor several centuries until undertaken in Poland. SeeR. Adin Steinsaltz, TheEssential Talmud (New York:Basic Books, Inc., 1976).10. Kabbalah or mysticism was divided into two parts: theAct of Creation, and the Divine Chariot. The first,more theoretical, dealt with the creation of the worldand the first divine revelations. The latter, derivedfirom the prophet Ezekiel, dealt with the prevailingan historical perspective45relations between God and the world and was thesource of practical Kabbalah. See Ibid., 213.11. R. Luria never reduced his teachings to writing. Thetexts were the notes and interpretations of his disci-ples, thus adding to the hidden nature of the subject.12. Encyclopedia Judaica, 11:362.13. Gershom Scholem, Sabbatai Sevi (Princeton: Prince-ton University Press, 1973).14. Salo W. Baron, The Russian Jew under Tsars andSoviets, 2ndEd. (New York: Schocken Books, 1987),64.15. Ibid., 68.16. Both of these claims are false and illustrate theexcesses practiced in this cultural catch up. The Indo-European group is a linguistic and not a racial desig-nation. The similarities between the Lithuanian andGreek languages do no more than identify both asIndo-European languages. The two languages origin-ate in separate branches of the larger linguistic group-ing: Lithuanian is derived from the Slavo-Germanicbranch whereas Greek is part of the Aryo-Graeco-Italo-Celtic branch. See J.P. Mallory, In Search oftheIndo-Europeans (London: Thames and Hudson Ltd,1989).17. Commentaries on the Shulhan Arukh, the codifícationof the law written by Rabbi Joseph Karo in Safad inthe sixteenth century.46LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBIBLIOGRAPHYBaron, Salo Wittmayer, A Social and Religious History oftheJews, volume III, New York: Columbia UniversityPress, 1957. A Social and Religious History ofthe Jews, volumeXVI, New York and London: Columbia UniversityPress, and Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society ofAmerica, 1976.  The Russian Jew Under Tsars and Soviets, 2ndEd., New York: Schocken Press, 1987.Chew, Allen F., An Atias of Russian History: ElevenCenturies ofChanging Borders, New Haven and London:Yale University Press, 1967.Clarkson, Jesse D., A History ofRussia, New York: RandomHouse, 1962.Cronbach, Abraham, "Social Action in Jewish Lithuania," inHebrew Union College Annual, volume XXII, part 2,1950-51.Gerutis, Albertas, ed. Lithuania 700 Years, New York:Maryland Books, Inc., 1969.Gimbutas, Jurgis, "The Outline of Rural Settlements Fromthe 16th Century to the Present," Lituanus, volume 5,number 4, Dec. 1959."Lithuania," Encyclopedia Judaica, volume 11, New Yorkand Jerusalem: Keter Publishing House, pages 362-390.Mahler, Raphael, A History of Modem Jewry 1780-1815,London: Valíentine, Mitchell, 1971.Norem, Owen J.C., Timeless Uthuania, Chicago: AmerlithPress, 1943.Sachs, A.S., Worlds That Passed, Philadelphia: The JewishPublication Society of America, 1928.AN HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE47Sapoka, Adolfas, Lithuania Through the Ages, ed. by T.J.Visgirda, Munich, Germany, 1948; published underMilitary Govemment license.Senn, Alífed, The Emergence of Modem Lithuania, NewYork: Columbia University Press, 1959.Scholem, Gershom, Sabbatai Sevi, Princeton: PrincetonUniversity Press, 1973.Steinsaltz, Adin, The Essential Talmud, New York: BasicBooks, Inc., 1976.Szlupas, John, Lithuania In Retrospect and Prospect, NewYork: The Lithuanian Press Association of America,1915.Urban, William, The Baltic Crusade, Illinois: NorthemIllinois University Press, 1975.CHAPTER IIJEWISH COMMUNITIES OF LITHUANIAABEL (OBELIAI) - Rakishok District E1Abel is near Rakishok (7 miles) and is situated beside alarge lake near the Latvian border. It is on the Radvilishok-Dvinsk train line.Abel had an old Jewish settlement. In the Jewish ceme-tery there were tombstones over 400 years old.In 1897, there were 652 Jews and in 1921 - 760, 67% ofthe general population. Prior to World War II, 300 Jewishfamilies lived there.Most of the Jews were merchants. Market day was oncea week, when hundreds of farmers and salesmen would comefirom the surrounding areas. In 1937, there were 17 skilledcraftsmen who were Jewish: 4 needle-workers, 3 shoemakers,4 butchers, a baker and 5 others. There were also Jewish firuitgrowers, who sold their produce in Warsaw and Riga, andflax and wood merchants who had trade with other countries.The Jews were divided between Hasidim and Mitnagdim.Each group had its own prayer house. Before World War I,Note: indicates killed in the Holocaust; "R."=Rabbi50LI7HUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNTTIESschooling was in cheders. Some children studied at the Rus-sian elementary school. Around the time of World War I, thetown burned down.After World War I, a Tarbut school was established. Partof the student body continued in a high school in the region.The library, founded in 1923, had a drama club.In 1923, the first community council was chosen. Itsmembers included: Leib Zalcstein, Zalman Meller and BoruchKadish. The youth were in Scouts and Hechalutz (Pioneers).There were branches of Hapoel Hamizrahi, Young Zionists,Socialist Zionists and General Zionists. Among the firstPioneers to emigrate to Palestine were: Lipa Friedman,Boruch Klas, Arye Gurvitch and Yonah Musel.From the rabbinate: R. Shlomo ben Gershon [the rabbiat the end of the eighteenth century[; R. Haim ben Shlomo[from Grodno; replaced R. Shlomo ben Gershon]; R. ZalmanSegal; R. Shabbetai Haim Shochet [author of "Zahav Sha-hut"]; R. Bunim Zemach Silver [father of Rabbi EliezerSilver]; R. Beiylka; and the last rabbi, R. Avraham Meiro-vitch* [ffom 1928].Natives: R. Eliezer (Zilber) Silver [born 1882; to U.S.in 1907; rabbi in Harrisburg, PA, Springfield, MA andCincinnati, OH]; Benjamin-Gutel Zak [writer and journalist];Abraham Harit [educator].Additional reference:A chapter on Abel in Yizkor-Book ofRakishok and Environs,issued by the Rakishker Landsmanschaft of Johannes-burg, So. Africa, 1952, edited by M. Bakalczuk-Felin(Yiddish).AKMIAN (AKMEME) - Mazhaik District B1Akmian is near Shavli (33 miles), Kurshon, Veckshnaand Mazhaik. It is situated on the Davikina and AkmianaRivers.THE COMMUNITIES51In 1874, this Jewish community numbered 667 persons.In 1897, there were 543, out of a general population of 1501.During World War I, the Jews were expelled to the interiorof Russia. In 1921, there were 150 Jews. Just before the Hol-ocaust, there were 25 Jewish families.The Jews engaged in small businesses, crafits and agricul-ture.They had a beit midrash and a rabbi. The last rabbi wasR. Nahum-Mordechai Verbovsky*.Additional references:Clein Famity History has a chapter on the family’s town ofresidence, Akmene.Pinhas Shavli by Eliezer Yerushalmi, 1958 (Hebrew), forevents in the Holocaust.ALEKSAT (ALEKSOLAS) - Kovno District C3Aleksat is a suburb of Kovno (located across the NiemanRiver), which Napoleon took from Prussia in 1808 and madepart of the Principality of Warsaw.The Jewish population had close ties with the Kovnocommunity.Natives: Yakov Dolnitzky [1855-1933; teacher and mas-kil]; Yosef-Shlomo Frinovitz [writer]; Yenta Serdetzky[1877-1962; writer]; Judge Miriam Ben Porat.ALEXANDROVOL (ALEKSANDRAVELE) - E1Rakishok DistrictAlexandrovol is near Abel (7 miles) and the railroadstation of Abel.During Independent Lithuania the population of Alexan-drovol was about 200, including 10 Jewish families.52LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESALSHISHOK - Troki District D3Alshishok was a village near Visokidbor (3 miles), wherea few Jewish families lived before World War I. [See Viso-kidbor for additional information.]ALSIAD (ALSEDZIAI) - Telz Distríct B1Alsiad is near Telz (8 1/2 miles), Plungian (12 miles),Plotel (8 1/2), Lieplauka (4) and Kalvaria-Zhamot (4). Thenearby Jewish settlement of Godnova (5 miles) was liquidatedduring Independent Lithuania. The nearest rail station was atMazhaik (27 miles). The site at one time had been a bishopricsettlement with a castle. Near two rivers, the landscape wasrich in hills and pine forests.In 1897, there were 70 Jewish families (295 individuals)out of a general population of 1088 people. There were 231houses. Prior to the Holocaust, there were approximately 50Jewish families (200 people). Because of its distance ffom therailroad, the town did not develop. The new Shavli-Memelline was opened during Independent Lithuania, bringing therailroad to Lieplauka, and the town benefitted. Market daywas Wednesday, and there were also 4 fairs per year.In the summer of 1920 nearly the entire town bumeddown. With support ffom abroad and with the help of loansfrom the Joint (JDC), all the Jewish homes as well as the beitmidrash were restored within a short time.The Jews made their livelihood mainly ffom trade inproduce and flax, as small shopkeepers and as craffsmen. Theblock and nail factory belonged to Zondel Klein, and his sonssold its products in faraway Russian towns. There were 2tanneries belonging to Kloria and the Paktor/Faktor brothersand 2 flour mills with Jewish ownership. Many of the Jewsemigrated to America, South Affica or Palestine. Quite anumber were supported by relatives living abroad.In the beginning of the last century the Gaon R. ZviBraude served in the rabbinate. A story is told that once aTHE COMMUNITIES53young lad of 12 was brought to him to study Torah. The boy,named Yisrael, was a child prodigy. When the rabbi discov-ered the uncommon talents of the boy, he gave him the title"Little Alfas." Later, R. Zvi became the Chief Rabbi ofSalant and became well-known by the name R. HershelSalanter (also R. Hirsch Braude). His student became knownas R. Yisrael Salanter, founder of the Musar Movement.There were Shas, Mishnayot, and "Orach Haim" Socie-ties. During Independent Lithuania there was a TarbutHebrew School and a Talmud Torah.A number of distinguished students came ffom elsewhereand married into families in the town. Among them wereAvraham Kamitz, Feivel Yaffe, Shalom-Tuvia Patt [studentsof the Telz Yeshiva], Yosef Levinsohn [a student of theNovharodok and Lida Yeshivas], R. Sholom-Tuvia Horowitzand Abba Gefen [pharmacist].Natives: Yosef Yaffe [received money ffom his son MaxJaffe from South Affica and divided it all between theyeshiva and charities]; Efraim Aaronsohn [teacher andmaggid; presented the page of Gemora at the Shas Society];Baer Klein [flax merchant]; Zondel Klein [son of Baer Klein;a student of the poet Yehuda Leib Gordon in Telz]; EliezerBraude: Moshe-Leib Velman; Mordechai Braude; MosheGimark [grandson of the town rabbi, R. Avraham Kamitz; amerchant who also served as rabbi]; and R. Avraham-AbbaHacohen Zack* [died in the Holocaust at age 83].Additional reference:Photo of a wedding group in Alsedziai in EncyclopediaJudaica, vol. 11, p. 383.ALYTA (ALYTUS) - District Capital D3Alyta is located 44 miles ffom Kovno and 50 miles ffomSuwalk. The Nieman River divides the town in two. PolishAlyta (west side) was in SuwaUc Province and used the laws54LTTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESof the "Code of Napoleon." Before World War I RussianAlyta (east side) was in Vilna Province and was govemed byRussian law. It was a railroad junction point for the Warsaw-Petersburg line and the Suwalk-Vilna line.In the Middle Ages, the town and its environs were apassing point for the Teutonic Knights in their assaults on thepagan Lithuanians. Alyta and Meretsh were in the first lineof defense against the invaders. In 1377, the Germanscaptured Alyta, wiped out some of its residents and destroyedmany of the villages in the vicinity. Knights from Englandtook part in an attack on the Alyta region in 1392. Amongthem was Lord Parsi, son of the Prince of Northumberland.In 1536, the town and its environs were given by thePolish King and Grand Duke of Lithuania, Sigmund-August,as a gift to the Lithuanian Janas Zabrzezinski (Govemor ofTroki) for his lifetime. After the death of Zabrzezinski, theGrand Duke transferred it to his wife, Queen Barbara(daughter of Jorgis Radzivill). After some time, it passedback to the King in the form of the "Ekonomia of Alyta." In1581, during the reign of King Stefan Batury, it received therights of a town (which were authorized a second time in1740).In 1775, the regional courts were transferred from Trokiand Meretsh to Alyta, which helped the town to develop andexpand the population. It became an important economiccenter of Southem Lithuania. Merchants of the HanseaticLeague traded there and put up warehouses for salt along theNieman River.During the Polish Rebellion of 1863, it was a battlefield.As a result of its strategic position, the Russians tumed it intoa third-class fortified city at the end of the nineteenthcentury; they put up barracks and fortífications in thesurrounding area, paved roads to Kalvaria, Sieni, and Daug,and laid the SuwaÚc-Oran-Grodno rail lines. These activitiesTHE COMMJJNITIES55brought an economic awakening and an improvement in thematerial conditions.In 1909, a fire swept the town, destroying most of thehomes.During World War I, Alyta was saved from the fate thatbefell other cities, when the Russians surrendered to theGermans without opposition.During Independent Lithuania, the two parts of Alytawere united into one District City. The govemment officeswere in the Polish section which was more developed. Thecity continued to be recognized as a strategic point and amilitary center.The Jewish community of Alyta was one of the earliestin Lithuania. The cemetery contained tombstones dating back400 years. According to Head-Tax lists, the Jewish popula-tion was 360 in 1765. In 1847, the number dropped to 262.In 1897, there were 482 Jews, 33.6% of the general popula-tion; in 1923 - about 5000; and before the Holocaust,approximately 4000 Jews.Before World War I, some Jews in the area were largeproperty owners. However, in Independent Lithuania theywere dispossessed of their land and only a few small gardensand vegetable patches remained.Most of the Jews of Alyta made a living through trade.The majority of the 226 business houses, thirty craft work-shops and small industries (including 2 flour mills and 2 saw-mills) were owned by Jews. Many Jews were suppliers forthe Army. On market days (Monday and Thursday), farmersand tradesmen from all around the area would boat into town.The city is surrounded by pine forests. During thesummer, numerous vacationers were attracted there from thesurrounding areas, providing an income for dozens of Jewishfamilies.Alyta was one of the first cities to organize a Jewishcouncil when the govemment of Independent Lithuania56LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESoriginally provided for Jewish autonomy. Chaim Krechmerwas head of the workers and the first chairman of thecommunity council.There were 2 Jewish banks, the Peoples Bank (itsfounder and administrator was Chaim Krechmer) and aprivate bank. The Peoples Bank had 144 members on thewest side and 213 on the east side (1925). There were 2distinct communities. Each had its own rabbi.Educational institutions included an elementary school,a Tarbut school, cheders, a yeshiva and a large library. Therewere branches of Hechalutz, the Zionist political parties,Zionist youth clubs, youth organizations and chapters of thecommunist party. Many of the young people made aliyah toEretz Yisrael.From the rabbinate: R. Natan ben Moshe Levine [5585-5658/1825-1898; native of Keidan, grandson of R. Raphaelof Hamburg; ffom Alyta he went to Nikopol]; R. Yosef-Yakov Rosenberg [served 50 years as rabbi of the city]; R.Bezalel Levine; R. Reuven Levinbock; R. Yoel Zelkind; R.Nachman Koliadizky; R. Aaron Milvasky; and the last rabbi,R. Yehuda Jablonsky'.Natives: Yakov-Dov Rappaport; Yisrael Heves; BrachaHeves [writer]; Haim-Moshe Levinsohn, Professor HaimLeib Pekeris [mathematician, born 1908]; David (Lachzan-sky) Omero [writer]; Yosef Glazman [a leader in the VilnaGhetto uprising].Additional references:Jews ofLithuania: Pictures andDrawings by Y.D. Kamzon,published by the Rav Kook Institute, Jerusalem, 1959.Photo of the main street in Alytus, Encyclopedia Judaica,vol. 11, p. 374.THE COMMUNITIES57AMIAN D3Amian was a settlement near Butrimantz. A few Jewishfamilies lived there at one time.ANDRIAVA (ANDRIEJAVAS) A2Andriava is a village near Ritova (9 miles). Some Jewishfamilies lived there at one time. They worked in trade andfarming. For all religious and cultural matters, they wereconnected to Ritova.ANIRSHT (ANYKSCIAI) - Utían District E2Aniksht is near Utian (18 miles), Ponevezh (36),Trashkun (9), Kurkli (7) and Vishinta (12). The town islocated on the narrow gauge Utian-Ponevezh train line, adistance of 6 miles from the main Warsaw-Petersburg road.Aniksht was one of the large centers of the district andwas being considered by the Russian govemment in the early1800’s to be made a District Capital.It is located in the Shventa River valley, surrounded byhills and pine forests. The pleasant scenery and excellent airattracted many vacationers in the summer months. TheLithuanian poet Baranauskas described the scenery in hispoem "The Aniksht Forest." Robik Lake with its islands is 5miles away. Four miles away is the large flat rock ofPontokas which was once used as an altar by the paganLithuanians of the Perkonus cult.In the seventeenth century, Aniksht was in the VyzhuonisDistrict of Zhamot Region.In 1847, there were 1556 Jews in the town, which rosein 1897 to 2754, constituting 69.7% of the overall popula-tion.During World War I, the town was destroyed, but wasrebuilt during Independent Lithuania. Streets were paved andthere were sidewallcs.58LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESDuring the War, the Jews fled to the interior of Russia.Some of them retumed. With the help of relatives andsupport ffom the Joint (JDC), they rebuilt their homes andtheir businesses. In 1921, there were 1800 Jews, about 40families, constituting 45% of the general population. Beforethe Holocaust, about 2000 Jews lived there.During Independent Lithuania, many Jews worked intrade, especially flax. Some worked in a local felt bootsfactory which employed 100 woricers. A mechanical shoefactory had 150 workers, and a stocking industry had 40women workers. Twenty people were employed in the farmmachines woritshop. There were 166 craftsmen, including 16tailors and seamstresses, 42 shoemakers and needle-workers,9 butchers, 11 bakers, 9 metalworkers, 1 carpenter, 4watchmakers and a jeweler. About 50 Jews ran rafts on theShventa and Nieman Rivers to Germany.As in other towns, the Jews were pushed out of tradesand crafts by the " Versíaninkis” which were supported by theLithuanian govemment. Assistance was given the Jews by theJewish People’s Bank, founded in 1920, whose membershipreached 275 by 1932. Most of the Jewish community emi-grated to the United States and South Africa.There were 6 houses of worship including that ofHasidim, who had their own rabbi. Most of the synagogueswere clustered around one courtyard (the "shulhoif"),including the old shul, the new one, a kloiz belonging to theshoemakers and the Talmud Torah. There was also thesynagogue of the Mount ("Bareg-shul")During Independent Lithuania, there were a few cheders,a small yeshiva and 3 schools. The Yavneh school, mn byMrs. Bier, had 50 children. The Tarbut School, whose firstprincipal was Y. Ben-Yehuda (Calebsohn), had 60 students;among its teachers were Esther Burstein-Koritzky, Leich, Y.Caspi, B. Aniksht and Bamch Vitchik. In the Yiddish school,the enrollment was 120 students. In the Yiddish kindergarten,THE COMMUNITIES59there were 30 children. There were also 2 large libraries, oneZionist and one Yiddish, and a drama club.In the days of the Czars, Aniksht was one of the strong-holds of the Bund in Lithuania. Between the two WorldWars, branches of all the political parties, the Zionistmovement, a WIZO chapter, the Yiddish-People’s party, anda chapter of the Communist Party were active. The youthorganizations included Shomer Hatzair, Betar and Maccabi.From the rabbinate: R. Gershon bar Ably Isserles fromLublin [his father was a community leader of the Council ofthe Lands. R. Gershon was the father of R. Shlomo, the headof the Beit Din of Posevol, and the grandfather of the GaonR. Ably of Posevol]; R. Arye-Leib bar Natan-Neta [head ofthe Beit Din of Brody]; R. Abraham Lichtenstein; R. Yakovbar Avraham of Emden; R. Eliahu of Ragula; R. Moshe-Eliahu [who gave his approval to the Vilna Talmud]; R.Moshe-Yoel bar Meir Sholom Gurion, [head of the Beit Dinin Alyta, author of "Roshai B’shamaim"]; R. Shlomo barYakov Shlossberg, [author of "Ohr Yakov" and "GanHadasim" (book of sermons)]; R. Avraham-Aaron Burstein;R. Shmuel-Avigdor Feivelson; R. Eliahu-Bar Shur; R.Avraham-Mordechai Vesler; and the last rabbi R. Kalman-Yitzhak Radishavitz’ [author of "Toledot Yitzhak,” called the"Tzadik of Lutova"].Public figures: Yisrael and Elhan Sheinsohn [died inEretz Yisrael]; Abraham Mones-Horowitz [a student inVlozhin]; Baruch-Yitzhak Chamah, [head of the yeshiva];Pinchas Yabinsohn [head of the community council andfounder of the bank]; Raphael Ackerman [secretary of thecommunity council and one of the founders of the PeoplesBank]; Zev Feller, [a founder of the bank]; Dr. SchumacherJdoctor]; the Rappaport Family and the Diamants jmer-chants].Natives: R. Meir Kamiake; Luis Epstein [rabbi andscholar]; Wolf Shor [writer].60LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAdditional references:The Anixter Family by Charles Bernstein and Stuart Cohen.The family is from Panemune and Anilesht.B. Kaganoff, Dictionary ofJewish Names, says the namesAnixter and Onixt came ffom the town of Onikszty, orAnilcsht.Chapter on Aniksht by Fruma Melamed of Holon, Israel, inthe memorial book Utian and the Surrounding Areas (inYiddish), 1979, published by the Committee for theremembrance of the Jews from Utian and the Surround-ing Areas, Tel Aviv, Israel.Mentioned in Pinhas Shavli, memorial book on Shavli, byEliezer Yerushalmi, 1958.ANISHOR (ONUSKJS) - Trolri District D3Anishok is a small town in southeastem Lithuania nearTroki. When World War II broke out in Russia, the Jewishpopulation was about 300.Residents of the town included: Avraham Bellon [black-smithj; Mones Vinik; Akiva Sindrovsky; and Kayla Zlodsky.This town of Anishok is not to be confused with Anishok(Onislris), which is also called Anushishok. The latter is inRakishok District.ANTOKOL (ANTAKOLIA) E3Antokol is a suburb of Vilna. In the book Jerusalem ofLithuania by Leyzer Ran (New York: Vilnar Parlag, 1974),there is a page on the Antokol community (p. 80). It saysthat the Antokol community was organized later than anotherneighboring community of Shnipishok. It had a code ofcooperation with Vilna since at least 1744 and was put underthe jurisdiction of Vilna in 1791. In 1916, a Yiddish schoolof the Central Educational Committee was founded.From the rabbinate: R. Binyamin Friedman [1839-1916;rabbi in Antokol ífom 1870, previously in Trolri; related byTHE COMMUNITIES61marriage to R. Yitzhak-lsaac of Kelme, father of writerEliezer-Eliahu Friedman, and grandfather of poet YehoshuaFriedman].ANTALIEPT (ANTELIPTE) - Ezhereni District E2Antaliept is near Dusiat (6 miles), Ezhereni (18), Salok(12), Ushpol (12). Surrounded by pine forested hills, thetown is situated at the confluence of tfie Shventa River and is15 miles from the rail station in Utian.The village of Morlishok (4 miles) had a Jewish settle-ment before World War I.Before World War I, 80 Jewish families (about 400individuals) lived there. The main source of income derivedffom a large Russian monastery. At that time there were nomarkets or fairs in the town.During World War I, many Jews left, with most goingto South Africa, the U.S., and to Uruguay. Before theHolocaust about 300 Jews lived in the town.Those that remained eamed their living from small tradeon market day, which was held each Monday, and from thebiannual fairs. Before World War II, there were 16 crafts-men, including: 2 tailors, a shoemaker, 5 butchers, 4metalworkers, 3 carpenters. A few families engaged inagriculture. The one flour mill on the Shventa River belongedto a Jew. About half a mile away a steam-powered dairy wasset up, as well as the first govemment fish store. In 1924, anelectric station was built there.The town had one beit midrash and two shtiblach. Therabbi did not receive a salary and made a living selling yeast,yeast-flour, etrogs, and other religious-related items. Therewere several cheders in the town. Some of the childrenstudied in Utian.From the rabbinate: R. Yehuda [a great rabbi from thesecond half of the nineteenth century. He was descendedfrom many rabbis ífom Vilna and Shirvint]; R. Zalman-62LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESTuvia Markovitz [he and his son R. Chaim-Shimshon werekilled in Kovno]; the last rabbi R. Yehuda Levine'.Additional reference:Chapter on Antaliept in Yizkor-Book of Rakishok and Envi-rons, Johannesburg, So. Africa, The Rakishker Lands-manschaft, edited by M. Bakalczuk-Felin, 1952 (inYiddish).ANUSHISHOK/ANISHUK (ONISKlS) - E1Rakishok DistrictAnushishok is north of Rakishok (13 miles) and on theLatvian border. The town is surrounded by forests, andnearby is a lovely lake.The land of the town belonged to Count Komer. Plotholders paid him a lease fee.Jews began to settle there at the beginning of the nine-teenth century. The oldest tombstone in the cemetery wasffom the early 1800’s.Before World War 1, there were 80 Jewish families.They traded in horses and work animals and worked in crafts.There were 14 Jewish craftsmen, including 5 tailors, 4shoemakers, 2 butchers, 2 bakers. They did most of theirbusiness on Sundays and Christian holidays.During World War I, many Jews fled to Russia. In1922-23, some of them retumed but found the town plun-dered and destroyed. Also, the town was cut off from Latvia,and their sources of income declined. Most of these peoplesettled in Rakishok and Kovno. A considerable number of theyouth emigrated to different countries. The Jewish communitydwindled until in 1930 there were 24 families (about 130people).There were both Hasidim and Mitnagdim in the town.Each had separate synagogues. There were several cheders.Among the better-known teachers was Bynosh Balak.THE COMMUNITIES63During Independent Lithuania, many of the young peoplewanted a secular education. Many of them went to study atthe Tarbut Schools in Rakishok, Vilkomir, and Kovno. Anumber of students attended the Lithuanian pre-gymnasia inthe town.From the rabbinate: R. Yisrael-Isser Klatzkin; R.Avraham Popel; R. Kadesh.Natives: Yehoshua Bodsohn [writer]; R. A. Popel; HirshLakart.Note: this town is not to be confused with Anishok onthe Polish-Lithuanian border.Additional reference:Chapter on Anushishok in Yizkor Book of Rakishok andEnvirons, 1952.AULAVA (ALOVE) - Alyta District D3Aulava is a village west of Daug (8 miles). Jews livedthere before World War I.AVANASTA F2Avanasta was a village near Salok (4 miles). BeforeWorld War I it had a Jewish settlement.AVANTA (ALUNTA) - Utian District E2Avanta is near Kurkali (4 miles), Meliat (9), Bolnik (12),Utian (15) and Vilkomir (24). It is located at the mouth ofthe Avanteki River, a tributary of the Shventa River.Before World War I, it was in Vilkomir District. DuringIndependent Lithuania, it was in Utian District. The popula-tion of the town was 460, a considerable number of whomwere Jewish. At the outbreak of the Holocaust, about 30Jewish families lived there.64LIJHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAYRAGULA (ARIOGALA) - Keidan Distríct C2Ayragula-Ragula is near Keidan (18 miles). It is locatedon the Dubisa River, which flows down from Shavli, pastAyragula and Srednih and into the Nieman River.It was one of the early settlements in Lithuania and isnoted in an historical document firom the year 1282.In 1847, the Jewish population was 1237. In 1897, itreached 1541, which was 70% of the general population.In World War I, the town was destroyed. All the Jewswere expelled from the town in 1915. After the War, someof them retumed and reestablished themselves. The Jewishpopulation in 1921 was 420. Before the Holocaust, it wasapproximately 450.The Jews engaged in small business and crafts. Themajority were shopkeepers and a few flax, wood, chicken andlarge animal merchants, whose products were exported.Market day was Thursday. There were 2 large fairs eachyear. Jews owned 2 flour mills on the river and a brick kiln(in the suburb of Chekenova). There was also a liquor andbrandy industry. The Jewish Peoples Bank, administered bythe merchant Zvi Ziv, had 100 members in 1929.There were 3 beit midrashes and a synagogue. There wasa Shas Society and Mishnayot, giving lessons in ChayeiAdam, Mishnah Brura, Ein Yakov and Menorat Hamaor forthe common man. Until World War I, there was a TalmudTorah for poor children, 6 cheders, and a yeshiva. Pupilsfrom the nearby towns came to study.Among the charitable institutions were Linat Hazedek,Gemilot Hasidism and a charitable fund used for permanentsupport of the poor and for giving anonymously to beggars.Before the Holocaust, about 70 boys were studying in theHebrew school and 20 boys in the cheder.Most of the Jews of Ayragula emigrated to South Afirica,America or Palestine.THE COMMUNITIES65From the rabbinate: R. Avraham {brother of the VilnaGaon; author of "Malot Hatorah"], R. Moshe-Mordechai [sonof Menahem Katzenellenbogen]; R. Eliahu [son of Yakovfirom Ragula, also called Kalisher]; R. Benjamin [father ofEliahu-David Rabinowitz-Taumim, also called Edrat. He wasthe author of Mishnat R. Binyamin]; R. Avraham-EverYaffe; R. Zvi-Yehuda Rabinovitz-Taumim [left manyhandwritten manuscripts on the Babylonian and JerusalemTalmuds]; R. Yosef-Benzion Friedman.Ayragula excelled in great Torah scholars, among whomwere rabbis and heads of yeshivas, including R. Moshe [headof the Mylis Yeshiva in Vilna]; R. Yehoshua Cohen [head ofa yeshiva in Minsk]; and R. Avraham Rozing [a rabbi in theUkraine]; R. Shmuel Rappaport [in Springfield]; R. Moshe-Eliahu Kagan [in New Yorkj; his son R. Boaz Kagan; and R.Zvi-Yehoshua Stern.Natives: R. Yakov-Meir; R. Yakov Kastin [author of aresponsa "Mishpatai Yakov"].BADUTABaduta is near Rakishok [El]. Some Jews lived therebefore the Holocaust.BAISIGOLA (BAISOGALA) - Keidan District C2Baisigola is near the Kirshina River, 8 miles firomGrinkishok and one mile from the nearest train station.In 1780, Stanislas Poniatovsky granted it the privilege toconduct fairs. In 1791, the town received the rights of a city,although it actually did not tum into a city. In 1831, it wascaptured from the Russians by Polish rebels. The land onwhich the town was situated belonged to Count Komar.Jewish settlement began in the first part of the nineteenthcentury. Records of the Chevra Kadisha (burial society) startin 1813. In 1847, the Jewish population was 461, and in1897 - 634 (more than 50% of the general population). By66LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES1914, the Jewish population declined to about 100 (15families). During World War I, they were exiled. After theWar, 8 families retumed. Six of them rebuilt houses near thetrain station. The Jewish population in 1929 amounted to only6% of the overall population of the town. There were a fewJewish families living in the town just prior to the Holocaust.The Jews made their livelihood from small-scale trade,peddling, gardening and small vegetable gardens.The cemetery was not in the town, but located atGrinkishok. Baisigola was at one time well-known in theJewish world for its rabbis and native sons.From the rabbinate: R. Abraham-Yitzhak bar RaphaelGrushlrin [served there as rabbi for 19 years; died in 5645/1885]; R. Shmuel-Avigdor Feivelson; R. Aaron Bakesht; R.Avraham Yitzhak bar Shmuel-Avigdor Feivelson; R. Yisrael-Benjamin-Bendt Feivelson; and the last rabbi, R. Yosef-Feivel Feivelson*.Natives: Baruch-Moshe Feivelson; Nahum bar UzielKaplan [R. Nahum of Grodno]; Meir Atlas; Eliezer Atlas[writer]; Dr. Eliahu-Yosef Gordon; Raphael Grushkin[writer]; Moshe Mirlis [one of the first of Hovevei-Zion inthe U.S.]; R. Moshe-Haim Mirvish [a rabbi in Capetown].BALBIRISHUK (BALBERISKIS) - C3Mariampole DistrictBalbirishuk is near Pren (9 miles), Butrimantz (15), andMariampole (25). It is situated on the banks of the NiemanRiver and within an area of pine and oak forests. It is 11miles from the Alyta train station.In 1522, a Catholic Church was located at the site.Beside it an agricultural plantation was established. KingSigmund I gave the estate as a gift to the Russian PrinceRafelovsky-Golovtzinsky. In the sixteenth century, Germanssettled on the site. At a later period, ownership of theproperty passed to a peer by the name of Korbin-GonsievskyTHE COMMUNITIES67and then to Count Tishkevitz. During the Polish Revolt of1831, the Russians confiscated the estate, but in 1846retumed it to the daughters of Count Tishkevitz.The town became an important commercial center for alarge and rich area. Merchants with connections in Leipzigand other German cities traded in lumber. During Indepen-dent Lithuania, flour mills and factories for alcohol, parquet,fumiture, linens and shoe soles were operating. There were2 market days each week and 3 fairs during the year.During Independent Lithuania, the economic importanceof the town declined. When roads and rail lines were con-stmcted, commerce moved to Alyta and Pren. The movementof goods on the Nieman River declined. Only trade in grainand poultry remained in local hands.The Jewish settlement in Balbirishuk was among theearliest in Lithuania. There was an "old" Jewish cemetery,and also a "new" Jewish cemetery established at the begin-ning of the nineteenth century.The Jewish population before World War I was 200Jewish families. In 1921, the number declined to 150 (560individuals). Before the Holocaust, there were 100 Jewishfamilies (about 350 people).Trade was concentrated in Jewish hands. Non-Jewsprimarily worked in factories and crafts. Only a smallnumber of craftsmen were Jews.The Jewish Peoples Bank (administered by Aaron-Yitzhak Teshami, David Teshami, Michael Teshizikovsky,Caleb Cohen-Zedek, Abba Frank) had 100 members in 1929.The economic decline forced the Jews to leave the town.They went mainly to Canada, Mexico, Uruguay, Argentina,and South Africa. Aliyah to Eretz Yisrael began in 1920. By1939, 53 Jews from tlie town had made aliyah.The town had a synagogue and a beit midrash. Thereexisted the charitable organizations Linat Hazedek and Ezra.The Tarbut School had 100 pupils. A library for the Jewish68LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESpublic existed as well as branches of the General ZionistHistadrut, Socialist Zionists, Revisionists, the Gordonia youthgroup, Betar and Maccabi.The public figures and leaders in the social, economicand cultural life of the town included Tuvia Cohen-Zedek[head of the community council]; Aaron-Yitzhak Teshami[principal of the school; Abba Frank; Michael Teshizikovsky;R. Yitzhak Braunstein; Caleb Cohen-Zedek; Cantor Arye-David Barzovsky [a member of the central "Mizrahi"];Eliezer Tatz; David Teshami; Chanoch Cohen-Zedek.From the rabbinate: R. Zvi-Hirsh bar Avraham Cahane[author of "Likuti Ratzba" on the Torah and the 5 Megillot];R. Ephraim Gabbai [distinguished educator and great com-mentator]; R. Shmuel-Meir bar Yitzhak Esch (5579- 5644/1819-1884); R. Moshe-Shmuel Horvitz [served as rabbi until5654/1894, author of "Yadei Moshe"]; R. Haim-YirmayahuPlansberg; R. Eliezer-Yitzhak Algazi; R. Bamch Grosbard;R. Eliahu Fink; R. Haim Halevy Lev* [5649-5701/1889-1941].Natives: Gabriel Feinberg; R. Yehoshua [a student of R.Haim of Vlozhin; rabbi in Liodvinova, Tiktin, and Zimbro-va]; the well-known physician, Dr. Yitzhak Feinberg [1822-1912; physician].BALSH B2Balsh was a village near Shilel (2 miles). Three hundredyears ago, a large community of Jews lived there.BARSHTITZ (BARSTYICIAI) - Mazhaik District A1Barshtitz is near Yelok (6 miles). In 1921 there were 87Jews living in the town. Some were engaged in agriculture.Economic conditions were difficult and most of the Jewswent to Eretz Yisrael. Before the Holocaust, only 6 Jewishfamilies were left in the town.THE COMMUNITIES69BARZHINSK C2Barzhinsk was near the town of Datnuva. Before WorldWar I, it had a Jewish settlement.BATUK (BATARAI) - Tavrig District B2Batuk is near Shilel (15 miles) and Skudvill (4). A trainstation was about 2 miles distant. It is located on the rightbank of the Antzwai River, a tributary of the Yura, and onthe Shavli-Telz Road.Before World War I, there were about 50 Jewish familiesthere, making a living firom trade with Germany.In March 1915, the Jews of the town were expelled inhalf an hour following the libelous accusation of a plot byJews to throw a cat into a well in order to poison the Chris-tians.During Independent Lithuania, there were about 100Jews in Batuk out of a general population of 260.BAULAVAH D3Baulavah is a village near Daug (8 miles) where Jewswere living before World War I.BAZILIAN (BAZILIONAI) - Shavli District C1Bazilian is near Kurtovian (4 miles), Shukian (12 miles),Shavli (13), Kelme (13). In the town was the Bazilianimonastery.Before World War I, there were 4 large annual fairs. Onmarket days, hundred of farmers ffom the area would arrivein Bazilian. The town had tanning factories and a brickfactory. After the opening of the Shavli-Telz railway, itsimportance declined.Before World War I, the town had 45 Jewish families. In1939, only 15 remained. Most of the Jews emigrated to SouthAffica and to the United States. A few went to Palestine.70LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNTTIESThe Jews of the town had made a living in small trade,peddling and crafts.In the beit midrash and school there were 25 pupils.From the rabbinate: R. Israel Shulman (rabbi in Bazilianin the beginning of the century; served there for 13 years].BETIGOLA (BETYGALA) - Rasin District C2Betigola is near Ayragula (7 miles) and Rasin (7), on theVivirsha River and near the Dubisa River. The closest trainstation was at Lidovian, 19 miles away.It served as an administrative center for the region.It was an early settlement. In the 17th and 18th centuries,it suffered ffom wars in the region. In 1706, battles with theSwedes occurred in the area.Its Jewish community decreased after World War I, to 85people in 1921.Jews owned two estate farms near Betigola. They heldthem up to the time of the Holocaust. Berel Vinik had one inZatzisia. A second one belonged to Shlomo Vinik and AharonSmolkensky and was in Vagofia.BIRSHTAN (BIRSTONAS) - Alyta District D3Birshtan is near Pren (3 miles) and Kovno (22). It wasa summer resort on the shores of the Nieman River.The town is situated in a very beautiful setting with pineforests and mineral springs. Vitovt (1392-1430), Grand Dukeof Lithuania, visited there with his family. In the winter of1475, Prince Kazimir-Jagello vacationed there when he lefthis capital because of the danger of the plague. In the middleof the nineteenth century, people began to use the mineralsprings for cures. Two estate owners (Bartoshavitz and laterIgnas Kvinta) developed the location as a health spa.In 1882, the officials of the Czar forbade Jews to live inBirshtan, but the ban was lifted in 1903.THE COMMUNITIES71In 1905, the town bumed down. In 1906, ownershippassed to Mrs. Miller-Kochnovsky, who rebuilt it. A guesthouse and a convalescent home were opened for guests fromRussia, who came to drink the spring water and bathe in theBiruta Springs.The town was far from the railway. During IndependentLithuania, transportation to Kovno was by automobile. In1924, the Govemment of Lithuania nationalized Birshtan andleased it to the Lithuanian Red Cross, which put up variousmedical institutions.The town had only a few Jewish families living there ona permanent basis. While Jews owned inns, guest houses,restaurants and shops there, most of them only lived there inthe summer.BIRZH (BIRZAI) - Distríct Capital D1Birzh is near Posvol (17 miles), Vabolnik (15), Salat(13), and Radvilishok (15), by the Latvian border. BeforeWorld War I, there existed Jewish settlements also in Popil(15) and in Kvatki (18) nearby.The city is located on the banks of the Amalna andAfushta Rivers. In the rivers are 4 islands. On one of theislands, a palace existed in the sixteenth century. Napoleonwas know to have stayed there. The forested landscape isbeautiful, making it a city of special beauty.Birzh was founded in the fifteenth century. From the endof the sixteenth centuiy, it served as the capital city ofPrincess Radzivill. In 1589, Prince Christopher Radzivillgranted the city the Rights of Magdeburg. These rights wererenewed by King Wladislaw IV in the year 1644.The Radzivills were followers of the Reformation andused the city as a fortress for this movement. However, thereligious wars in the 16th and 17th centuríes did not evade it.The town suffered in the 17th and 18th centuries from thewars between the Swedes and the Russians.72LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESIn 1795, the Russians captured the city and cancelled itsspecial rights. It became part of the estate of the House ofTishkevitz. In 1812, the French Army passed through it onits way to Riga. During Czarist rule, the city was in Pone-vezh District.In 1869, the city had 2630 people and 528 homes, twoof which were brick. In 1883, a large fire engulfed the townand destroyed over 50 buildings. In 1897, the populationreached 4500.During World War I, the Germans conquered the town,destroying quite a few buildings. The Germans laid a narrowtrain track which connected the town with Shavli. This laterhelped the town develop.During Independent Lithuania, the city began to expand.Hundreds of new homes were built. By 1934, 257 brickhomes and 362 new wooden homes had been erected. Twen-ty-eight new streets were opened. The city had 9000 residentsand became an administrative center of the district.Jews began to settle in Birzh in the seventeenth century.They were invited to come by the Prince of the House ofRadzivill who wanted to foster economic development. Hepromised them protection from their neighbors. Variousdocuments from 1662 and 1683 mention Jews settling thereand receiving the rights of settlement.In the days of the "Lithuanian Jewish Council," Birzhwas one of three district cities (along with Keidan and Vizhonin the northem circuit), in the Zhamot Region. (See alsoreference under Keidan.) Birzh had authority over the recordsfor the communities of Posvol, Salat, Shatt, Pumpian, andPokroi. A decision of the Council of Slutsk in 1761 has comedown to us regarding the raising of head-tax for the Districtof Birzh.The Karaite settlement, which predated rabbinical Jewsin the area, was mentioned in 1625. The Karaites lived ontwo streets. They had their own synagogue and cemetery. InTHE COMMUNITIES73the eighteenth century the Karaite settlement ended, and theirsynagogue was tumed over to the rabbinical Jews.The Jewish population in Birzh in the 1760’s was 1040.In 1847, it was 1685; in 1897 - 2510, about 57% of thegeneral population. During World War I, the Jewish popula-tion was expelled and their settlement destroyed. Part of theJewish community retumed after the War. In 1921, theJewish population was 1200. The number rose in 1923 to1807. In 1934 and before the Holocaust, there were about3000 Jews living in the city, which accounted for 36% of theoverall population (3/4 of all the homes were owned byJews).The Jews of Birzh primarily made their living in trade,especially in flax and wood. Some were in crafts, agriculture,industry and peddling. Several weaving and knitting factorieswere located in the city where wool from England wasworked and prepared for export. In particular, sheetingmaterial and sheets were produced in Birzh.In Independent Lithuania, there were numerous factories,including a factory for processing flax, a spinning mill, 2flour mills, 3 sawmills, 2 for fumiture, 5 tanneries, a winery,a dairy industry, a pottery factory, an electric station, 4factories for fme powders, and several other small industries.Both in the large flour mill and other factories, Jewishworkers were employed ffom the surrounding area. Develop-ment of a gypsum mine and the sulphur springs near the citybegan in this period.The market days were Monday and Thursday. Therewere also 2 fairs during the year.The city had a branch of the Lithuanian bank and 4 pri-vate banks. Most important for the Jews was the JewishPeoples Bank which had 321 members in 1929.The city was well-known for 2 musical performinggroups, "Tivat Haneginah” (lit., the box of the music player)and Katarin-Shtizikas, which would tour Lithuania during the74LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESsummer and give musical performances. They would retumhome for the Holidays.The Jews of the city were primarily Mitnagdim, but therewere also Hasidim, who had their own synagogue. Therewere 2 beit midrashes, a synagogue, 2 ldoizes, and a shtibl.At one time, the city was known as a place of Torah andleaming; well-known rabbis occupied the seat of the rabbin-ate. The city was known for its great educators and maskilim,but this declined during Independent Lithuania. Besides theYeshiva (founded by Rabbis Bemstein and Movsha), therewere several cheders, a Yavneh School with 40 pupils and aTarbut School with 180 pupils. The charitable institutions inBirzh included Bikur Holim, Linat Hazedek, a home for theelderly, "maskil al dal" and Lehem Aniim. Their Eza Clinicwas used by people ffom neighboring towns.From the rabbinate: R. Sholom bar Yisrael Zack [theholy one of Rozhnoi; related by marriage to R. Meshullam-Zalman Mirlish; head of the Beit Din. He served 5473-5485/1713- 1725]; R. Yisrael bar Sholom Zack [5500-5505/1740-1745]; R. Haim bar Yisrael Zack [head of the Beit Din inBirzh and the district; he died in Vilna in 5560/1800]; R.Yitzhak bar Haim Zack [head of the Beit Din of Posvol andBirzh; his brother, R. Yisrael bar Haim ("Charif"), partici-pated in the Council at Petersburg on the issue of Jewishsettlement in southem Russia during the reign of Catherine II.He gave his approval to the book "Amudai Beit Yehuda" toR. Yehuda Halevy Horvitz, Amsterdam, 5526/1766]; R.Avraham Shlomo bar Gerson [related by marriage to R.Yitzhak, and the father of the Gaon R. Ably of Posvol]; R.Naftali-Hertz [head of the Beit Din in Birzh; uncle ofNaftali-Hertz Klatzkin]; R. Nahum bar Avraham Katzenellen-bogen; R. Avraham bar Shlomo-Zalman [brother of the VilnaGaon; leamed teacher of Birzh]; R. Ezriel bar Gershon-Mendel Ziv [from the days of the Gaon R. Ably; wasremembered in the responsa of R. Mordechai, head of theTHE COMMUNITIES75Beit Din of Boisk, in the book "Gedolat Mordechai"]; R.Shimon-Merkal Shapiro [grandfather of R. Shimon Merkal ofKovno]; R. Shlomo-Zalman bar Meir Zakash ( "ZalmalaFromack"; was a rabbi in Birzh, Luknik and Rretinga. Hedied in 5636/1876 at the age of 62]; R. David bar Haim[author of "Shira L’David," 5557/1797]; R. Meshullam-Shraga Segel [died in 5619/1859]; R. Asher-Nissan Levin-sohn [author of "Gan Ne’ool," related by marriage to R.Shimon [a great man in aggadah and in religious scholarship];R. Yosef-Zondel [author of "Zir Yitzhak," a responsa andcommentary, Vilna, 5636/1876. He served as rabbi for 30years, a teacher, tzadik and brilliant man]; R. Pinchas Lintof[author of "Ptchai Sharim.” A hasidic rabbi in the days ofYosef-Zondel]; R. Eliahu-Dov Shur [author of "NetaayChaim"]; R. Benyamin Movsha’; and the last rabbi, R.Yehuda-Leib Bemstein*.Natives: Yosef-Yehuda Zusnitz [mathematician andastronomer]; R. Elhanan-Bonim Wasserman; R. Yehoshua-Yosef Freyl; R. Eliezer-Meir bar Elhanan Freyl; Tuvia barGerson-Mendel of Birzh [maskil]; Menahem-Nahum-Natan["Ha’ilui from Birzh," son of R. Asher-Nissan Levinsohn; hewas a young prodigy, but he died at the age of 18}; and Dr.Avraham-Zalman Levin [physician; killed in the Holocaust].Additional references:Photo of the Shoemaker’s Synagogue in Birzh, in Encyclope-diaJudaica, vol. 11, p. 371.BLATOSHUVA (BALTOSHUVE)Blatoshuva was a village near Skumian [E2]. A Jew ffomthis village donated the money and helped to build thesynagogue in Slrumian.76LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBLATSHISHOK, or Baltshishok C3Blatshishok was a village near the town of Laipoonwhere Jews lived before World War I.BOBRYBobry was a village near Serhai (7 miles) where Jewslived before World War I. Residents included the Pytlarfamily.BOBT (BABTAI) - Kovno District C2Bobt is near Kovno (17 miles), Vendzhigola, Yanova,and Raudondvaris ("the red estate ). The town is situated ona hill, overlooking the Neviezhe River. Boats and rafts passedit on their way to Germany. Its connection with Kovno wasby boat (except for the winter months).In the seventeenth century, Bobt received the rights of acity along with its own emblem. Its main growth, however,occurred in the nineteenth century with the surfacing of theKovno-Riga road, which passed it. Upon the laying of therail line to Riga, the value of the road decreased. Thecommerce of the town was reduced and the populationdwindled.The town had one long street. In the center was themarket and the Christian church. In 1930, the town bumeddown, but was rebuilt within a short time. On Sundays andholidays, farmers from the surrounding area would come tothe market and on these occasions would make purchases inthe Jewish stores.Before World War I, the population was 1200, 80% ofwhom were Jews. But during the time of IndependentLithuania, the population declined. In 1923, there were only770 people - including 153 Jews, 20% of the population.Most of the Jews of Bobt emigrated to the U.S. or went toother cities or towns. Before the Holocaust, about 40 Jewishfamilies lived there.THE COMMUNITIES77The local Jews made their living firom trade, gardeningand crafts. One additional source of income was from theboats on the Neviezhe. Jewish merchants opened an exporttrade of wood and agricultural produce to Prussia.The rabbi of Keidan also served the Jews of Bobt.BOGOSLAVISHOK (BAGASLAVISKIS) - D2Vilkomir DistríctBogoslavishok is a village near Vilkomir (13 miles), nearGelvan (4) Shirvint (7), Musnik (10), and Yanova (21). Inthe villages of Vefer (6 miles) and Yakovnetz (1/2 mile),Jewish settlements existed prior to World War I. The areaaround Bogoslavishok has beautifully forested hills and alovely landscape.The town bumed down in 1880 and again in 1918.Before World War I, 50 Jewish families lived there;before the Holocaust there were 10. The economic situationof the Jews was extremely bad due to the undermining oftheir livelihood by the Lithuanian cooperatives. Among theJews were a number of small shopkeepers and peddlers, aplasterer, a tailor, 2 shoemakers, as well as a few cartmen.Once a year a fair was held which would awaken and enliventhe town.Because of small numbers and poverty, the Jewishcommunity could not have its own rabbi or doctor. It had aschool. The local priest worked at curing the sick, and theteacher of the cheder also served as the shochet.Some of the youth of the community studied at theHebrew high school in Vilkomir. The Jews were connectedwith Gelvan, which was nearby, and used their library andparticipated in their drama club.Native: R. Avraham-Chaim Shas.78LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBOLNIK (BALNINRAI) - Vilkomir District E2Bolnik is near Maliat (12 miles), Avanta (8), Vilkomir(12), and is situated on Lake Pirsha and the Luvsha River.Rich fishing lakes are in the area.Bolnik had once been an estate, which was connected toa village. During World War I, it was destroyed.During Independent Lithuania, 50 Jewish families livedthere, making their living from peddling, fishing and small-scale agriculture and trade. Half of the families lived inpoverty. Prior to the Holocaust, the Jewish population was230.There was a cheder. Those who were able sent their boysto study in the Hebrew Gymnasia or the Yiddish school atVilkomir.BOYD (BUDA) - Maríampole District C3Boyd is near Kazlova-Ruda (3 miles) and Pilvishok (12).The town, which is located on the Kovno-Mariampole Road,is surrounded by pine forests and is a vacation spot.Sixteen Jewish families lived there, including OzerZelinger, a wood merchant, and Sander Yallin, a propertyowner. Others were shopkeepers, traveling peddlers andtradesmen.In World War I, the Jewish residents left and thesynagogue was destroyed. After the War, they all retumed.On Shabbat and Holidays, d minyan was held at thehome of Sander Yallin. The local shochet was Avraham-Eliahu Steinfeld, who interpreted the Law when a rabbi wasnot available. A teacher ffom Kovno would come to care forthe education of the little children. Part of the youth studiedat the Hebrew high school in Kovno and in Mariampole.BUDOVITZ - Vilkovishk District C3Budovitz was a village near Vilkovishk, where Jews livedat one time.THE COMMUNITIES79Native: R. Tzvi-Hirsh ben Haim Cohen [1862-1950;served as rabbi in Canada].BUKANTZ (BUKONYS) - Keidan District D2Bukantz is a village near Shatt (6 miles). Jews lived therebefore World War I.BUTRIMANTZ (BUTRIMONYS) - Alyta District D3Butrimantz is situated on a hill on which Napoleon builtfortifications. At the foot of the hill is the River Plosovka. Itis 13 miles from the Alyta railway station. Nearby were 2settlements, Poon and Amian, where a number of Jewishfamilies lived.Under Russian rule, Butrimantz was in Troki District.Later, during Independent Lithuania, it was attached to AlytaDistrict.Until 1850, the town belonged to the Tishkevitz family.At that time, ownership passed to the aristocratic families ofBogeteky, Venorovsky and Morevsky.ln tiie area lived several hundred Tatar families. Theywere engaged in agriculture, especially fruit and vegetableplantations, mostíy in partnership with Jews.The Jewish community of Butrimantz was among theearliest established in Lithuania. During Independent Lithua-nia, there were some 200 Jewish families, out of a totalpopulation of 1631 people.The majority of Jews were engaged in trade, peddling,and crafts. There were also gardeners, greengrocers andfruit-garden tenants (such as "Fritz the Jew" and LolaShemchhas, the owner of many estates). In the center of theeconomic life of Butrimantz before World War II was theJewish Peoples Bank, which had 230 members.Before World War I, the town had a small yeshiva towhich students from the surrounding towns came to study.The head of the yeshiva was R. Yosef Yankilevich, dayan80LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES(judge) in the local religious court. During IndependentLithuania, there were ethnic schools and among them theTarbut School administered by R. Vinitsky, as well as somecheders. Likewise, there existed organizations including aShas society, Mishnayot, Chayei Adam, Ein Yakov, andothers. Many of the participants were distinguished scholarsand religious men.Butrimantz had an active public life and many charitableinstitutions, such as Bikur Cholim, Linat Hazedek, HachnasatOrchim, and Hachnasat Kalla. Most of the youth belonged toZionist Youth and to Gordonia. Many made aliyah to EretzYisrael. The moving spirits in the public and Zionist workwere Dov Koshlovitz, Dov Vinitzky and Gordon, the Gabbaiin the synagogue.From the rabbinate: R. Eliezer Strasson [author of thebook "Amud Esh" (Warsaw 5672/1912) and "Esh Dat"] andthe last rabbi R. Avraham-Moshe Vitkind,* [author of thebook "Toafat Ram"].Natives: R. Meir-Simcha Hacohen; Henry Horowitz[writer]; Kadish-Yehuda Sillman [writer]; and Menahem-Mordechai Sillman [educator].CHAlKISHOK (CEKISKA) - Kovno District C2Chaikishok is near Vilki (9 miles), Ayragula (9), andKovno (24). It is on the Dubisa River and the main Kovno-Rasin Road. Wooden houses were built on both sides of themain road. Historians of the last generation considered it oneof the oldest settlements in Lithuania, founded at least by1457.During the Polish uprising of 1863, battles were foughtnearby.Before World War I, there were about 200 Jewishfamilies in the town. But on the eve of the Holocaust, onlyabout 60 families remained. They comprised 45% of theoverall population.THE COMMUNITIES81The Jews worked in gardening and selling firuit. Therewere also a few artisans and cartmen. A steam-generatedmill, a sawmill, and 2 tanneries were owned by Jews. TheJewish Peoples Bank had 60 members.During Independent Lithuania, they had a Tarbut Schooland a library.From the rabbinate: R. Eliahu Gordon [5634/1874]; R.Abraham Cohen [died in 5654/1894]; R. Avraham Gordon[5663/1903; teacher and rabbi]; R. Yosef [father of Morde-chai Eliasberg of Boisk]; R. Broida; and the last rabbi, R.Shmuel-Zev Melamed* [author of "Nahalat Shmuel"].Public figures: Zondel Shtreichman; David MattityahuLipman [pharmacist and researcher]; and S. Perl.Natives: R. Mordechai Eliasberg; R. Moshe Zilber[author of "Chalukei Kesef." He died in 5709/1949 inJerusalem. He was the father of Abba-Hillel Silver].CHAVIADAN (KVEDARNA) - Tavrig District A2During the Czarist regime, Chaviadan was calledKonstantinova (New Constantine). Up to the middle of thenineteenth century, the town was located on the Yura (Jura)River. But after a fire, the town was relocated about a mileaway. Before World War I, the nearest rail station was inShvekshna (12 miles). During Independent Lithuania, arailway station was built in the town.Thick forests surrounded the town. Between it and theriver there are two lovely hills.Except for 4 brick houses, 2 of them of two stories, allthe homes were of wood. In the year 1896, a big firedestroyed more than 100 houses. Only 10 houses survived.Jewish settlement in the town began in the eighteenthcentury. According to an official registry, there were 186Jews that paid head tax in 1765. Before World War I, therewere 120 Jewish families. In 1915, most of the Jews fled.Only a portion retumed after the War. During Independent82LIWUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESLithuania, the Jewish population was 80 families, and beforethe Holocaust, there were about 350 Jews.Among the Jews of the town were some prosperous woodmerchants. Twelve families engaged in agriculture. The restworked in trade (flax, chickens and grains) and crafts.The town had 3 cheders, a Talmud Torah, a TarbutSchool, a library, a Jewish Peoples Bank, a charitable(interest-free) loan society and Linat Hazedek.For many years, R. Avraham Yeshayahu Karlitz (1878-1953) lived in Chaviadan and studied in the beit midrash. Hewas known as "Chazon Ish" ("a man of vision").From the rabbinate: R. Arye-Leib Rappaport [from5632/1872]; R. Yitzhak [from 5643/1883]; R. Yitzhak-ZviICringer [5610-5657/185CM 897; served as rabbi for 4 yearsin Chaviadan prior to moving to Chicago]; R. Moshe barYehuda-Leib Rozin [from 5660/1900]; the last rabbi, R.Shraga Gebron* [5695/1935].Natives: Zalman Shach and the wife of Rabbi AvrahamYeshayahu Karlitz.CHEKHENOVA - Keidan Distríct C2Chekhenova was a community near Ayaragula. Jewsowned 2 flour mills there on the Dubisa River. A brick kilnalso belonged to Jews.CHISLOVKA D2Chislovka was a village near Rogova. At one time, tíierewere a number of Jewish farmers living there.DABEIK (DEBEIKIAI) - Utian Distríct E2Dabeik is near Utian (12 miles), Vilkomir (21), Aniksht(9), Vizhon (6), along the road linking Vilkomir with Vizhonand Ushpol. The nearest train station is in Trumbachishok (4miles).THE COMMUNITIES83The Jewish community goes back many years. Tomb-stones in the nearby cemetery of Aniksht indicate that aJewish settlement existed there 300 years ago. Elders,wishing to make a commentaiy on the source of the name ofthe town, would cite the verse nve’dabeik libanu b’mitzvote-cha" ("open our hearts to Your commandments").The Jews of Dabeik made their living ffom crafts,agriculture, and small businesses, including flax, eggs andboar hair merchants. Many earaed a livelihood ffom the largeestates in the area by buying crops and supplying goods.During World War I, the Jews were expelled to Russia.After the War, most of them retumed. In 1921, the Jewishcommunity counted 120 families; in 1939 - 65 families. In1941, the Jewish population was down to 10 families.After World War I, the town was cut off ffom Dvinskand Vilna which were important marketplaces. As a result ofeconomic discrimination by Lithuanians, the economicposition of the Jews was undercut. Many left the town andrelocated in other communities or emigrated to Great Britain,the United States, South Africa and Palestine.They had two houses of prayer - a beit midrash for theMitnagdim and a shtíbl for the Chabad Hasidim. The majori-ty were Mitnagdim. A good relatíonship existed between thetwo groups. One rabbi served the whole community. Hewould pray two weeks in the beit midrash of the Mitnagdimand one week at the Hasidic shtíbl.The community had a Shas society, Mishnayot and EinYakov, which included both Mitnagdim and Hasidim. Evenafter a long day of work, many would gather together tostudy Torah.Dabeik was known for its cantor and prayer leaders. Forthe High Holidays, cantors would go to Aniksht, Ponevezh,Utían and other places. Some of the notables of the townincluded: R. Zvi Raznikovitz (who later served as rabbi in84LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESKatlenitz, Ploch and Yatka), R. Isaac Rabinovitz and R.Yehuda-Eidal Calebsohn.In Independent Lithuania, there was a Tarbut School, acheder and a library. Many of the young people studied atyeshivas in the surrounding communities. There was a JewishPeoples Bank.Quite a few of tiie youth received training in Hechalutzbefore making aliyah to Eretz Yisrael. Among the first"pioneers" were Sarah and Shoshanah Isikson and ShmuelKerem. A branch of the Young Zionists had 30 members.From the rabbinate: R. Eliezer Soloveichik [served 50years in the town. His son-in-law served after him].Natives: Yerachmiel Perek [translated the 5 Megillot andPirke Avot to Yiddish, published in 1915 by Sharbarak,VilnaJ; Moshe Benzion Kerem; Yerachmiel Ben Yehuda(Kalebsohn) [teacher and public figure; went to Israel andbecame an attomey]. Also, Zeev (William) Finn and MosheKantor [Zionist figures in the U.S.]DARBIAN (DARBENAI) - Kretinga District A1Darbian is near Kretinga (8 miles), Polangen (10), Salant(12) and Shkud (13). The distance to Libau and Riga - 36miles. It is situated beside Lake Derba, whence the name ofthe town, and near the Lithuanian-Latvian border. A rail lineconnects it to Memel, Libau and Riga, and it is the junctionof six roads.There existed Jewish communities in Grosvilki andLoilczim. At the beginning of the nineteenth century, arecognizable Jewish settlement existed in Loikzim until thewrath of the local Baron fell on them, and they were ex-pelled. They relocated in Darbian and became the foundationof this Jewish community.In 1909, the center of the town caught on fire. The beitmidrash and synagogue were bumed down. The synagoguewas never rebuilt.THE COMMUNITIES85In 1897, 1129 Jews lived in Darbian, about 80% of thegeneral population. Before the Holocaust, the numberdwindled to 800, 40% of the population.During Independent Lithuania, Jews made their livingmainly from trade with nearby Latvian villages, buying andselling fish, flax and rags. Most of the families had a barnand a chicken coop, and some of them had small vegetablegardens. About 25 families worked in crafts. Market day wasevery Wednesday, and 4 fairs were held during the year.There were several factories for knits and for processingwool, as well as a factory for soft drinks. The sawmill wasowned by Jews.Those who emigrated firom Darbian went mainly toCanada, South Aftíca and the United States. Some went toPalestine.The town had a beit midrash and a shtibl. In the TarbutSchool (Moshe Evenstein, Principal), 2 cheders and a TalmudTorah, 150 pupils were enrolled.Charitable institutions operating in the town includedLinat Hazedek, Gemach (interest-free loan fund). There were2 libraries (Hebrew and Yiddish), a Maccabi sports associa-tion, a Tiferet Bachurim society, a drama club and branchesof Mizrahi, Socialist Democrats and a Zionist youth group.From the rabbinate: R. Eliahu Margoliat [5576-5634/1816-1874; made aliyah to Jerusalem where he served as agabbai at the Vilna-Zhamot Kollel]; R. Yosef Alexander, andhis son-in-law R. Yisrael-Isser Levine; R. Yitzhak Koplovitz,and the last rabbi, R. Isser Weisbord*.Natives: David Wolffsohn [1856-1914; associate andfiriend of Dr. Herzl and his successor as president of theWorld Zionist Organization in 1905] and R. Joshua Bloch[1890-1957; librarian, bibliographer and Reform rabbi].86LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESDARSHUNISHOK (DARSUNISKIS) - D3Troki DistríctDarshunishok is near Zhezmir (13 miles), Zhusli, Rum-shishok, Kushidar (17) and Kovno (18). It is located on theright bank of the Nieman River.In the fourteenth century, a wooden castle stood at thislocation. During an invasion in the region by the TeutonicKnights, the residents bumed down the castle and hid in thenearby forests.King Sigmund-August transferred the entire area toBarbara Radzivill. The town was considered the property ofthe Grand Duke of Lithuania, but in actuality it was held byvarious peers. In the nineteenth century, the Russian authori-ties divided up the land among the peasants and farmers.Prior to World War I, the town had a well-developedcommerce owing to its proximity to the Nieman River.However, it was hurt when it was cut off from the center ofthe country.In Independent Lithuania, the Jews engaged mainly insmall-scale trade, peddling and some gardening.The Darshunishuk Jewish community had some outstand-ing teachers and rabbis.Before the Holocaust, a few dozen Jewish families livedin the town.From the rabbinate: R. Arye-Zvi Daiches (Daykas); R.Pinchas Pinfer/Finfer [5623-5689/1863-1929]; R. Chaim-Y ermayahu Plansberg/ Flansberg [ffom 5631/1871 ]; R. Haim-Avraham Shas [5647-5648/1887-1889]; R. Shmuel- YosefShoham [from 5651/1891; went to Vilki, and was killed therein the summer of 1941]; the last rabbi, R. Moshe-Arye Mil-vasky‘.THE COMMUNITIES87DATNUVA (DOTNUVA) - Reidan District C2Datnuva is near Keidan (13 miles) and Krok (6). It issituated on the banks of the Datnuvela River and 2 milesírom the train station.Before World War I, Jewish communities existed in theneighboring communities of Montvidova and Barzhinsk.Datnuva belonged to the (Polish) Mlechki and later toBzhustovski and Kharapovtzki. The Russians confiscated itand tumed the place over to Count Kravitz.In 1899, almost the entire town bumed down.The Jews engaged in trade, tanning and agriculture. Theflour mill belonged to a Jew. Before World War I, themarket day was every Tuesday. In Independent Lithuania, themarket was closed and the farmers from the area would travelto Keidan.Before World War I, about 120 Jewish families residedin Datnuva. They were expelled during the War and sentdeep into Russia. Only a part returaed and of these, a numberemigrated to South Aírica and to the Americas.In 1921, there were 50 Jewish families, and in 1939, thenumber was down to 12.In the nineteenth century, the cemetery in Datnuva wasalso used by the Jewish community of Keidan. In the ceme-tery were found some very old wooden tombstones. Atradition among the Jews of the town was that the rabbi ofthe Vilna Gaon was buried there.There was a synagogue, a beit midrash and a shtibl,which also served as a hospice for visitors to the community.In the courtyard of the synagogue stood the rabbi’s house.Sometimes this house served as a synagogue. One tradition isthat in his youth the Vilna Gaon stayed there one Shavuot andstudied Talmud on sacrifices and offerings all night on theeve of the Holiday. The rabbi of Datnuva, R. Michel, testedthe guest and was surprised at his great depth of knowledge.The town was known for its conservatism.88LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBefore World War I, there were cheders in the town.After the War, there was no school due to the small numberof pupils. Students went to school in Keidan.Next to the town, there was an academy of agriculture.The number of Jewish pupils was very small.From the rabbinate: R. Michel [died in 5660/1900; theKagan and Shapira families were his descendants]; R.Abba-Heshel Shein; R. Avraham Poltinnov*; R. Moshe-Aaron Koselavsky, the last rabbi.Natives: Yitzhak Rubinstein; his father, Moshe, was theritual slaughterer in the town.Shmuel Marcus must also be mentioned. He was awell-to-do merchant, a learned man and a supporter of Torahlearning.DAUG (DAUGAI) - Alyta District D3Daug is near Alyta (13 miles), Oran (13), Butrimantz(12), Meretsh (18), Anishuk (18). It is situated on a peninsulaof Lake Daug. The nearest train station was in Alyta (13).Before World War I, there were Jews living in the nearbyvillages of Nadzing (7) and in Aulava (7).In the 13th and 14th centuries, the Teutonic Knightspassed through the town on their way to Vilna. During WorldWar I, it was also considered a strategic location.ín 1914, the town had 110 Jewish families, 60% of thegeneral population, and in 1936, it had 90 families or about500 individuals, 30% of the general population.During World War I, many reftigees, especially fromVilna, found refuge in the town. They were well received notonly by the local Jews, but also by the Christians. Therefúgees who settled in Daug contributed to the public life ofthe town. A library was opened, a soup kitchen was set upand a German school was established, where Hebrew wastaught by the poet Yisrael Me’Yafit, the son of the localrabbi.THE COMMUNITIES89In 1925, almost half of the town bumed down. With thehelp of the Joint (JDC), the Jewish settlement was rebuilt.The Jews were engaged primarily in trade, crafts andfishing. Two flour mills were in the town. Market day wason Wednesday. They took their products and fish to Vilna tosell.During Independent Lithuania, the Lithuanians began topush out the Jews who had small shops or were engaged intrade. The Jews were then forced to resettle in other cities orto emigrate.There was one beit midrash in the town, a Tarbut Schoolwith 75 pupils and a Jewish Peoples Bank.From tfie rabbinate: R. Avraham-Zvi Katz [served thereas rabbi for 40 years]; R. Ephraim-Nissan Me’Yafit and R.Nahum Sher*.Natives: Benzion Katz [1875-1958; writer; son of R.Avraham-Zvi Katz] and the members of the Ilgovsky Family.Additional reference:Book by Benzion Katz, "A1 Itonim V’Anashim," (Hebrew).He discusses his place of birth, the town of Daug. Hesays there were altogether 2 streets where 120 Jewishfamilies lived. One road was the Street of the Cowswhere the rich people, i.e. those who owned cows, lived,and the other was the Street of the Goats where the poorpeople, who only had goats, lived. Many Jews of thetown were fishermen. They would begin work at nightand their monthly wages were 1 1/2 rubles. As more andmore began to emigrate, many Jews of the town beganto receive money from their relatives in America and liveon a better standard.90LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESDAUGAL (DAUGAILIAI) - Utian District E2Daugal is near Salok, Ezhreni (18 miles) and Utian (10)and is situated on the Dvinsk-Kovno Road. Many lakes in theregion were noted for their fish.Before World War I, there were 10 Jewish families.During the War, they were exiled into the interior of Russia.In 1921, the only family that retumed to the town was that ofYakov Shuvsky. They had a store with supplies for farmersand an inn for travelers.When the Shuvsky family made aliyah to Eretz Yisraelin 1935, the Jewish settlement in the town ended.DAUIEN (DAINJENAI) - Birzh District D1Dauien is a village located between the towns of Posvol,Vabolnik and Poshelat. The census of 1923 recorded 25Jews. By the time of the Holocaust, only a few familiesremained.DEKSHNA C3Dekshna, also called Dekshna-Selo, was a village nearthe town of Laipoon. It had a Jewish population before theHolocaust.Dekshna is near 01kenik (11/2 miles). It was founded inthe middle of the nineteenth century, during the reign of CzarNicholas I. The sandy soil could not sustain its residents, andthe govemment gave the residents parcels of land about 4miles from the town.In 1900, when the site was included in the activities ofthe I.C.A. (Jewish Colonization Association), the situation ofthe farmers improved. They planted fruit trees, began to raisebees and animals. In addition to agriculture, the residentsfound a special livelihood and the village became known allover Russia for this. Since it was far firom transportationroutes, the city used it as a rest and recuperation location forpeople with mental illnesses.THE COMMUNITIES91The village had a synagogue and a shochet, who alsoserved as a melamed (teacher). Sometimes the farmers wouldhire a modem teacher for the children. When the village wasbetter established, the farmers sent their children out of thevillage to study - to Vilna and to yeshivas. Also, youth fromthis village emigrated to America. In the 1930’s, some wentto Palestine with the aliyah of Pioneers.The number of families in the village in the 1930’sreached 40, about 200 people.The village was connected for its communal and culturallife to 01kenik. The rabbi handled their religious questions.The youth would come there for plays. Every Friday thefarmers would come on their wagons to the bathhouse. Theyalso buried their dead in the cemetery in the town. OnShabbat and holidays the young people of 01kenik would hiketo Dekshna.Reference:Yizkor book entitled Ha ’ira Belahavot, (<Olkeniki In Flames:A Memorial Book) edited by Shlomo Farber and pub-lished by the Association of Former Residents of 01ke-niki and Surroundings, Tel Aviv, 1962.DGAITZ - Telz DistrictDgaitz [B2| was a village near the city of Telz (3 miles),on the main road ffom Telz to Popilan, where the nearesttrain station was located. The few Jews in this village and theother villages around Telz were in the dairy business,providing kosher products for Telz.During Independent Lithuania, the Lithuanian coopera-tives introduced modern dairying and otherwise drove theJews out of business. The Jews then moved to the city.92LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAdditional reference:In the memorial book on Telz, there is a chapter by ShmuelNatrovitz on his family’s home in the village of Dgaitz.DIRVIANISHUK (DVARININKAI) C2Dirviainishuk was a village near Shavlan (10 miles). Thevillage was the scene of a terrible blood libel caused by ayoung Jewish boy who fought with his father Yankel Isaaksonand sought revenge. (See Shavlan)DROSKNIK (DRUSK1ENIKI) - Sieni District D3Drosknik was a resort town near Kopcheva, on theNieman River. One Jew from the town was exiled intointerior Russia in World War II.Native: Jack Lifshitz [cubist sculptor; bom 1891].DUBINIK (DUBINGIAI) - Vilkomir District E2Dubinik is near Maliat (15 miles), Gedrovitz (8), Intorik(10), Vidishuk (10), Vilkomir (33), and also by a lake.Before World War I, there was a Jewish settlementnearby in Kazakishuk (6 miles).It is estimated that the town was in existence in the daysof Grand Duke Vitovt (1392-1430), as an estate of Lithuaniannoblemen. It served as an administrative center for thedistrict. In 1866, there were 26 houses and 363 residents, andin 1923 - 59 homes and 255 residents (in the neighboringestate there were 49 residents). In 1925, the estate wasdivided up among the farmers.Before World War I, 60 Jewish families were living inthe town. Before the Holocaust, the number had dropped to19.Most of the Jews emigrated to Cuba, Canada, SouthAfirica, the United States, and Palestine.THE COMMUNITIES93DUKSHT (DUKSTAS) F2Duksht is a town near Salok (7 miles) and Ezhreni-Zarasi(17). It had a small Jewish population up to the time of theHolocaust.Native: Cyril Rappoport [1865-1942; leader in Socialistmovement].Additional reference:Bleter Vegen Vilna, a memorial book on Vilna and VilnaGubemia, mentions Duksht.DUSIAT (DUSETOS) - Ezhreni Distríct E2Dusiat is near Antaliept (6 miles), Salok (16), Ezhreni(15), Utian (22) and Rakishok (12). It is situated on theShventa River and is near Lakes Serte, Shontosi and Dusiat- for which the town was named. The town is surrounded byforests and the view is very pleasant.The town is far ffom a railway, and its connections withneighboring communities are by road and dirt paths.There were three streets of wooden houses. At the end ofone of the streets was the Catholic Church, with its towersoverlooldng the town. The land on which the town wassituated was owned by the Pelater Estate.The town is mentioned in records dating back to 1530,indicating the existence of ffee craftsmen, merchants, and aJewish settlement. Later, the town was known as a center ofPolish rebellion against Russian authority.On April 23, 1905, a pogrom broke out in the town,instigated by the Czarist Russians. Jewish shops were brokeninto and property stolen. Torah scrolls were desecrated andtom up. A small group of Jews barricaded themselves in onehouse and hurled rocks at the rioters. One Jew, YitzhakBaron, was murdered in a very cmel manner, and three Jewswere seriously injured.94LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThat year and again in 1910, large fires broke out in thetown. In the 1910 fire, at least half of the Jewish homes andstores, as well as the old synagogue, were destroyed.The Jewish population in 1847 was 486; in 1894, it was1158, 89% of the general population. After the fire of 1910,the Jewish settlement declined. When the town was rebuilt in1912, only 704 remained, or about 250 families (70% of theoverall population). The 30 shops in the town all belonged toJewish families. A few Jews engaged in farming on rentedland. The rest worked in trade, peddling or in crafts. Most ofthe trade was with Dvinsk (by way of Ezhreni). Market daywas Wednesday. Two fairs were held each year.During World War I, the Jews were not expelled fromDusiat, but many resettled in larger communities. After theWar (1921), only 100 families remained. Just prior to theHolocaust, the number was down to 80 families.During Independent Lithuania, the town no longer hadaccess to Dvinsk, which was on the opposite side of the newborder. Trade also decreased because of the anti-Semitism ofthe "Verslaninkis," who considered the Jews "foreigners."The Jews set up fairs for trading in an attempt to subsist.Those who remained in the town engaged in crafts orsmall-scale trading. There were 32 Jewish artisans, including8 needle-workers, 5 butchers, 5 shoemakers, 4 metal-workers, 2 bakers. There were also several farmers. Twoflour mills, an electric station and a candy factory were allowned by Jews.The Jewish Peoples Bank was established in November1924.Because of the difficult economic situation, manyemigrated to South Africa, the United States and Palestine.Before World War I, there were 5 or 6 cheders in Dusiatand a cheder metuchan. In Independent Lithuania, there wasa Tarbut School with 65 pupils (Hillel Schvartz, Principal;Yehuda Salant and Leib Gordon, teachers). Ten pupils wereTHE COMMUNITIES95studying at the cheder. Next to the school was a library anda drama club. Evening classes in Hebrew were held. Achapter of Shomer Hatzair had 80 members. The Maccabigroup had 50 members. There was a society for Torahleaming and a charitable society of Linat Hazedek, as well asthe Gemach, interest-free loan society.From the rabbinate: R. Menahem-Mendel fffom Lublin;Torah educator in Zhamot Region, rabbi and teacher inDusiat and Ponevezh. He was the author of "Tamim Yach-dav"]; R. Natan-Neta, and his son R. Bonim-Zemach Silver,[natives of Dusiat]; and the last rabbi, R. Tuvia-Dov Shalzin-ger*.Natives: Mordechai Yaffe [writer and poet] and DovGamer [conductor of a synagogue choir in Kovno].EISHISHOK (EISISRES) E3Eishishok is 36 miles south of Vilna, in southeastemLithuania, near two small rivers, the Kentil and Virshuki.The General Russian Encyclopedia mentions a place calledEishis, which was founded in the eleventh century and wasnamed after Eishiskas, its founder.It is located along the main road between Vilna, Lida andNovogrodek. For many years, it was the capital of theregion.At the end of the eighteenth century, Vilna Region,which included Eishishok, became part of Russia. In 1918,when Poland was reconstituted, Eishishok was annexed toPoland in Novogrodek Region.An article in the General Polish Encyclopedia of 1883stated that there was a Karaite community in Eishishok in1145. Other information is mainly frorn the last hundredyears. Witnesses firom the town reported seeing tombstonesin the old cemeteiy firom the 1300’s.The Jewish population in 1847 was 660. In 1897, it was2376, 70% of the general population. This included the Jews96LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESwho came into the town from the surrounding villages afterthe "May Laws" of 1882 forbade Jews ffom living invillages. The Polish census of 1921 (not considered the mostexacting) recorded the Jewish population as 1591, 65% of thegeneral population. In the Holocaust, 4000 Jews ffomEishishok were killed.According to an old pinkas of the Burial Society, a verylarge fire occurred there in 1895. The "Great Fire of 1895"destroyed nearly the entire town. It was rebuilt with manybrick buildings and straight roads. Later, sidewalks wereadded.The main road from Warsaw to Vilna passed through thetown. Eishishok, which had previously been a very poor city,prospered. Motor traffic was heavy. Local merchants were nolonger limited to Vilna and Lida for buying merchandise, butcould go to Bialystok and Warsaw, large centers of industryand commerce.The Old Cemetery of Eishishok was outside the town. Itwas located beyond the Virshulci River, past the village ofYorzdiki and the towns of Voronova and Seklotzki.It is told that gentiles began to expand their fields intothe cemetery. But in trying to plow the land, several horsesfell and broke their legs. The farmers feared that the God ofthe Jews was telling them not to desecrate the Jewish graves,thereby saving the old Jewish cemetery until the Holocaust.The town had 2 beit midrashes and a large synagogue.There was an institution called a "kibbutz" where young menprepared themselves for the rabbinate through self-instruction.The new cemetery was located outside the courtyard ofthe synagogue.Additional references:Eishishok is not written up in Yehadut Uta. Information ismainly ffom the Memorial Book, Eishishok: The Com-THE COMMUNITIES97munity and Its Destruction and from the Jewish Encyclo-pedia.Michael Weisser, A Brotherhood ofMemory: Jewish Lands-manshaftn in the New World, New York: Basic Books,Inc., 1985.ERZHVILKY (ERZVILKAS) - Tavrig District B2Erzhvilky is near Skudvill (13 miles), Nemoksht (12),Rasin (19), Yurburg (14), and Tavrig (19). It is on a hilloverlooking the Sheltona River, and is 12 miles from thenearest railway station.In 1905, a large part of the town bumed down.The Jewish population in 1897 was 144. In 1921, 350Jews were living there. Before the Holocaust, the number haddropped to 45 to 50 Jewish families.The Jewish families existed mainly on small businessesand trade. Market day was on Wednesday, and there were 4fairs held annually.Economic problems caused many Jews to emigrate,especially to the United States, South Africa and Palestine.From the rabbinate: R. Zeev Rafiako*.Natives: Professor Avi-Herman Shapiro; R. ShimonGlazer.EZHERENI-ZARASAI F2(NOVO-ALEKSANDROVSK) - District CapitalEzhereni-Zarasai is near Salok (12 miles), Utian (24),Rakishok (36), Dvinsk, Latvia (15), and the Lithuanian-Byelorussian-Latvian border. The nearest rail line was inKelkon (10). The town is on the Kovno-Vilkomir-Utian-Dvinsk road.It is in an area of lakes and forests. The Lithuanians callit "The Switzerland of Lithuania." When Czar Nicholas Ivisited the area in 1836, he was so impressed with the beautythat he ordered the establishment there of the District Capital,98LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEScalled Novo-AIexandrovsk. During Independent Lithuania,the town was called Ezhereni after the many Iakes in thearea. In 1929, the name was changed to Zarasai.In the fifteenth century, a monastery of the Carmeliteswas located on the site of the town. The army of Moscowunder Ivan III, invaded the area in 1481. At the beginning ofthe eighteenth century, the city suffered from plagues.Following the Third Partition of Poland in 1795, the citypassed to the Russians. In 1812, the Russians and the Frenchfought battles in the vicinity. During the Polish Rebellion(1831), rebel troops were active in the area. From 1836 to1915, the city was in the district of Kovno. The city sufferedgreatly during World War I.Jewish settlement dates from the days of Czar AlexanderI. There were 453 Jews in the city in 1847 and 3348 (53% ofthe entire population) in 1897.Prior to World War I, the Jewish population was 2500.During the War, the Jews left and went into Russia. Only apart retumed after the War. During Independent Lithuania(1923), there were 1329 Jews, 284 families, 35% of thegeneraí population. Before the Holocaust, there were approxi-mately 1500 Jews.The Jews lived in the center of the city, on the mainstreets and on the main road dividing the city.Before World War I, the Jews worked in trade ofproduce and flax and as shopkeepers, peddlers and transport-ers. Many were artisans: tailors, shoemakers, and feltbootmakers. Some were fishermen. There were also someprofessionals.Market days were Tuesdays and Fridays. Sunday alsoprovided the farmers with an opportunity to bring theirproduce to market when they came to town for church. Inaddition, there were 2 fairs per year. Jewish merchants hadcontacts in Poland, Vilna, Dvinsk and Riga, which constitut-ed a large market for agricultural produce.THE COMMUNITJES99With the establishment of Independent Lithuania, the citywas cut off from a large portion of the region. On the eastwas the new Polish border and on the northeast was theLatvian border. The city was cut off ffom many settíementsfor which it had previously served as a center. The towneffectively lost its market. Above all, it was cut off ffom therail line and ffom nearby Dvinsk (Latvia). The overallpopulation declined from 9,000 before the War to 4,200.The Jewish population also dwindled. Occupationschanged. In 1937, there were 87 Jewish craftsmen, including25 needle workers, 12 shoemakers, 11 butchers, 8 metalworkers, 6 bakers, 3 clock makers, a carpenter and a jeweler.Four families worked in agriculture and the remainder intrade. There was a match factory belonging to Eptar and abeer factory owned by Horwitz, as well as 2 flour mills.The Jewish Peoples Bank was founded in 1920 and had345 members in 1923.The city had 6 Jewish houses of worship: a largesynagogue ("The Shul") built in 1858; a large beit midrashbuilt on the lots of Itzila Heshem; a Hasidic shtibl, which wascalled "The Minyan HaAdom" (red); the green Hasidicbuilding, the Beit Hamidrash "Lereglai Hahar"; and the beitmidrash of the tailors built in 1895. The Jewish communityhad a rabbi and 2 shochets.Before World War, I the town had 8 cheders and ayeshiva. During Independent Lithuania, there was a TarbutSchool. The teachers were Yakov Moshel, Vusman, Vilimov-sky. A large number of Jewish children went to the Lithuani-an high school, as their parents would not give permission forthem to go to a Hebrew high school outside of the city.Jewish institutions included a hospital, an old age home,Linat Hazedek, an interest-lfee loan society, societies forstudying Gemorah, Mishnayot, Ein Yakov, a Zionist libraryand a drama club. Chapters of Zionist parties were active in100LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESthe town. There were youth organizations, sports groups suchas Maccabi and a chapter of the Religious Pioneers.From the rabbinate: R. Meir-Shalom Hacohen [rabbi inVidz and Ezhereni. He died at the age of 30 in 1903]. R.Levy son of Leib Shapira [died 5640/1880]; R. Raphael Sha-pira [from 5646/1886 in Bobroisk]; R. Mordechai Feinstein[died 5663/1903]; R. Burgin; the last rabbi R. Eliahu Rez-nik*.Natives: Yudel Fenn/Penn [artist]; Eliahu Neividel[educator and writer].Additional references:Several chapters on Ezhereni in Yizkor Book of Rakishok andEnvirons, edited by M. Bakalczuk-Felin, Johannesburg,So. Aífica: The Rakishker Landsmanschaft, 1952(Yiddish).Jews ofLithuania: Pictures and Drawings by Y.D. Kamzon,Jerusalem: The Rav Kook Institute, 1959 (Hebrew text).GAILISHOKGailishok is a village near the town of Alsiad (Bl). Afew Jews lived there before the Holocaust.GAURA (GAURE) - Tavrig District B2Gaura was a small town near the District City of Tavrig(8 miles). In 1923, it had a Jewish population of 20.GAUVARY B2Gauvary is near Yurburg (14 miles). Before World WarI, there was Jewish settlement there.GEDROVITZ (GIEDRAICIAI) - Vilkomir District E2Gedrovitz, situated on Lake Kementa, is near Shirvint,Gelvan, Maliat, Bolnik and Vilkomir and is 30 miles from aTHE COMAÍUNITIES101railway station. It is on the road to Vilna, which is 27 milesaway.The town suífered extensively ffom the battles betweenPoles and Lithuanians in the autumn of 1920.The Jewish population in 1921 was 200. They made theirliving through small-scale trade, craftsmanship and agricul-ture. Maricet day was on Thursday. In 1941, about 50 Jewishfamilies lived there.There was one prayer house, 2 cheders, an ethnic schooland a library. Most of the Jewish youth continued theirstudies at the Hebrew and Yiddish high schools in Villcomir.From the rabbinate: R. Haim Gurvitz.GELEZ (GELAZIAI) - Ponevezh District D2Gelez was a village near Subotsh (6 miles). Some Jewslived there before World War I.GELVAN (GELVONAI) - Vilkomir District D2Gelvan is located near Shirvint (9 miles) and Vilkomir(12).Jews lived there ffom the seventeenth century. In thecemetery were tombstones dating ffom the year 5419 (1659).In 1914, there were about 90 Jewish families. By 1934, thenumber dropped to 70 families, 46% of the population.Before the Holocaust, the Jewish population was about 450.Before World War I, the Jews engaged mainly in graintrade and in the export of poultry, ffuits and dairy productsto Vilna. There were also Jewish craftsmen: tailors, shoemak-ers, glaziers and others.After the War when Vilna was cut off ffom Lithuania,trade fell. The "Verslaninkis" undercut and supplanted theJewish branches of trade. As the town dwindled, the Jewishcommunity diminished. Some of the youth trained as pioneersand made aliyah to Eretz Yisrael. Many left for othercountries or larger cities in Lithuania.102LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESIn the days of Jewish autonomy, the community set upreligious and social institutions. In 1918, a Hebrew schoolwas established by the teacher Glintershtzik. The influence ofthe Yiddishists later changed it to a Yiddish school. In 1930,the school was changed again and it became a Hebrew TarbutSchool. The Zionists set up a library in the town. A signifi-cant number of the youth of Gelvan studied at the Hebrewhigh school or the Yiddish school in Vilkomir.From the rabbinate: R. Menahem-Mendel Lifshitz[author of "brachat menachem"; brother of Yakov Lifshitz];R. Yehoshua Kalavan [who served in Gelvan until 5685/1925and later went to the U.S.]; R. Zalman-Pinchas Hacohen[related by marriage to R. Meir-Michel Mashat; father of thewriter Ephraim Kaplan]; and the last rabbi, R. DanielEinstein. R. Zusman-Gershon Bitzik served as the shochet ofthe town for many years.Natives: R. Yosef Bar-Yehuda [rabbi in the U.S.]; R.Leib-Noah Bas, [rabbi in Shukat].Additional reference:Westem Reserve Historical Society, 10825 East Boulevard,Cleveland, Ohio 44106, USA, holds a collection ofletters (translated to English) from David Peretz Adelman(also Aideman and Eideman) of Gelvan to his family inAmerica up to the time that he and his wife were mur-dered in the shtetl.GINTALISHOK (GINTELISKE) A1Gintalishok was a village near Plotel (5 miles) andDarbian. It had Jewish settlement before World War I.GIRTIGOLA (GIRKALNIS) - Rasin District C2Girtigola is located near Rasin (5 miles). In 1921, theJewish population of the town was 270. Before World WarII, 27 Jewish families lived there.THE COMMUNITIES103From the rabbinate: R. Yehuda-Leib Oppenheim; R.Shmuel-Naftali Halevy Epstein [author of the book "EmreiShefer" on the Song of Songs. His son Mordechai-Yitzhakwas a rabbi in Sheffield.J R. Meir Stolvitz [author of'Mi-beit Meir"; he died in Jerusalem]; R. Yitzhak-IsaacBroude [5644-5692/1884-1932; was bom in Shatt; laterserved as a rabbi in the United States]; R. Yakov-MosheLiesin [subsequently, was a rabbi in Naishtut-Tavrig andfinally in New York; participated in the community gatheringin Kovno in 1920 as a delegate of "Young Israel"; related bymarriage to R. Eliezer-Yehoshua Shapira].Native: R. Shlomo-Yakov Shein [rabbi in Tzitovian andLatzkova and a student of R. Yakov-Yosef in the VilonYeshiva; studied in Eishishok and Grodno; related bymarriage to R. Baruch Feivelson. R. Shein died in Kovno inthe year 5694/1934]. Other residents included the Osovsky,Zilberman and Blaicher families, including R. Haim-YitzhakOsovsky.GLIYUN C3Gliyun was a village near Gudleva, south of Kovno. TheGliyun Estate was owned by the family of Yitzhak Segelov-sky. He received it ffom the owner of the Gudliavsky Estateas a gift for serving as a translator between Gudiavsky andMoses Montefiore when the latter passed through the townduring his visit to Russia. The estate belonged to the familyup to World War II. David Segelovsky, son of YitzhakSegelovsky, would host the great Jewish figures and messen-gers when they passed through the town.GODNOVA (GUDNOVE)Godnova is located 5 miles from Alsiad [Bl]. It had aJewish community until Independent Lithuania.104LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESGORZHD (GARGZDAI) - Rretinga District A2Gorzhd is near Memel (9 miles) on the German border.It had one of the fírst Jewish communities in Lithuania.In the cemetery there were tombstones over 400 years old.Documents from the sixteenth century mention Jews fromGorzhd as overseers for the collection of customs fees at theborder. In 1639, they received a letter granting them fullcitizenship rights from Wladislaw IV, King of Poland. In1742, King August III reissued this document.During Czarist rule, when pogroms threatened, the Jewswould flee to Germany. They would remain several days untilthe danger passed. Some never returned.The Jewish population in 1827 numbered 648. In 1897,it rose to 1455, about 60% of the general population. In1921, there were 1148 Jews. During World War I, the townwas occupied by the Germans. This was a period of prosperi-ty. Prior to the Holocaust, the Jewish population was about1000, including several hundred refugees from Memel region.The local Jews’ main livelihood was the export of woodto Germany. Many floated rafts on Minija River whichflowed past the town. Millions of square meters of woodwere sent annually to Germany. There were a number ofprosperous Jews, including Yakov and Feivel Yafshitz,lumber merchants and owners of a bank in Memel. In 1929,the Jewish Peoples Bank had 269 members.The town had a synagogue and a beit midrash. Amongthe charitable institutions were Lehem Aniim, Bikur Holim,Linat Hazedek, and a charitable loan fund established withthe help of natives of the town in America. The local youthstudied at Talmud Torah and at either the Hebrew or Yiddishethnic school. There was also a Zionist library with manyHebrew books and a Yiddish library.The religious youth belonged to Tiferet Bachurim. Otherswere in Zionist organizations and a Maccabi sports group. AllTHE COMMUNITIES105of the Zionist parties were represented, training pioneers foraliyah to Eretz Yisrael.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe Yaffe [who occupied theseat of the rabbinate for 45 years, firom 1840 to 1885]; hisson R. Yosef Yaffe; R. Yitzhak-Yakov Rabinovitz [R. Itzhalaffom Ponevezh]; R. Aaron Velkin; R. Yitzhak-Isaac Fried-man; R. Shabbatai-Aaron bar Moshe Shapira; and the lastrabbi, R. Meir Levin*.Natives: Shlomo-Zalman bar Shraiga-Feibush Shach;Shmuel Velkin; R. Shmuel bar Baruch [Tzaddik and Hasid];Chaim-Benyamin Shevis; Yehudit Tzik ["Yudika"; poet];Sam Zacks [industrialist]; Dr. Hershel Meit [Communistwriter in the U.S].GRINKISHOK (GRINKISKIS) - Keidan District C2Grinkishok is near Baisigola (4 miles) and Krok (10). Itis situated on the Shoshava River and 7 miles firom a trainstation.The three main streets were Shadova, Pashushva andKrok.The Jewish settlement in 1921 had 250 people. In 1923,the Jewish population was 235. They made their living firomsmall shops and crafits. Market day was Tuesday. Prior to theHolocaust, the Jewish population was down to about 20families.The cheder, cemetery, rabbi and shochet all served theJews of nearby Baisigola.GRIVAKLA D1Grivakla was a village near Salat (1 mile). It had aJewish population before World War I.GRISHKABUD (GRISKABU DIS) - Shaki DistrictGrishkabud is located 9 miles firom Shaki [C3]. It is nearLukshi (7 miles), Pilvishok (12), Naishtut-Shaki (15),106LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESVilkovishk (21). There were Jewish settlements in the nearbytowns of Paloby (5), Shadvigi (6), and Posvieskeli (6), whichwere liquidated following World War I.Before World War I, about 30 Jewish families wereliving in the town, but before the Holocaust, only 8 re-mained.There were 24 market days per year in Grishkabud whichwere the source of income for the Jews. During IndependentLithuania, Jewish merchants were pushed out of commerce.Most of them emigrated to the United States.In 1935, a large fire destroyed 22 buildings, includingthe beit midrash. It was decided to convert the bathhouse intoa beit midrash. However, they lacked the means to fix upeither one. Five children studied at the cheder.GROSVILKI A1Grosvillci was near Darbian and Loigzim. It had Jewishsettlement at one time.GRUZD (GRUZDZIAI) - Shavli District C1Gruzd is near Shavli (16 miles), Yanishok (17), Zhager(21) and Rurshan (15).Near the town was the large Narishkin Estate and cattleranch, the source of livelihood for several Jewish families.In 1929, a quarter of the homes in Gruzd were destroyedby fíre.In 1897, the Jewish population was 482, 41% of thegeneral population. Before World War I, 120 Jewish familieswere living there, but after the War only 40 Jewish families,150 people, remained. Before the Holocaust, there were 27Jewish families. They made their living from small shops,crafts and agriculture. Market day was on Wednesday. Therewas an annual fair.THE COMMUNITIES107The Jews emigrated to South Afirica, the United Statesand Mexico. Only a few went to Eretz Yisrael. Those whoremained were supported largely by relatives firom abroad.There was one beit midrash. They had Linat Hazedelc, aninterest-free loan society and a Peoples Bank.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe bar Yeshayahu-RaphaelShapira.Additional reference:Photo of "a comer of the cemetery in Gruzdziai," appears inEncyclopedia Judaica, vol. 11, p.366.GUDLEVA (GARLIAVA) - Kovno District C3Gudleva is near Kovno (5 miles), Panimon (4), Pren(14), and Mariampole (26). It is located on the Kovno-Pren-Alyta Road. An extension of the road went to Mariampole.Before World War I, the Jewish population was over 400(about 100 families). By 1921, the population was 206 (about50 families). Before the Holocaust, there were 70 Jewishfamilies living there. Most were in small-scale trade andcrafts. Almost every family had a vegetable garden. TheSegelovsky Family owned a factory for firing bricks. Therewere also 3 sawmills.There were some Jewish estate owners. Yosef Shvartzowned a large estate in Ulinova, 3 miles from Gudleva. TheGliyun estate belonged to the family of Yitzhak Segelovsky.There was a beit midrash in the town as well as aYavneh School with 45 pupils and a Yiddish school with 45pupils.During World War I, nearly the entire town bumeddown.The Jews of the town emigrated to the United States,Canada and South Africa and some to Eretz Yisrael.Natives: R. Yosef-Reuven Katz’ [the rabbi in Vishintaand Glubok; was an active worker in Hamizrahi in Vilna].108LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESGUDZHON (GUDZIUNAI) - Keidan DistríctGudzhon was a sraall town in central Lithuania, nearKeidan [D2]. In the 1923 census, 103 Jews were countedthere. Before the Holocaust, the number had dropped to justa few families.HANUSHISHOR - Troki Distríct E3Hanushishok was a town near Visokidbor (8 miles). Ithad a Jewish population before World War I.From the rabbinate: R. Yisrael-Isser ben Naftali-HertzKlatzkin [1844-1921].Natives: Yehoshua Bodzon [1858-1929; writer] andHirsh Lekert [1879-1902; activist].HOTA - Troki Distríct D3Hota was a village about a mile and a half ffom Visokid-bor. The Jewish community disintegrated before World WarI, following the Jewish expulsion firom villages under theCzarist regime. (See also Visokidbor.)INTORIK (INTURKE) - Utian District E2Intorik is near Dubinik (8 miles) and Maliat (8), betweenMaliat and Vilna. Lakes surround it on all sides.Across one of the lakes, less than a mile to the east, wasthe village of Raitarada, which had some 20 Jewish families.The post office was opened in 1926. The general Lithuanianschool and the Christian church were in Intorik. Raitaradawas considered a suburb. The two towns were essentiallyone. Before the Holocaust approximately 40 Jewish familieslived in Raitarada.In 1919, almost every Jewish home bumed down in alarge fire.The Jews engaged in fishing and small businesses. Therewere 3 annual fairs in the town.THE COMMUNITIES109Before World War I, the town of Intorik had 62 Jewishfamilies (250 individuals). Before the Holocaust, there were26 families left. Its separation from Vilna during IndependentLithuania caused a decline in the Jewish residents. Manyemigrated to America and South Africa. A few went toPalestine.There was one beit midrash. Before World War I, therewas a small yeshiva. In Independent Lithuania, they had ageneral library but they did not have a school or cheder.Children ffom that town studied in Maliat, Vilkomir orKovno.Up to 1925, the rabbi was R. Zalman-Tuvia Markovitz.After he left for Antaliept, no new rabbi was chosen.Everything related to religious matters was tumed over to R.Bilitzky of Maliat.KALANEL (KALNALIS) C1Kalanel was a village near Zhager.Additional reference:Family history research of Len Yudakin (Israel GenealogicalSociety), whose family lived in Ralanel.KALTINAN (KALTINENAI) - Tavrig District B2Kaltinan is a small town near Loykuva (10 miles) inwestem Lithuania.In 1923, 130 Jews lived there. At the time of the Holo-caust, 15-20 Jewish families lived there.Native: Eliahu Rodnitzky [1892-1951; attomey andwriter].KALVARIA (KALVARIJA) - Mariampole District C3Kalvaria, also called Kalvaria-Suwalk, is near Liodvinova(6 miles), Mariampole (10), Simna (18), Vilkovishk (22). Itis on the banks of the Sheshupa River, and near the conflu-110LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESence of the Kirshina River, a tributary of the Nieman River.Before World War I, the nearest train station was in Shosta-kova on the Suwalki-Oran rail line. In 1921, a train stationwas established about a mile firom the town next to theYanovo estates. The town was on the main Warsaw -Petersburg highway connecting it with Kovno via Mariam-pole.Before World War I, Kalvaria was part of SuwalkiDistrict. During Independent Lithuania, it became part ofMariampole District.Jewish settlement began when the place was a villagecalled Teraba. In 1713, the Jews were granted a permit byKing Augustus II to build a synagogue on the condition thatit would not be taller than the Christian Church. Residentsincluded a number of Jewish weavers, who received permis-sion to work in their professions without belonging to anartisan guild. In 1803, a new synagogue was built.The Jewish community numbered 1055 in 1766; 6508 inthe 1860’s, 80% of the general population; 7581 in 1897,81 % of the general population; and about 7000 in 1914, 70%of the general population. Before World War I, a Jewishsettlement existed in nearby Liubova.During World War I, battles were fought in the vicinityand 220 Jews were wounded. The Jews were forced to leavethe city. In 1915 about half of the town bumed down. Afterthe War, part of the Jewish community retumed. Someremained in Russia while others went to larger cities inLithuania. In 1923, there were 1233 Jews, 27% of thegeneral population. In 1939, about 1000 Jews remained(about 250 families).Before World War I, Lithuanian peasants lived in thesurrounding villages. The estates and large farms were ownedby Germans who employed German farm workers fromacross the border. The govemment offices in the city werestaffed by Polish workers. Only a few Jews had jobs as clerksTHE COMMUNITIES111in the notary offices, the municipality or the civil court.Trade and crafits were in the hands of the Jews, who werealso hired as workers in small industry. Raw materials werebrought from Russia. Manufactured products were exportedto Germany along with grains, butter, chickens and otheragricultural products. This export trade to Germany washandled by Jewish merchants. Many families sold goods onmarket days, which were every Tuesday and Friday.The Krongold family had large beehives. The Epstein,Kronsohn and Solomon families had tobacco plantations.Yakov-Zvi Epstein was among the pioneers in tobacco inLithuania. He employed 170 workers on his tobacco planta-tion. Army camps, the prison ("The Yellow Prison") and themental hospital which had 400-500 patients were served byJewish contractors and suppliers. The prison was built in thenineteenth century, or possibly the eighteenth, and was thelargest of its kind in Lithuania. Prisoners included politicalprisoners and freedom fighters. From here they were trans-ferred to Siberia. The city also had a flour mill owned byRomanov; it was one of the largest in Lithuania. There wasalso a tobacco factory owned by Solomon.During Independent Lithuania, the govemmental andsemi-govemmental cooperatives, the Verslaninkis, under-mined hundreds of Jewish merchants, craftsmen and smallbusinessmen. Many Jews emigrated to America and to SouthAífica. Some resettled in larger Lithuanian cities.There were 5 Jewish prayer houses in Ralvaria: a syna-gogue, a beit midrash, 2 kloizs and a shtibl. "The GreatSynagogue" was a broad, brick building. Adoming the interi-or were pictures of animals and chickens. The synagogue waspattemed after the great synagogue in Vilna.Before World War I, there were cheders in the town.Some of the youth studied at yeshivas and some at theRussian municipal schools. Some continued their studies atthe Gymnasia in Mariampole or at Suwalk. During Indepen-112LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESdent Lithuania, there was a Yavneh School with 135 pupilsand a Yiddish School with 130 pupils. There was also aHebrew School.From the rabbinate: R. Shmuel bar Eliezer [in theeighteenth century]; R. Aaron Barvida; R. Arye-LeibBarvida; R. Arye-Leib Shapira; R. Yehoshua Isaac Shapira["Charif," author of "Emek Yehoshua"]; R. MordechaiMeltzer [Klaczko; author of "Tekhelet Mordechai"]; R.Mordechai Halevy Huchman; R. David-Shlomo Margoliot;R. Benzion Stemfeld; R. Eliezer-Simcha Rabinovitz [5647-5671/1887-1911]; R. Zelig-Reuven Bengis [from 5672/1912;in 5698/1938 made aliyah to Eretz Yisraelj.Natives: R. Michel-Yirmeyahu Eisenstat; Yitzhak barEliahu Margaliot; R. Ably ben Jeremiah; Shmuel bar Eliezer;Zalman-Dov Rashgolim; R. Dr. Goldenson; Dov (Baer)Ratner [Talmud scholar]; R. Shmuel Shulman; Neta Rein-hertz [1792-1867, Torah scholar and great masldl. Author ofa commentary on the Jerusalem Talmud]; Yitzhak benShmuel [author of a commentary on the Song of Songs]; Dr.Yosef-Yitzhak Blostein [a physician]; Dr. Elhanan Elkis'[Head of the Kovno ghetto council]; Dr. Eífaim London; theauthors: Shlomo-Zalman Goodstat, Meir-Jacob Fried, AaronVizhinsky, Jacob Yasda; Yisrael Metz [a philanthropist];Nathaniel Philips; Harold-Meir Philips; Shlomo Peres[anarchist]; Meir London [member of the American Con-gress]; and Eliahu Lev [paleographer].KALVARIA-ZHAMOT (KALVARIJA) - B1Mazhaik DistrictKalvaria-Zhamot is located near Siad (5 miles). It wasknown for its annual fair which lasted for a week, and alsofor its Christian Church. There was a Jewish population inthis village before World War I.THE COMMUNTTIES113KAMAI (KAMAJAI) - Rakishok District E2Kamai is near Panimunik (7 miles), Sviadoshitz (10),Rakishok (13), Ushpole (14) and Dusiat (17). It is on theSlatkesna River and the Petrastzik and Saol Lakes. It issurrounded by forests.In 1847, the Jewish population was 453. In 1897, it was944, 85% of the general population. In 1914, there were 90Jewish families, and in 1939, 60 to 70 Jewish families.Before World War I, all trade was handled by Jews. Inaddition, all craftsmen except one were Jews. They included2 shoemakers, 3 tailors, 2 blaclcsmiths, 2 glaziers and 2roof-tilers. The Jews were the shop owners, flax and eggmerchants, tavem owners and even peddlers. Jewish fisher-men plied the surrounding lakes which were rich in fish. Thepostal agency was mn by a Jew. The town had no doctor,only a medic.Fires were ffequent. The largest one occurred in 1915during World War I, destroying the town. Most of the Jewsleft. Only 10 families remained. Some retumed after theWar.During Independent Lithuania, the character of the townchanged. The new borders cut it off from the Latvian market.A policy of evicting Jews caused an exodus to large cities andan emigration to South Affica, America and England.In 1937, there were 12 Jewish artisans, including 2tailors, 4 shoemakers, 3 butchers and a baker. Others livedoff of small-scale trade. They depended on market day whichwas on Wednesday and on 3 annual fairs.Most of the Jews were Mitnagdim although some wereHasidim. There was an old beit midrash, which was usedonly for the High Holidays, and two prayer houses, one forthe Hasidim and one for the Mitnagdim.Before World War I, there was a yeshiva founded by R.Eliezer-Zev Luft and R. Yisrael-Zissel Dvortz. More than 50pupils studied there. When the yeshiva was founded, some of114LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESthe boys who were accepted had previously left cheder andwere peddlers. Among tfie yeshiva students were ProfessorShmuel Atlas, Yitzhak Agolnik and his 3 brothers. One ofthe brothers, Aaron, became head of the rabbinical college inNovaharodok. When R. Luft left for Rubinishok, he tooksome of the yeshiva boys with him.The Hasidim had their own rabbi and ritual slaughterer.The shochet, Avraham-Leib Atlas, was a distinguishedscholar and was the father of Professor S. Atlas.The Tarbut School had 60 pupils. The teachers wereMrs. Yeruzlam and Yakov Charit. Eighteen boys attended thecheder. Many of the local boys continued their studies in theyeshivas or Hebrew high schools in the area. Next to thelocal school there was a library.From the rabbinate: R. David bar Avraham [5545/1785;afterward he served as rabbi in Skidel]; R. Bonim ZemachSilver; R. Eliahu Gordon from Vidz [from 5659/1899. Hewas the father of Dr. H.L. Gordon. He wrote several books.He later served as a rabbi and teacher in Vilna]; R. Eliezer-Zev Luft; R. Yisrael-Zissel Dvoretz; R. Meir Fine and thelast rabbi, R. Leib Taeger'.Natives: Yitzhak Agolnik; Yisrael Nissan Krek; ShmuelHar [writer].Additional references:Four chapters on Kamai (Kamay) in Yizkor Book ofRakishokand Environs, edited by M. Bakalczuk-Felin, Johannes-burg, So. Africa: The Rakishker Landsmanschaften,1952 (Yiddish).Bemard Sachs, "Portrait of an East European Village," inMidstream, Jan. 1985, pp. 27-30. About the town ofKamaai. The article mentions a stream within the village- the stream was called Hiddekel after a river in theGarden of Eden. It was the Stavros Estates.THE COMMUNITIES115RAMIRINTZA - Sieni District C3Kamirintza is a village near Laipoon. It had a Jewishpopulation before World War I.KANEVERAZ (KARNUVARA) - Keidan District C2Kaneveraz was a farm settlement near Keidan. SomeJews lived there until World War I.Additional reference:The settlement is mentioned in the Keidan memorial book,1977.KATBISHOK (KIETAVISKAS) - Troki District D3Katbishok was a village near Semilishuk (8 miles). It hada Jewish population before World War I.KATKISHOK - Sieni District C3Katkishok was an estate near Lazdai. It was farmland anda forested area where a Jewish family lived before WorldWar I.Additional reference:It is mentioned in the memorial book of Mariampole.KAZAKISHOK (KAZAKAS) - Vilkomir District E2Kazakishok was a village near Maliat (9 miles) andDubinik (6) that had a Jewish population at one time. Thevillage was liquidated before World War I, when Jews wereordered out of the villages and rural areas by the Czaristregime.KAZLOVA-RUDA (KAZLU RUDA) C3Kazlova-Ruda is near Pilvishok (11 miles), Visoki-Ruda(5) and Kovno (18), along the rail line ffom Kovno to Kibart.It had a Jewish population up to the time of the Holocaust.116LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESKEIDAN (KEDAINIAI) - District Capital D2Keidan is near Krok (14 miles), Datnuva (7), Shatt (11),Zhaim (12), Yusvine (7) and Ayaragola (18). The trainstation was 2 miles away. It is on the shores of the Neviazhaand the Smilga Rivers.The city was founded in the fourteenth century. Original-ly, it was a fishing village called "Kazran.” After some yearsthe name was changed to Keidan. The first residents wereidol worshippers, who built an altar on a hill to the godPerkonus, the god of thunder. This altar drew settlers to thevillage. In the days of Grand Duke Jagello, who acceptedChristianity, the pagan altar was replaced by a Christianchurch, and the hill was fortified. The building was laterimproved and became one of the most splendid Christianchurches in Lithuania.The Polish King Casimir IV in 1492 gave the city as agift to the Russian-Lithuanian Kishaka (Kishkis) family for itsservice to the state. The members of this family urged Jewishmerchants, who came to the fairs, to settle and develop trade.Many accepted but soon had to leave as a result of anexpulsion order issued by Grand Duke Alexander in April1495. In 1503, he rescinded the expulsion decree, and theexiles were permitted to return. But only a portion returned.It took many years for the community to recover.In 1560, Prince Michael Radzivill, who made his homein this city, became a Calvinist. Jews were granted civicrights and religious ffeedom. Many Calvinist Protestantscame to the city. After a number of years, a sharp conflictbroke out between the Calvinists and the Catholics. PrinceRadzivill was murdered. His embalmed corpse is kept in thebasement of the Calvinist Church in the city.In 1590, King Sigmund III granted the city MagdeburgRights and the city got self rule. Its economic conditionimproved and it became a trade center. Merchants ffom allover the country came to the 3 annual fairs. Prince Christo-THE COMMUNTTIES117pher Radzivill improved the positíon of merchants andgranted the Jews ftill rights of citizenship and íireedom ofreligion. He also gave land for new Jewish settlers and gavethem tax reductíons. In selecting the Jewish settlers, heaccepted only those with recommendations as to theirintegrity and good character.Among the settlers were Calvinists from Germany andScotland, including scholars, military people and artísans,with a sizable number of weavers. Jews were assisted by theCalvinists in developing the art of weaving. Until thebeginning of the nineteenth century, weaving was entirely inthe hands of Jews.In 1625, Prince Radzivill set up the first Calvinist highschool, which served as an important cultural center inLithuania.Among the settlers from Germany were Jewish teachersand maskilim, who changed the city into a major communityand a center for Torah and leaming in the Zhamot region.In 1640, the city was inherited by Yanush Radzivill, sonof Christopher, a worldly and liberal individual. He reaf-firmed the rights which his father had granted to the Jews. In1647, he decreed that all citízens, without regard for religionor natíonality, could partícipate in elections for city officials.In 1648, he built the first flour mill and leased it to Jews. Heestablished a paper factory. In 1650, he set up a printinghouse where the Book of Psalms was printed for the first tímein the Lithuanian language. The Prince provided that the Jewsof the town had military training and organized them into anarmy unit for service in tímes of emergency.At that tíme, the Jews occupied the top places in thecity’s economy. They engaged in import and export trade, inagriculture, in many branches of crafts and in lending. TheJews made wine and liquor. Jewish artísans were organizedinto trade guilds. The guilds of shochets, butchers and animaltraders were established by an order of 1652. These artisans118LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESlived in their own quarter of the city, as they were notpermitted in the other areas.The relationship between the artisans and the Jewishcommunity leaders of the city is illustrated by the followingstory from the records of the artisans.On a Sunday of Rosh Hashanah, a tailor came to thesynagogue wearing a velvet Idppa (skullcap). The communityleaders sat in the Mizrach, the east wall of the synagogue,where only they had the right to wear velvet kippot. At theend of the Holiday, the tailor was called to the congregationaloífice and issued a fine. Further, he was instructed to turnover his velvet kippa. The fine was considered a great insultby the craítsmen who were organized into guilds. On the firstday of Sukkot, all the artisans appeared wearing velvetkippot, shtremels and sashes, exactly like the communityleaders from the Mizrach. They came dressed the same wayon the second day. The next day all the craftsmen werearrested by the men of Count Chopsky. The craftsmen unitedin a war against the heads of the congregation and tumed tothe Russian authorities. But the heads of the congregationwere able to prevent the matter from coming to court. Thestruggle continued for years and cost both sides thousands ofrubles.In the end, the community leaders conceded that: (1) Itwas the right of the aitisans and any other Jew to wear thekippa and costume; (2) In every hearing between communityleaders and artisans, a dayan from the artisans’ side would beincluded; (3) In the office of the congregation there would bea place for a representative of the artisans.As a result of this struggle, a kloiz was founded, calledKloiz Chayei Adam of the Artisans, with their own dayan.He gave the lesson in Chayei Adam and on Shabbat wouldreview the portion of the week.The Chmielniki Massacres of 1648 and 1649 did notdirectly affect the Jews of Keidan. However, like otherTHE COMMUNITIES119communities in Lithuania, they sent aid to those injured inthe pogroms.In Sabbatai Sevi by Gershon Scholem, reference is madeconceming an exchange of letters in 1666 "between rabbinicscholars and kabbalists, R. Sevi Hirsh Horovitz, rabbi of thethree districts of Zamot (Kaidan, Vizon, and Bierz) andsubsequently of Zablodov, and R. Isaac b. Abraham, therabbi of Vilna and subsequently of Posen" (at p. 598).In 1656-7, the war between the Swedes, led by Karl-Gustav, and Poland harmed the Jews. Many fled to Koenigs-berg in Prussia. In 1657 the Black Plague claimed manycasualties among the Jews.In 1658, the Jewish community began to retum tonormal. A pharmacy was established, the first in Lithuania.In 1659, the first bridge was built on the Neviazha River.The collection of fees for crossing the bridge was farmed bythe Prince to Jews. Prince Bogoslav Radzivill in 1665 leasedhis palace and its eamings to Volf Itzikovitz, which gave himthe right to judge the residents of Keidan and to levy fines.After the peace of 1667, the Ukraine passed to theRussians. Many Jews, for whom the memory of the Chmiel-niki massacres was still fresh, fled to Lithuania. Some settledin Keidan.In 1681 a large fire in the city destroyed many homes.In the beginning of the eighteenth century, both theRussian and the Swedish armies passed through the city anddestroyed it. The Radzivill Palace was destroyed. The Jewishcommunity became impoverished and had to borrow ffomPolish landowners to cover ever-increasing expenses. TheJews were not able to repay their debts, and creditors resortedto force. One of them, Squire Gorsky, one Shabbat sealed thedoor of the synagogue shut while the Jews were insidepraying. He reftised to release them until they made payment.These bad days passed. The Jews of Keidan succeeded inmaking an economic recovery. By 1721 the amount of120LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEShead-tax paid to the State Treasury by the Jews of Keidanwas only exceeded by the communities of Brisk and Grodno,with lesser amounts paid by Pinsk, Minsk and Vilna.In this period, the city sent representatives to the Jewish"Council of the Land of Lithuania." Afiter the Council wasabolished in 1764, representatives from the communities inLithuania met in the city in 1778 and in 1782. The decisionsof the latter meeting were confirmed by the head of theBeit-Din of Brisk.The "Kahal" in Keidan administered the head-tax for theState Treasury and the community (kehilla) taxes for thedistrict. In 1766, there were 501 Jews on the poll-tax rolls.A regulation of the Council of Slutzk in 1791 stated thatall Jewish residents on the right-bank of the Nieman River,including Slobodka (Vilijampole) came under the KeidanKehilla in matters of the rabbi, cantor and beadle or otherlaws. Thus, the following locations belonged to the region ofthe Keidan Kehilla: Yurburg, Plungian, Rasin, Polangen,Kelme, Krozh, Shavli, Shkud, Telz and Ritova. At the headof the region were the rabbis of the KatzenellenbogenFamily, which for 3 generations occupied the seat of therabbinate in the city.Keidan served as a center of Torah learning. Its yeshivasand cheders were known throughout Lithuania. R. Yosef ofKobrin, a teacher from Keidan, wrote 'Selichot" in 1698 inmemory of the Jews persecuted in various countries. It wasread in the kehillot of Lithuania and Zhamot.The Shas Society held a respected place in the city. Theirend-of-the-year celebrations were famous. Other societies,including Chevra Kadisha (burial society), would also arrangemitzvah-banquets. Only members took part and they wouldhave pantomimes and plays. An accounting of expenses forone banquet in 5443/1683 is recorded in the pinkas (recordbook) of the Chevra Kadisha.THE COMMUNITIES121Atthe time of Shabbatai-Zvi, R. David Katzenellenbogenwas the rabbi of the city and head of the region. He and hisson Avraham, the Rabbi of Brisk, concemed that the study ofXabbalah would become widespread in Lithuania, establishedthe regulation that forbade the study of the Zohar before theage of 40.R. Avraham Ratzenellenbogen in 1727 brought a 6 yearold boy from Vilna, who had astonished all the rabbis withhis talents and abilities. R. David Ratzenellenbogen devotedhimself to the education of the boy, who later became knownas the Gaon R. Eliyahu of Vilna, The Vilna Gaon. The VilnaGaon’s wife came from Keidan.In 1784, the congregation began to build a large syna-gogue and a beit midrash. The holy ark took up a third of theeastem wall, the Mizrach, and was a work of art. It wascompleted in 1807. On the gate in front of the synagogue wasa sundial with Hebrew letters. To the right was the congrega-tional office, the "shtibl,’’ which served as an office forcommunity leaders. The "Kuna," a place for detention ofcriminals, was also there.The leader in establishing the synagogue and the beitmidrash was R. Avraham Ably, son of Yehoshua Ram. Hisname was put on a parchment scroll and placed in one of thepiliars of the holy ark.In 1795, after the Third Partition, Lithuania and Zhamotwent to Russia. The legal status of the Jews of Lithuaniachanged. The rights given them by former govemors werecancelled. Under Czar Alexander I, the Jewish tenant-farmerswere expelled from the villages in 1804. They arrived in thecities with absolutely nothing. Some settled in Keidan andbecame shopkeepers or opened tavems. Some grew vegeta-bles and fruits.During the Polish Revolutions of 1831 and 1863, manyPolish rebels concentrated near the town. Count Chopsky,head of the town, was very active in the rebellion. After the122LfTHUANlAN JEWISH COMMUNJTIESvictory over the rebels, the Russians confiscated his castleand his large library and sold them to Count Tutleben. ThePolish high school was closed and its buildings were turnedinto barracks for the Russian Army. In place of the highschool, a Russian elementary school was opened with 3grades. There began a period of Russification.The Russian garrison served as a source of income forcraftsmen and shopkeepers. The Libau-Rumanian rail line,which was laid by the Russians, passed near the city andhelped strengthen the trade connection with Russia. Theeconomic situation improved and advanced. The children ofwell-to-do families went to Russian schools. Count Tutlebenrepaired the palace which he had purchased. He also builtflour mills and leased them to Jews. He had a good relation-ship with the Jews. In 1847, the number of Jews in the cityreached 4987.When Alexander III came to power, a wave of pogromsagainst Russian Jews occurred. But the Jews of Lithuaniaunder the rule of General-Gubernator Count Tutleben werenot seriously affected. The situation deteriorated, however,after the death of the Count.The emigration of masses of Russian Jews to the UnitedStates and England during the 1890’s saw the uprooting ofmany Jews from Keidan. The majority of the emigrants werefrom poorer families and were largely the artisans. They wereescaping the decades-long draft into the Czar’s Army. Thesize of the Jewish community decreased. In 1897 there wereonly 3733, 64% of the general population.In the 1880’s, the Talmud-Torah was converted into amodem school, in which religious subjects as well as Russianand secular subjects were taught. There were also a numberof cheders.In the early years of the twentieth century, Jewish youthin Lithuania were collecting poems and songs of the JewishPeople. In a collection edited by Ginzburg and Marick, 376124LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESof nearby estates. Many Jews also grew sugarbeets andfodder for their cows. Farm products, including wheat, eggs,apples, and clover seeds, were exported in sizable quantitiesto England, Germany and the Scandinavian countries. Twoflour mills belonged to Jews. There was also the printingcompany, Movshovitz-Cohen & Associate.During the fírst years of Lithuanian independence, tradeexpanded and the Jews prospered. But as the country becamemore established, Lithuanian merchants began to push out theJews. The Lithuanian cooperatives, supported by the govem-ment, reduced the territory of Jewish merchants. A numberof Jews sought to remain in business, but many were forcedto emigrate.Some of the youth aspired to aliyah and devoted them-selves to agricultural training and pioneering.During Independent Lithuania, there was a yeshiva, aTarbut School run by A. Pritz and a Yavneh School, whereinstruction was in Hebrew. A high school with 100 studentswas mn by D. Rishman and Kizel. Among the teachers wereY. Klatzko, Zvi Rosenzweig, Cohen, Trekman. At theinitiative of R. Shlomo Feinsilver*, a "Beit-Talmud," servingas a preparatory school for yeshiva was founded. There werealso libraries mn by various parties. The Movshovitz printinghouse published a number of religious and secular books.They printed the last Hebrew book in Lithuania in 1940.The Zionist movement in Keidan had roots from the daysof Hibbat Zion (1882). Moshe-Leib Lilienblum, bom inKeidan, was one of the foremnners of the movement inRussia. From its inception, the Zionist movement founddevotees and supporters in Keidan.During Independent Lithuania, Zionism caught on amongthe Jews of the city, the youth and the teachers of theHebrew Schools. In 1922 Plodnogy, next to Keidan, wasfounded as a training farm mn by Shabtiel Dvitsh. It offeredthe fírst pioneering training in Lithuania.THE COMMUNITIES125The youth were mainly in Hashomer Hatzair, Gordoniaand Betar. Many made aliyah. There were branches of theLabor Federation General Zionists, Mizrahi, Socialist Zionist,Revisionists and other parties. Among the activist workerswere Zondel Ginzburg, Zvi Traub, Haim-Beryl Srolov,Sholom Chayat, Zev Tober, Yosef Velpert and HannahLandsberg.Keidan was captured by the Nazis in 1941. In one day,the 5th of Elul 5701 (August 28, 1941), with the help ofLithuanians, the entire Jewish community was wiped out - acommunity which had been there for 500 years. The Jewishpopulation prior to the Holocaust was approximately 3000.From the rabbinate: R. Hillel, of Beit Hillel; R. AlekimGetz; R. Shaul bar Heshil; R. Zvi-Hirsh Halevy; R. Yehez-kiel Katzenellenbogen; R. David Katzenellenbogen; R.Meshulem-Zalmen Katzenellenbogen [5519-5530/1759-1770]; R. Menahem-Nahum Katzenellenbogen [5530-5539/1770-1779]; R. Moshe-Mordechai Katzenellenbogen [5542-5555/1782-1795]; R. Moshe Margaliot; R. Hillel Bishke; R.Yom-Tov-Lipman Hilperin [5601-5607/1841-1847]; R.Avraham-Shimon Troip [5612-5636/1852-1876]; R. ZalmanTroip; R. Avraham-Zvi Komai [up to 5675/1915]; and thelast rabbi, R. Shlomo Feinsilver*.Natives: R. Aaron-Zalman Dat; the brothers Yehiel,Yehoshua and Meir Heller; Zemach Zakesh; Avraham-Shimon Troib and his son Zalman; Avraham-Ever and hisson Yehuda-Leib Yaffe; Moshe Margaliot; Natan bar Moshe,grandson of R. Raphael [head of the beit din]; Aaron-ShmuelKeidanover; Avraham-Eliahu Kaplan; Meir-Michel Rabino-vitz; Moshe Rabinovitz; Shmuel Rappaport; Haim Plansberg;Dr. Yosef Smilg [historian]; Aaron Einhorn [joumalist];Yosef Einhom [agronomist]; Hirsh Blaustein [poet]; ShneurZakesh [researcher and writer]; Yisrael-Michel Troib [writ-er]; M.L. Lilienblum [writer]; Dr. Aaron Pik [physician andwriter]; Moshe Prozer [maskil]; Dov-Gershon Richards126LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES(Keidansky) [writer]; Benjamin Shelsinger [labor leader];Benjamin-Eliahu Ramigolsky [scholar and researcher];Arye-Moshe Keidansky [scholar and philanthropist]; ShmuelShelpoversky [Zionist leader]; David Velpa [editor and poet];Haim Cohen [official in the city of Kovno and activist in theZionist organizations. He made aliyah to Israel in 1948. Hewas active in the Association of Jews ffom Lithuania in Israeland was on the editorial committee for Yehadut Lita; he diedin 5728/1968]. Esther-Chema Yaffa* [activist in the Yiddi-shist movement in Kovno]; and Isaac Levitan [landscapepainter; bom 1860].Additional references:Keidan: Memorial Book, edited by Josef Chmst, published byKeidan Associations in Israel, So. Africa and U.S.A.,Tel-Aviv, 1977. Includes an essay in English by BemardRichards, which tells a lovely story of his recollectionsof his life as a young boy growing up in Keidan, alongwith some background about the town itself. Also dis-cusses the Keidaner Associations in the U.S., So. Africaand Israel and their assistance to the Jews in Keidan afterWorld War I.Photo of the wooden synagogue of Keidan, in EncyclopediaJudaica, vol. 11, p. 864.KELME (KELME) - Rasin District B2Kelme is located near Shukian (13 miles), Rasin (30),Nemoksht (15), Tzitovian (12) and Krozh (11). It is on theRrazhianta River.The origin of the name Kelme is in the Zhmodi-Lithua-nian language, meaning "tree trunk." There was a traditionthat in the distant past a Polish squire cut down trees,uprooted tmnks and built the city of "Kelmy."The Riga-Tilsit Road cut through the center of the townand was the main street. The well-to-do built homes on bothTHE COMMUNJTIES127sides of this street. Side streets branched off the main road.Two streets went off to the southeast; between them were twolong rows of small shops which made up the central retailcommercial district. Most of the shops were operated byJewish women who were making a living for their familieswhile their husbands studied Torah.Market day was on Thursday. On market day and duringfairs, farmers ífom the surrounding area came to sell theircrops. Crowds would fill the central square and surroundingstreets and alleys.It is estimated that the Jewish community was foundedover 300 years ago. However, data on the Jews exists onlyfrom the nineteenth century. In 1847 there were 759 Jews inthe town; in 1897 - 2710, 69% of the general population; in1923 - between 1460 and 1600 Jews. In 1940 there wereabout 2000 Jews in the community. The rest of the popula-tion included Lithuanians and Poles. Each group lived in itsown neighborhood.Kelme was a prosperous town, even rich according toLithuanian standards. Trade developed in grain, flax, seeds,animals and bristles. In addition, there was a small industryin tanning and processing bristles for brushes, and there were2 flour mills. Wholesale trading houses were concentrated onthe main road. Groceiy products were supplied by the 2 largetrade houses of Zalman Ziv and Raphael Greenberg. From1886, wholesale textile trade was controlled by Abraham-Moshe Horvitz.The 3 businessmen, Greenberg, Ziv and Horvitz, wereífom 3 separate movements that divided the Jewish communi-ty. Raphael Greenberg was in the Musar Movement andinvolved with its yeshiva. Zalman Ziv belonged to theGerman Haskalah Movement. Moshe Horvitz was a Zionist.The yeshiva of the Musar Movement, called "The GreatTalmud Torah," was founded by Simcha Zissel in the secondhalf of the nineteenth century. The Musar People lived a128LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEScommunal life, closed and separated. They did not take partin the community life of the town. Social contact with otherpeople almost never took place. Most marriages werearranged within their own group. In the years just prior to theHolocaust, the spiritual leader of the Musamiks was DanielMovshovitz, who was married to the granddaughter ofSimcha Zissel. He was distinguished in Torah as well assecular philosophical literature and was considered both agenius and a gentleman.Besides the Musar yeshiva, there was the Great Yeshivaheaded by distinguished scholars. It was filled with youngmen from the town, from nearby towns and from far away.The beit midrash buildings were concentrated in thecourtyard of the synagogue (shulhoif). The shulhoif wassurrounded by a green wooden fence with 2 large gates andsmall openings. Originally, the large gates were opened onlyon Shabbat and Holidays. In time, they stopped closing thegates. The fence also broke open in several places. Inside theyard stood the old synagogue, "de shul," a wooden buildingof outstanding beauty. The holy ark was a work of art,decorated with carvings of flowers, trees and various animals.Beside the old synagogue stood the large beit midrash andsome distance from it the small beit midrash and the kloiz.After prayers, these buildings served as dormitories for theyeshiva boys. The synagogue also served as a chupa.In addition to the large and important Shas Society, therewere Chayai Adam, Mishnayot, Ein Yakov, and Midrasha.The artisans and workers used to come regularly after theirworkday for a lesson in Ein Yakov and Menorat Hamaor.Among the Jewish public institutions was a school calledTalmud Torah (Little Talmud-Torah) to differentiate it ffornthe yeshiva of the Musamiks which was called the BigTalmud-Torah, the societies of Malbish Irumim, LinatHazedek and Gemach (loan fund).THE COMMUNITIES129In the last generation, Kelme had several unique figures.R. Zelig Tarshish (R. "Zeligel") was always wrapped in atalit and adomed with tefillin. Day and night he would study.He was so engrossed in Talmud that he did not relate to theneeds of his household. His appearance in the streets in histalit and tefillin would arouse curiosity. When he was askedone day why he behaved this way, he answered simply: it’smy insignia." The Maggid of Kelme, Moses YitzhaJk Darso-an, was very popular. No less famous was R. Leib Zeigler,known by the name "Leib Hasid."When Lithuania gained independence, the set pattem oflife changed. The Lithuanians undermined the economicposition of the Jews. They opened their own bank, set up acooperative for marketing their products and made an effortto evict the Jews from trade. The Jews struggled and foughtback. They opened new businesses, such as moving andtransporting with vehicles. The Jews had 20 vehicles. Alltransporting to and from the town was in the hands of theJews. But the previous economic security disappeared.In the period of autonomy, Kelme was one of the firstplaces to establish a Hebrew School which later became apro-gymnasia. There was a Hebrew kindergarten and aYavneh School where haredi girls received an education.Hebrew was the spoken language of most of the youth. Thespirit of Zionism was quite strong in the town.Ideological splits were apparent. Representatives of allparties from the right to the far left were present. However,even the youth involved in Zionist activities maintained tradi-tional Judaism, attending synagogue and studying in yeshivas.From the rabbinate: R. Eliezer Gutman, R. Yehezkiel,R. Elikim Getzil Halevy Horvitz [died 5633/1873; was called"Shulchan Amch" because he was fluent in all four parts ofthe Shulchan Amch]; R. Eliezer Gordon [5634-5643/1874-1883; later rabbi in Telz]; R. Zvi-Yakov Oppenheim [whoserved as rabbi for 43 years, from 5644/1884 until his death130LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESin the year 5686/1926]; and the last rabbi, R. KalmanBienoshevitz* [related by marriage to R. Zvi-Yakov]; R.Yitzhak Meltzan [made aliyah to Eretz Yisrael and settled inJerusalem]; R. Eliahu-Bar Lizerovitz; R. Shmuel Kelmar; R.Simcha-Zissel Ziv and his son R. Nahum-Zeev; R. Neta-ZviFinkel; R. Zvi-Hirsh Broude; R. Eliahu Lupian.Natives: R. Arye-Leib Frumkin; R. Shmuel-YakovRabinovitz [the rabbi firom Sopotzkin]; R. Elikim Goldberg[rabbi and physician; doctor in Israel and later in the U.S.];Eliezer-Eliahu Friedman [a Zionist leader]; Shifra Weiss,Zebulun Levine and Aaron (Adolf) Courland [writers].Additional reference:Chapter on the Kelmer Maggid in A.S. Sachs, Worlds ThatPassed, 1928. Although the Kelmer Maggid was "lam-pooned and derided so mercilessly by the poet Gordon,[the Kelmer Maggid] certainly was one of the mosttalented men produced in the Lithuanian Ghetto in thecourse of the nineteenth century. For 2 generations hemade the rounds of all the cities and towns in Lithuania."KENA (KENA) E3Kena is a town 15 miles east of Vilna along the rail lineto Minsk.From the rabbinate: R. Eliahu-Gershon Halprin [1864-1941; later in Lishkova and Vilna].KIBART (KYBARTAI) - Vilkovishk District C3Kibart is opposite the German town of Eidkonin (Evdtku-hen), on the Laipona River, which was the border. In itstime, it served as a well-known border-station between Russiaand Germany, and later between Lithuania and Germany.Most of the trade of Lithuania with Germany passed throughit, and it was an important trade center, especially in fabrics.THE COMMUNITIES131In 1897, the Jewish population was 533, 50% of the totalpopulation.Before World War I, about 200 Jewish families livedthere. At the beginning of the War, the Jewish residents left,and the retreating Russian Army bumed down the town.Upon the establishment of Independent Lithuania, the townwas rebuilt. In 1923, 1253 Jews lived there, 20% of thegeneral population.The Jews engaged mainly in trade, although there werealso some estate owners, including David Shtenstein. Manyhad small vegetable gardens. Two bed-linen factories wereowned by Jews.The Jewish Peoples Bank, administered by BenzionBrodny, had 150 members in 1929.There was a Tarbut kindergarten and a Tarbut elementaryschool with 150 pupils enrolled.For many years, the rabbi of Virbaln also served theJews of Kibart, and they used the same cemetery. By the endof the 1920’s, the community had its own rabbinate.From the rabbinate: R. Baruch-Nahum Ginzburg'; andthe last rabbi, R. M. Rabinovitz [died in 1940].Public figures: Vidomlinsky, Meir Libovitz, BenzionBrodny, M. Segal and Tuvia Sharshavsky.Native: Shimon Goldberg [Zionist figure].KLIKUL (KLYKOLIAI) - Mazhaik District B1Klikul is near Akmian (9 miles), Vekshna (18), Laya-zhova (15), Veger (6) and Pikeln (21). It was a border-townon the Vadaksta River, separating Latvia and Lithuania. Thenearest train station was in Dabikina, 12 miles away.Before World War I, about 600 Jews lived there. Mostwere peddlers, going out to neighboring villages on Sundayand not retuming home until Sabbath eve. In the town therewere also well-to-do Jews, who were businessmen and horsetraders with contacts in Libau and Riga. The Gabronsky132LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESfamily was prominent. It spread out to Russia, the UnitedStates and South Africa.In 1915, the Jews were exiled into inner-Russia. All theirproperty was stolen. The town tumed into a battlefield. In1918, the Jews began retuming. They found their homes inthe hands of strangers, but arrangements were made for theirrestoration. The number of retumees did not exceed 40 fami-lies.Almost immediately, the town again became a battlefieldbetween the Germans and the Lithuanians. The latter wereespecially cmel to the Jews, tuming the synagogue into abam, desecrating the Jewish cemetery and stealing theirremaining property. Upon the withdrawal of the Lithuanians,the Jews of Klikul again began repairing their homes andreestablishing a community life. Leading the activity wasShlomo Goldblatt. With the help of relatives abroad and theaid of Jewish support organizations, the Jews succeeded inrebuilding their destroyed buildings.By 1925, the life of the town retumed to its regularroutine. The Jews went back to working in trade and crafts.The period of stability was short-lived. Anti-Semitismbecame rampant in Lithuania, with the elimination ofautonomous Jewish institutions. The economic base of theJews was undermined. This all created a mood of "leaving."In particular, the youth saw no future there and emigrated.Most went to South Afirica, while some went to the UnitedStates. Within a matter of a few years, the community wasemptied of young people. At the time of the Holocaust, thenumber had declined to 30 people.Klikul had no school. Those who could sent theirchildren to study in nearby towns. Melameds were broughtfirom elsewhere to teach the small children. They weresupported by one of the families and received a monthlysalary.THE COMMUNTUES133From the rabbinate: R. Eliahu [Head of the Beit Din ofKlikul. It was said that the Vilna Gaon was fond of him]; R.Moshe [5576-5657/1816-1896, served as rabbi for 46 years[;R. Yitzhak-Reuven bar Moshe [afterwards was rabbi in Riga;died in 5675/1915; author of "Sadeh Yitzhakn[; his son R.Abba; R. Yakov Katz [an educator in Slobodka and Kelme,a teacher and rabbi at the yeshiva of R. Hirshel in Slobodka,and the mashgiach in the Telz Yeshiva. During World WarI, he was rabbi and teacher in Homel and later in Old-Zha-ger. He died on Yom Kippur, 5693/1933]; R. Aaron-AbbaRabinovitz [5661/1901].Natives: Dr. Benzion Shein [doctor and Zionist leader inCapetown].KLOVIAN (KLOVAINIAI) - Shavli District C2Klovian was a village near Pokroi (5 miles) and Rozalia(4) in northern Lithuania.In 1923, there were 21 Jews living there. At the time ofthe Holocaust, there were only a few Jewish families livingthere.KOKTISHKA (KUKTISKES) - Utian DistrictKoktishka was a small town in eastem Lithuania, nearTargin (6 miles) and Utian (8) [E2]. In 1923, 172 Jews livedthere. The population declined and about 25 Jewish familieslived there at the time of the Holocaust.KOLATOVA (KULAUTOVA) - Kovno District C3Kolatova is near Kovno (13 miles). It was a vacation spoton the banks of the Nieman River in pine forests.Before World War I, there was no permanent Jewishsettlement. Only during the summer did hundreds of Jewishfamilies come from Kovno and the surrounding area.In the 1930’s, a permanent Jewish community wasestablished with 16 families. They made their living from134LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESservicing the summer vacationers and from their smallvegetable gardens.The children went to school in Kovno or in Vilki.ROMIAN D1Komian was a village near Salat (5 miles). It had aJewish community before World War I.KOOL (KULIAI) - Rretinga Distríct A2Kool is near Gorzhd (11 miles), Ritova (15) and Plun-gian (10). The land that the town is on was once an estatebelonging to a Catholic priest.In 1897, 181 Jews, 28% of the general population, livedthere, and in 1921 - about 100. Before World War II, about20 Jewish families lived there.The Jews were shopkeepers, innkeepers, and wood sales-men. Most of them lived in poverty. Every family had itsown cow, vegetable garden and well. Some had fields nearthe town. There were basically no artisans among them,except for 2 shoemakers and a tailor.This small town had a rabbi, a shochet and melamed forthe little children. Because of the small number of school-aged children, they did not have a school in the town. Theboys went to the Lithuanian school and in the aftemoonleamed Bible and Hebrew at a cheder. The older childrenwent to a yeshiva or to a school in Plungian. There was noJewish cemetery there, so burials were held in Plungian.From the rabbinate: R. Spitz; R. Moshe Yom-TovVechtopogel [served as rabbi in Kool and later went toMontreal]; the last rabbi, R. David-Gershon Rubinstein*.Natives: R. Haim-Yosef Vechtpogel; Levy Spitz*; R.Yosef-Shlomo Kahanaman.THE COMMUNITIES135KOPCHEVA (KAPCIAM1EST1S) - Sieni Distríct C3Kopcheva is near Vishay (7 railes), Laipoon (11), Serhai(22) and Lazdai (24). The nearest rail station was in Krasni.It is located in forests between two Ancheya Rivers, theWhite and the Black, near the Nieman River, and some largelakes; it is on the road heading out of Lithuania by thesouthern border.At the end of the nineteenth century, there was a bigfactory for reaping machines, iron hinges, nails and otheriron products in the town. During Lithuania’s independence,50 Jewish families lived there and their occupations weremainly in crafts and trade. Three families eamed their livingin farming, but almost every family had a small vegetablegarden and some fruit trees for their own use. There were afew big wood merchants. There were 2 flour mills, analcohol factory, and 2 factories for iron products owned byJews.In its cheders both Gemorah and Hebrew language weretaught. During Independent Lithuania, there was a HebrewSchool and next to it a library and dramatics club. The youthparticipated in Zionist associations, including the Pioneermovement.Before the Holocaust, about 45 Jewish families (190individuals) lived there.From the rabbinate: R. Zvi Direktor; R. Abraham-ZviPinhas-Aliasberg; R. Zvi-Arye Luria (until 5673/1913]; R.Meir Stolavitz [5673-4/1913-4]; and the last rabbi, R.Menahem-Mendel Sahr.Natives: Elhanan (Edward) D. Kelman [1891-1939;historian]; B.Z. Shimshilevitz [scholar and wood merchant].KOPLITZA - Keidan Distríct D2Koplitza was near Zhaim (9 miles) in Keidan District.There was once a Jewish community there.136LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESKOVARSK (KOVARSKAS) - Vilkomir Distríct D2Kovarsk is near Tavian (5 miles), Kurkali (6), Aniksht(10), Trashkun (13), Vilkomir (15) and Traip (7).Before World War I, 200 Jewish families lived there. In1915, the Jews were expelled to Russia. More than half ofthe town bumed down. In 1921, about 100 Jewish families(350 people) lived there. Before the outbreak of the Holo-caust, there were more than 100 Jewish families.The Jews were engaged in trade, crafts, and peddling.Their main income was eamed on market day, each Monday,and from the 4 fairs held during the year. Many emigrated toSouth Africa, and a few went to Palestine.The town had a beit midrash and a shtibl. Sixty pupilsstudied at the town’s Yavneh school.From the rabbinate: R. Yakov [5646/1886]; R. YosefKanovitz, [son-in-law of the "Ridbaz"]; R. Haim Rodnei[5670/1910]; R. Dov Shnitzer [the martyred]; R. DovSukmansky*.Native: Eliezer Hyman' [writer].KOVILON D1Kovilon is a village near Salat (2 miles). It had a Jewishpopulation before World War I.KOVNO (KAUNAS) - District City C3Kovno lies in the narrow Nieman River valley where theNieman and Vilia Rivers meet. Across the Nieman is thesuburb of Aleksot, and across the Vilia is the town ofSlobodka.The Lithuanian Prince Koinas established the fortress ofKovno, named after him, in 1030. It was next mentioned in1280. Between 1280 and 1410, it was on the front line in thebattles between the Lithuanians and the Teutonic Knights andwas destroyed 13 times. The victory at Grundwald in 1410THE COMMUNITIES137ended the threat from the Teutonic Knights and marked thebeginning of the city’s development.During the reign of Grand Duke Vitovt in the fifteenthcentury, the first Jews, who were traders from the Ukraineand Poland, came to Kovno and resided there temporarily.Some Jewish families tried to remain but were banned.The first Jewish settlers came from Troki, which issituated along the Vilna-Kovno trade route. According to theLithuanian Metrica, one of the first settlers was Daniel ofTroki, who leased the Customs station in Kovno firom1450-1470. His son Zev had a large home and ownedproperty, which included a hill later known as Mt. Napoleon.This hill was once called The Mountain of the Jews ("JidoKelnis"). Although officially it was forbidden for Jews tosettle in Kovno, Daniel of Troki and his sons had specialrights firom the king. King Casimir arranged permission fromthe Teutonic Order for Zev to visit Danzig and any otherplaces in Prussia on matters of business.The Jews of Kovno were persecuted by city authoritiesand at times were forced to flee the city. They found refugein the nearby Jewish community of Slobodka. When dangerlessened, they filtered back to Kovno, which was the tradingcenter. This process continued for several hundred years.In 1492, Grand Duke Alexander issued a "Kovno Expul-sion" order. The District Governor at the time was AvrahamYozipovitz, a converted Jew who later was the TreasuryMinister of Lithuania. He assisted the Jews in their efforts toremain.The situation changed under King Sigmund I (1507-1548), who encouraged trade and craftsmanship. During hisreign Jewish tradesmen came to the city in unlimited num-bers. Christian merchants in the city needed Jewish appraiserswho were authorized to evaluate export products, such aslumber and produce, in order to set customs fees on exportgoods bound for Prussia. Documents dated 1528 mention138LTTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAharon Nahumovitz, a Jewish customs agent for wax andsalt.Nevertheless, the municipal officials still insisted thatJews be prohibited from living in Kovno, and most Jewswere forced to live in Slobodka.During the reign of Sigmund-Augustus, Jews from otherprofessions received residence permits for Kovno. Metricarecords of Lithuania mention a Jewish pharmacist named R.David. A legal case from October 1559 mentions a MosheYakemovitz Melochovitz. A physician named Dr. Todras wasalso noted.In 1558, a Jew named David Smarlovitz from Briskreceived the concession for tax collection on wax and salt fora 3 year period.The Jewish community of Kovno remained small formany years, without a rabbi or a synagogue. Each time theJewish settlement began to grow, the municipality found newways to halt it. They forbade Jews from appearing in themarketplace and closed them off on Yanova Street as aghetto. In 1601, King Sigmund III decreed severe limitationsof rights for the Jews of Kovno.In 1682, the Jews were expelled from Kovno. Followingextended negotiations, the municipality agreed to permit theJews to return, on the condition that they pay one-fifteenth oftheir income to the city. This agreement finally allowed aJewish community to develop. They built a beit midrash and,at the beginning of the eighteenth century, the rabbi, R.Ezriel, served as a religious judge for the Jews of Kovno.The head of the religious court was in Slobodka.Under the Jewish Council of Lithuania, the small Jewishcommunity of Kovno was placed in the Grodno Region,while Slobodka was in the Keidan Region.In 1753, it was leamed that the Jews had lost thedocuments giving them the right to reside in the city. Themunicipality obtained their expulsion and the confiscation ofTHE COMMUNITIES139their property, based on an old edict of the Polish ldng thatforbade Jews from living in the city. Some Jews moved toSlobodka and others relocated elsewhere.When Jews again appeared in the marketplace in Kovnoin 1761, pogroms broke out. Homes were bumed and the lastremaining Jews were expelled to Slobodka. Mayor Prozer ofKovno tried to have the Jews expelled from Slobodka as well,but failed.R. Moshe Soloveichik of Slobodka and his brotherAvraham brought legal proceedings against the Mayor. Thetrial took place in Warsaw. The Jews were supported by theRadziwill family of Keidan, members of tfie Lithuaniannobility. In 1782, a judgment was issued against the munici-pality of Kovno. They were ordered to pay damages and legalexpenses to the Jewish victims of the pogroms. Mayor Prozerwas sentenced to 2 weeks imprisonment. The Jews retumedto the city and were given back their property. In memory ofthe event, R. Shmuel Hakatan from Vilna wrote "MegillatKovno" (1 Adar II 5543/1783), which was read on ShushanPurim in the old beit midrash. One of those who retumedwas Abba Soloveichik.In 1795, Lithuania was taken over by Russia and becamea border city with Germany. The following year Kovnobecame a District Capital in the Vilna Region.The hatred of Jews did not diminish. In 1797, Czar PaulI was approached and asked to enforce the old laws thatwould expel the Jews. The Czar ordered an investigation. Onthe recommendation of the Minister of the Region, the Czarordered that the Jews be left alone and be permitted tocontinue their businesses.The Jewish population was approximately 1508. Theyhad a beit midrash ("The Old Beit Midrash"), but could notsupport a rabbi. The Kovno Jews paid a fee to the Slobodlcacommunity for Jewish communal services.140LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESOn June 2, 1812, Napoleon’s army crossed the NiemanRiver near Aleksot. The Jews suffered under French occupa-tion. When the Russians retumed, the Jews brought out Torahscrolls and welcomed them with bread and salt.Diuing the reign of Czar Nicholas I (1825-1855), newrestrictions were instituted against the Jews. They werepermitted to build only in the suburbs. It was during thisperiod that Jewish children were being kidnapped into theRussian Army.After the failure of the Polish Rebellion of 1831,relationships between the Russian administration and theLithuanian Jewish community improved. Although the oldrestrictions remained on the books, Jews were permitted tolive in all parts of the city. In 1839, Jews received the rightto be elected to the city council. Zvi (Hirshel) Neviazher, acommunity leader, worked very hard to ease the edicts.After Czar Alexander II ascended the Russian throne, allrestrictions against the Jews of Kovno were eliminated.In 1842, Kovno became the Regional Capital although itwas only a small town. The city began to develop rapidly.Moses Montefiore visited the city with his wife and son.He stayed at the home of R. Shimon Kerkal and visitedSlobodka. He met with the Minister of the Region.In 1847, the Jewish population in Kovno was 2013 andin Slobodka 4986. In 1864, the combined population was16,540, and in 1897 - 25,448, 36% of the general popula-tion. During this period Jews were leaving the villages andthe small towns and moving to urban centers.In 1862, the Kovno community established a ChevraKadisha and purchased a large plot of land on "GreenMountain" for a cemetery. Until then, they had used thecemetery in Slobodka.By 1864, there were 19 Jewish prayer houses in the citybesides the Old Beit Midrash. A Talmud Torah was built withan enrollment of 300-400 students and 6 or 7 teachers.THE COMMUNJTIES141In 1875, Tanchiel Levinsohn and Zev Frumkin foundeda 400-bed hospital, which annually treated 4000 patients.Hirsch Neviazher was a particularly hard worker in organi-zing the hospital. In 1862, a Somekh Noflim Society (assis-tance to the unfortunate) was founded by Zvi Shapir and R.Yitzhak-Zev Soloveichik (father of R. Yosef-Dov, rabbi ofBrisk). By the end of the century, there was also an old-agehome and an orphanage.R. Yitzhak-Elhanan Spektor (The Kovner Rav) was theKovno rabbi from 1864 to 1896. R. Yitzhak-Elhanan was awell-known Torah authority and tumed the city into a majorrabbinical center. In 1875 he placed a ban on etrogs fromCorfu in response to the pogroms there.R. Yitzhak-Elhanan established a secretariat, headed byR. Yakov Lipschitz, who headed the struggle against Hask-alah and later against Hovevei Zion and the Zionists. Maskiljournalists later called the secretariat the "Black Bureau."The maskilim established a synagogue, Ohel Yakov, inthe Mapu School. It was later moved into its own building onUshishlco Street.R. Yitzhak~Elhanan also opposed the Musar Movement.R. Yisrael Salanter, the founder of the Musar Movement,moved to Slobodka and with R. Natan-Zvi Finkel founded aMusar yeshiva. Ten years later another yeshiva was estab-lished in Slobodlca, called Knesset Beit-Yitzhak after R.Yitzhak-Elhanan Spektor, with the aim of weakening theMusar Movement.In the second half of the nineteenth century, economicconditions in the Jewish community improved. The portion ofthe Petersburg-Warsaw Road passing through Kovno openedin the 1850’s. In 1863, a rail line was laid to the Germanborder. A large fortress system providing work was beingbuilt near the city and continued until the outbreak of WorldWar I. In this period the city had a middle class. The Jewish142LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESpopulation grew and spread into new parts of the city, suchas Shantzy and Carmelita.In 1887, there were 5479 Jewish artisans, 1143 assistantsto artisans and 776 apprentices. Included in this number were445 tailors and seamstresses, 380 shoemakers and stitchers,336 cigarette makers, 300 butchers and fishermen, 445bakers, 338 gardeners, 509 cartmen and coachmen, and 595unskilled workers. There were also bookbinders, blacksmiths,barbers, millers, stove makers, and wine makers.The middle class included the intelligentsia, the doctors,lawyers, engineers, writers and teachers. Most Jewishcommunity leaders were ffom this class, including Isser-BarVulf, Abba Soloveichik, Shimon Merkal, Yehe2kiel Yaffe,Binyamin Rabinovitz, Mordechai Rabinovitz, TanchielLevinzon, Altman, R. Yisrael-Nissan Krok and Zev Frumkin.Education was traditional, in cheders and yeshivas. Therewas also a Talmud Torah, a Jewish public school, Jewishprivate schools and a Russian govemment boys gymnasium.Prior to World War I, the Jewish population in Kovnoreached 40,000, about 50% of the general population of87,986.Except for the flour mill, the largest factories wereowned by non-Jews, especially Germans. They seldomemployed Jews. Working conditions in small, Jewish-ownedfactories were poor. Shabby living conditions and diminishingemployment opportunities caused large emigration, mainly tothe United States and South Africa. In 1908, 600 Jewsemigrated. That year public assistance rolls reached 4000.In 1911, there were 25 synagogues and prayer houses,belonging mainly to occupational societies, such as themerchants, tailors and butchers. One was for Hasidim. Theyouth studied in the dozens of local cheders, the 2 yeshivasin Slobodka, the old beit midrash, the Synagogue of theTailors (Etz Haim) and Kloiz Neviazher.THE COMMUNITIES143In the early 1900’s, a Jewish newspaper was publishedin Russian, edited by Julius Blumenthal. First called theKovinski Telegraph," the name was later changed to"Severo-Zafadny Telegraph."The failure of the 1905 Revolution brought prisonsentences and Siberian exile for many Jews. Some fled toAmerica, where they continued their socialist activities.In 1908, Dr. D. M. Shvartz, Dr. A. Lapin and A.Blosher established the Mapu Library. It had an educationaland Zionistic influence on the youth. In addition, there wasa Library of the Haskalah Movement in Slobodka, as well asa large private library of Abba Blosher.On May 22-29, 1909, a meeting of 120 Jewish leadersfrom 48 communities convened in Kovno to discuss aplethora of Jewish issues.When World War I broke out, thousands of Jews leftKovno. As the front got closer, thousands more left for Vilnaor other locations. On May 5, 1915, the commander of theRussian Army, Nikolai, ordered the evacuation of all Jews,without exceptions. The order was carried out mercilessly inKovno. Jewish homes were robbed and vandalized. Some ofthe exiles found refuge in Vilna, but most were sent to thesouth and the center of Russia.The Germans took Kovno on August 5, 1915. The fewKovno Jews remaining in the captured territory returned, butthey found their property stolen and their homes destroyed.The synagogue and other communal institutions had beenpillaged. Korli Synagogue had little damage. Most of thebooks of the Mapu Library had been hidden in tiie synagogueand were saved. Almost 9000 Jews retumed to Kovno, whilesome 20,000 former Jewish residents were dispersed through-out Russia.Shabbatai Shoval was the Jewish representative to theGerman-run government. During the occupation, R. YisraelNissan Krok served as the rabbi in place of R. A.D. Shapira.144LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe Jewish chaplains, Dr. Rosenak and R. Levy from Leip-zig; Amold Zveig, a writer; Herman Shtroíc, an artist;Sammy Gmeniman, a writer; and Dr. Leo Deutschlander ofthe German army, worked actively for the loosely-knit Jewishcommunity. They helped establish a high school with insfruc-tion given in German. It was administered by Dr. YosefCarlebach who later became a rabbi in Altuna-Hamburg.Later, this school became a Hebrew gymnasium with anatural sciences trend.Kovno did not suffer famine and plague. The Germanconquest was felt relatively lightly in Kovno when comparedto other places.In 1918, as the Germans prepared to leave, local leadersincluding Dr. Max Soloveichik, Dr. Meshulam Vulf and L.Garfunkel formed a committee comprised of Jewish, Polishand Lithuanian leaders to administer the city. Chairmanshipof the council was rotated among the 3 ethnic groups.After the signing of the peace treaty between Germanyand Russia, Jews began to retum en masse to Kovno. Theretum of war refugees and exiles from Russia continued until1923. However, thousands of Jews remained in Russia. Atthat time, the head of the Kehilla (Jewish community) ofKovno was Dr. Meshulam Vulf.Kovno, which was renamed Kaunas, was proclaimed thecapital of Lithuania in 1919. The city became the trade andadministrative center of the country. Many Jews moved therefrom the small towns.In 1924, democratic elections were held. The Jewishpopulation was represented on all important committees. Y.Reginsky was Assistant Mayor. Dr. Meshulam Vulf was headof the Council. A sizable number of Jewish clerks wereemployed by the city.However, these conditions lasted only until the Lithuani-an Nationalists took control of the counfry in the revolutionof December 1926. The new govemment cancelled the rightsTHE COMMUNITIES145of minorities in municipalities and reduced their representa-tion. Nationalism and anti-Semitism became prevalent in cityoffices.The Lithuanian Nationalists began an organized effort toundermine Jewish influence in the economy of the city. Theycut the budget for Jewish educational, cultural and welfareprograms and reduced the number of Jewish employees.The last Jewish representatives on the City Council wereDr. Meshulam Vulf, Attorney Reuven Rubinstein, YosefReginsky, Leon Uzhinsky, David Itzkovitz, L. Chadash.In the census of September 17, 1923, the Jewish popula-tion of Kovno was 25,044, 27.1 % of the general population.In 1933 it was 38,000, 29.8% of the general population.Although deposed from many areas of trade, Jews wereable to continue operating in textiles, building materials andlumber, and in the import of industrial products.Many tumed to industry. Jews succeeded in opening awide range of factories in the city and the surrounding areas.Help was received from the Joint (JDC). The Jewish CentralBank helped to reestablish small-scale, middleman trade andJewish crafts. The living standards of the Jewish workingpopulation rose.The period of Independent Lithuania was a period ofrehabilitation and building. There were primary schools,secondary schools, gymnasia, banks, and newspapers. Thenetwork of Hebrew schools and cultural institutions includedkindergartens, public schools, ORT trade schools, 5 highschools, 2 teachers seminars, yeshivas and a public universityadministered by Dr. Esther Elishiv. The language of instruc-tion in most of them was Hebrew. In the Lithuanian universi-ty in 1940, there were about 500 Jewish students out of anoverall enrollment of 3041.Several Yiddish daily newspapers appeared in Kovno,such as 'Tidisha Shtima," edited by Leib Garfunkel and laterby Moshe Cohen and Reuven Rubinstein. Begun in 1919, it146LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESwas the largest and oldest of the papers. The "Falksblatt" wasedited by Dr. Mendel Sodersky and Yudel Mark. There was"Vort," edited by Natan Greenblatt-Goren and EíraimGreenberg; and "Mament." The Jewish community hadlibraries, like the Mapu and the Hovevei Hameida Library("Libhaver fin Visen"), a Hebrew drama studio, a culturalcenter, and a Yiddish theatre, administered by Lan. Therewere social institutions that included the Children’s Housefounded by Dr. Lehman; Eza health clinic; a large Jewishhospital; Yitzhak-Elhanan Orphanage, run by Tuvia Shapira,Dr. Abba Lapin, Isser Rabinovitz and Yosef Margolin; andan old-age home. Some of the Jewish institutions werehoused in new, attractive buildings, such as the 2 Hebrewgymnasia, the Central Bank, the children’s home, and the Ezahealth clinic.Most of the Jewish youth were in Zionist organizationssuch as Hashomer Hatzair, Betar, Zionist Youth, Bnai Akiva,Gordonia, Socialist Democratic Youth. Student associationsand sports organizations such as Maccabi and Hapoel trainedthe youth for aliyah to Eretz Yisrael. Hechalutz operatedkibbutz-type pioneer training. The cooperative carpentry shopof Hechalutz was run by A. Sragovitz.Leftist organizations were small. They were oíficiallybanned for many years. The Communists operated under-ground until the Soviets took over Lithuania in 1940. Jewisheducational and cultural institutions were then tumed over tothe Jewish Communists.On Aug. 15, 1941, after the Nazi occupation, the Jewswere sent to the ghetto in Slobodka. Most of them werekilled within 2 to 3 years.From the rabbinate: R. Ezriel bar Yehuda; R. UriZakesh; R. Moshe Halevy Soloveichik; R. Yosef bar MosheSoloveichik; R. Menachem-Mendel Rabinovitz.Heads of the Beit Din: R. Arye-Leib bar Menachem-Zondel Shapira [5609-5613/1840-1853]; R. Moshe-Yitzhak-THE COMMUNJTIES147Avigdor bar Shmuel; R. Yehoshua-Leib Disldn; R. Yitzhak-Elhanan Spektor [5624-5656/1864-1896]; R. Zvi bar YitzhakElhanan Rabinovitz [5656-5670/1896-1910]; R. Avraham-Dubar bar Zalman Sender Shapira [5673-5703/1913-1943].Judges and Rabbis: R. Moshe bar Eliahu; R. Avrahambar Moshe Zacheim; R. Arye Dayks; R. Yitzhak Aronovsky;R. Yisrael-Nissan Krek; R. Gershon Gutman; Rabbi Bilitzky;R. Yisrael Rosenson; R. Simcha Gittlevitz; R. Yitzhak-ZevSoloveichik; R. Reuven Snitkind.Heads of Yeshivas: R. Yisrael Salanter, R. Isser-ZalmanMeltzer, R. Zvi-Hirsh Levitan, R. Reuven Miltzky, R.Baruch-Dov Libovitz, R. Yakov bar Yisrael Katz, R.Avraham-Aaron Burstein, R. Yosef-David Berger, R.Haim-Sholom-Tuvia Rabinovitz, R. Naftali-Zvi Trop, R.Yitzhak-Yakov bar Shmuel-Rabinovitz, R. Shlomo-NatanCutler, R. Neta-Zvi Finkel, R. Yosef-BenZion Friedman, R.Moshe-Mordechai Epstein, R. Eliahu-Bar Lizrovitz, R.Gershon Gutman, R. Baruch Horvitz, R. Yitzhak-Isaac Sahr,R. Shraga bar Baruch Horvitz, R. Yitzhak-Isaac-EliezerHirshovitz, R. Shmuel-Haim Yanchuk, R. Dov Rethoiz, R.Simcha Gittlevitz, R. Zev Dezikansky, R. Yitzhak Meltzer,R. Zvi Schneider, R. Yakov Pikelnisky.Public figures during Independent Lithuania: LeonUzhinsky; David Ilgovsky; Kalman Ipp; Arye Interiligter;Dr. Elhanan Elkes; Dr. Benjamin Berger; Boris Bemstein;Abba Blosher; Dr. Benjamin Blodz; Leib Garfunlde; ShmuelGoldberg; Attomey Yakov Goldberg; Natan Goren (Green-blatt); Dr. Elhanan Dobrovitz; Dr. Yitzhak-Raphael Holtz-berg (Etzion); Dr. Meshullam Wolf; Zvi (Grigori-Hans)Wolf; Attomey Shlomo Horonzhitzky; Zalman Trekinishsky;Noah Yaífe; Helena Katzkeles; Moshe Cohen; Dr. AbbaLapin; Dr. Yitzhak Levitan; David Levin; Yosef Margolin;Dr. Moshe Matis; Anna Matis; Rabbi Shlomo Muntzer; Dr.Menahem Soloveichik; Liaunti Soloveichik; MatityahuSoloveichik; Dr. Mendel Sudarsky; Elta Sudarsky; Eliahu148LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSolomon; Attomey Ozer Finkelstein; Dr. Lazar Finkelstein;Dr. Shmuel Alishiv; Zvi Porat; Yitzchak Kopilovitz; Dr.Krever; Yosef Reginsky; R. Yisrael Rosenson; R. A.E.Rodner; Isser Rabinovitz; Felix Rabinovitz; Shulamit Rabino-vitz; Yakov Robinsohn; Reuven Rubinstein; Dr. EliezerRachmilevitz; Dr. Nachman Rachmilevitz; Dr. D.M.Schwartz; Yisrael Strasburg; Yitzhak Streichman; YitzhakShmuelovitz; Tuvia Shapira; Shmuel-Zeidel Sharshavsky.Natives: YonatanbarMordechai Eliasberg; Yakov-Davidbar Yehuda Gordon; Asher-Lipman bar Shmuel-HalevyZerachy; Zvi-Hirsh Levitan; Kalman bar Eliezer Magid;Yosef bar Moshe Halevy Soloveichik; Shimon-Yitzhak barYehuda-Zvi Halevy Finkelstein; Zvi Farber; Zvi-Pesach barYehuda-Leib Frank; Shlomo-Natan Kotler; Tuvia bar YosefGefen; Eliezer-Simcha bar Menachem-Mendel Rabinovitz;Shmuel-Moshe bar Arye-Leib Shapira; Shlomo-Pinchas barMoshe-Shmuel Batnitzky; Yehuda-Dov bar Natan Bemstein;Shraga bar Baruch Horvitz; Shmuel-Yitzhak bar Zvi Yaffe;Yosef-Zvi bar Avraham Halevy Kalmans; Paul Abelson[attomey and labor mediator]; Shachna Abramson [attomeyand delegate to the Duma]; Hyman Einilov [researcher];Isadore Elishiv [writer]; Esther Elishiv [writer]; DoraAskovitch [writer]; Yehezkel Epstein [rabbi and researcher];Mordechai Epstein [economist]; Yisrael Bitan [researcher];Harold Berman feditor and translator]; Leon Bramson[1869-1949; attomey and community figure; member of thefirst Lithuanian Dumaf; Moshe Bramson [revolutionary]; R.Yehuda-Dov Bemstein [rabbi and engineer]; Julius Blumen-thal [editor]; Yehoshua Gordon [activist in the Haganah ofEretz Yisrael]; Emma Goldman [anarchist]; Levy Ginzburg[halachic scholar]; Natan Greenstein [chemist]; OscarGruzenberg [attomey; candidate for Lithuanian Duma j; Israel(Louie) Dublin [statistician]; Yitzhak Dembo [physician andpublic figure]; Yehezkel Dilion [in leadership of Betar];Yitzhak Dunsky [writer and communal worker]; BernardTHE COMMUNITIES149Horvitz [banker and Zionist figure]; Mordechai Alprinf merchant and Zionist figure]; Nehamia Hoffman [joumalist];Zalman Vilk [Zionist figure]; Avraham Veldstein [writer andactivist in the Zionist Labor Movement]; Meshulam Wolf[public figure]; Zvi (Grigory, Hans) Wolf (public figure);Amold Velpe [conductor]; Haim-Arye Zota [educator andwriter]; Louie Zetenstein [industrialist]; Moshe-Zev Zun[educator and Zionist figure]; Sholom-Yosef Zilberstein[researcher]; Menahem Zaltzberg [writer]; Yehuda-LeibYaffo [merchantandauthor]; Mordechai Yatkonsky [commu-nity figure]; Reuven-Leon Cohen [bacteriologist]; HelenaKatzkeles [educator]; Avraham-Moshe Luntz [researcher ofthe Land of Israelj; Eliezer-Daniel Lekson [joumalist];Yehoshua Levinson [wríter]; Nahum Levinsky [Bund leaderj;Avraham Mapu [writer]; Miriam Mosesohn [writer]; PinchasMordel [scholar]; Irving Miller [rabbi and Zionist figure];Oscar Minkovsky [endocrinologist]; Herman Minkovsky[mathematician]; Julius Metz [plant pathologistJ; ShimonMerkel [leader in Haredi community]; Arye Mapu [physi-cian]; Hirsh Neviazher [public figure]; Benjamin-ZevNeviazher [community leader]; Mark Nathansohn [revolution-ary]; Leon Sevizh [attomey and joumalist]; Abba Soloveichik[community leader]; Menachem Soloveichik [communityÍeader and Bible scholar]; Matityahu Soloveichik jcommunityfigure]; Yenta Sardetzicy [writer]; Binyamin Feivelson[artist]; David Feinberg [community figure]; Ozer Finkelsteinjattomey and community figure]; Yosef-Shlomo Frinovitz[artist]; William Kayser [Yiddish poet]; Yekutiel (Gomitzky)Kaisin [writer]; Yehuda-Leib Klivensky [public figure and inHovevei Zion]; Avraham Kaplan fautiior]; Lazar Kerstin[artist]; Shlomo Kelzon [community leader]; David Camo[engineer]; Aaron Karon [educator]; Yitzhak Rabinovitzjpoet]; Lydia Rabinovitz-Kempner [bacteriologist]; HermanRabinovitz [rabbi]; Yeshayahu Rosenberg (Carl Forenberg)[writer]; Anna Rappaport [writer]; Isser Rabinovitz [commu-150LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESnity leader]; Binyamin Rabinovitz; A. S. Schwartz [physicianand poet]; Moshe-Aaron Shmelitzensky [leader of HoveveiZion]; Reuven Snitkind [rabbi]; Yehuda-Eidel Sharshavsky[talmudic scholar]; D.M. Schwartz [physician and Zionistfigure].Additional references:Dr. Lazar Goldstein-Golden (1901-1981), From GhettoKovno to Dachau; Max Rosenfeld, English trans.Published by Esther Goldstein, New York, 1985.A bibliography of materials at YIVO on Rovno’s Jewishcommunity by Anna Olswanger (Association of JewishGenealogical Societies).Jacob Oleistí: A Man ’s Work, edited by I. Posner, publishedby ORT Israel and The Association of Lithuanian Jewsin Israel, 1986. About Oleisld’s career with ORT inKovno and then as Director of ORT schools throughoutLithuania. Later with ORT in the Kovno Ghetto. (Heb-rew)KRAKINOVA (KRAKENAVA) - Ponevezh Distríct D2Krakinova is near Keidan (18 miles) and Ponevezh (18),on the Neviazha River. The nearest train station was 10 milesaway.Before World War I, approximately 300 Jewish familieslived there. During the War, the Jews were expelled toRussia. The entire town burned down. After the War (1921),there were 150 Jewish families, and in 1938, 60 families.The Jews made a living mainly from trade in flax. Therewere few Jewish artisans. Two large flour mills were ownedby Jews. Mondays and Thursdays were market days.They had a synagogue, a beit midrash, a kloiz, and alarge yeshiva which was established and run by Rabbi MosheHeskin. Torah studies went on in the beit midrash day andnight. The Tarbut School had about 170 pupils. There was aTHE COMMUNITIES151library with about 2000 volumes. They also had charitableinstitutions and social aid groups. There were youth organiza-tions, including Maccabi, Young Pioneer and HashomerHazair.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe-Mishel Luria [served asthe rabbi for 50 years]; R. Natan-Neta Plaum/Flaum [bom inthe town, he was the son of R. Mishel. He served as a rabbifor 35 years and died in 5655/1895]. R. Shneour-ZalmanShneourson [died in 5645/1885]; R. Moshe Heskin [served15 years as rabbi, until 5675/1915]; and the last rabbi, R.Benjamin Movasha*.Natives: R. Shaul [son of Moshe-Mishel Luria]; R.Eliezer-Yehuda Rabinovitz; Yosef-Eliahu Fried; Abba Sha-ban, [public figure in South Afirica].Additional reference:Amos Ben Shalom, Portrait ofa VoUtsmensch, Johannesburg,So. Afirica: Grosvenor Publishing Co., 1974. Shaban wasbom in Krakinovo. Chapter 1 is "Shaban and HisEnvironment."Krakenowo: Our Town in Lithuania 1901-1961, The Story ofa World Thai Has Passed, published by Krakenowo SickBenefit Society, P.O. Box 8426, Johannesburg, 2000,So. Afirica; Chairman Sydney Seeff.KRAPINA C1Krapina was a village near Poshvitan (3 miles). It had aJewish community before World War I.ICRETINGA (RRETINGA) - District Capital A2Rretinga is near Memel (13 miles), Polangen (6),Plungian (25) and Darbian (8). It is located 7 miles firom theBaltic Sea and is near the German border. The rail linesKovno-Memel-Tilsit and Shavli-Plungian-Kretinga passedthrough the town.152LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESRretinga is one of the oldest settlements of Lithuania.The first information known is from the thirteenth century. Itthen served as a fortress of the Livonian Order. After thebattle in Kursha, it went to the Lithuanians. From 1572 to the1830’s, the elite of the Katkevitz family ran the town. Duringthe same period, it was called Krolshtat after the militarycommander Yohan Krol Katkevitz. In 1607, with the estab-lishment of storehouses for products brought firom Prussia,the trade centers changed to northem Lithuania. Yohan Krolobtained Magdeburg Rights for the town, and its symbolfrom then on was a lion. He was involved in planning out thecity and its roads. The daughter of Yohan Krol married aprince ffom the Sapieha Family. From that time, the city wasowned by that family. It passed from them to the Masalskyfamily and later to the Pototzky family. When the Russianstook control, it passed to Count Zubov, who sold it to CountTishkevitz. During Independent Lithuania, a large estateowned by the Tishkevitz family still existed in the area.The beginnings of a Jewish settlement date ffom theseventeenth century according to documents from 1639, butdetails only begin in the year 1847. At that time, 1738 Jewslived there. By the end of the nineteenth century, the num-bers declined. In 1897, there were 1203 Jews, 35% of thegeneral population. In 1921, about 1000 Jews lived there. In1933, the Jewish population was about 800. In 1941, theJewish population was about 1000, which included someJewish refugees ffom Memel.In 1889, the town bumed down, including the syna-gogue, the beit midrash and the kloiz. These buildings wererebuilt.The Jews had trade with Memel Region and with EastPmssia. They also benefitted ffom their proximity to theresort town of Polangen, especially during the summervacation season. There were Jewish arts and crafts factoriesTHE COMMUNITIES153which made amber jewelry to be sold as souvenirs to vaca-tioners and tourists.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 233 members in 1932.During Independent Lithuania, there was a Tarbut Schooland a library. An interest-free loan fund was active in thecommunity, as well as Bikur Holim and other aid institutions.Most of the Jewish community was Zionistic. The youthparticipated in various Zionist associations. There also wasthe society of Tiferet Bachurim and the children’s associationof Perchei Shoshanim which collected books for the syna-gogues.From the rabbinate: R. Leib [who also served as a rabbiof Darbian and Polangen, but his permanent position was inKretinga[; R. Aaron [later was the Head of the Beit Din inPinsk[; R. Menahem Mendel; R. Shlomo-Zalman Zakan["Zalmela Fromak"; he died in 5636/1876]; R. Arye-LeibLipkin; R. Zvi-Hirsh Shur and the last rabbi, R. BinyaminPersky* [son-in-law of R. Zvi Shur].Natives: R. Yisrael-Zelig Teplitz; R. Eliahu Levinsohn[R. Elinkeh of Kretinga; philanthropist and public figure];Bereko Yuslavitz (Berek Joselewicz) [a leader in the PolishRevolt]; Eliezer Shulman [writer]; Yisrael Drubin [ffom theBilu]; Yosef Shmuel [sociologist].RRINCHIN (KRINCINAS) - Birzh Distríct D1Rrinchin is a village northeast of Posvol (5 miles) andBirzh (13).The Jewish community of Krinchin was one of the firstin Lithuania.Before World War I, the town had about 300 Jewishfamilies. The economy was based on trade and tanning.In 1923, 37 Jews lived there. Just prior to the Holocaust,there were 5 Jewish families.In 1897, the tanners struck against the communityleaders. They took over the east wall of the synagogue154LITHUANIAN JEWJSH COMMUNITIESreserved for the wealthy. They felt that they were unfairlytreated and demanded good "aliyot." The tanners refused toleave and the police were called in.KROK (KRAKIAI) - Keidan District C2Krok is near Keidan (14 miles), Datnuva (7), andGrinkishok. The nearest train station was at Datnuva.In 1897, the Jewish population was 450. In 1914, itreached 800. At the outbreak of the Holocaust, about 150Jewish families lived there.During World War I, the Jews were expelled. Somesucceeded in finding temporary shelter in Vilna, and thenretumed to the town the same year after its capture by theGermans. But even under the German regime, the Jewssuffered deprivation and forced labor. After the War, asizable number of refugees retumed from Russia. Withoutside help, they began to rehabilitate the life of the town.In 1930, the Jewish community had 165 families. Someeamed a living from trade. They depended on market daywhich was on Wednesday. But most eamed a living fromhard labor as cartmen, tanners, blacksmiths and the like.During Independent Lithuania, some lived off of aid sent byrelatives abroad, especially from South Africa.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 132 members in 1929. Itsfounder and manager for many years was Meir Gordon.Despite the poverty, the town had a spiritual and coramu-nal life. About 80 pupils studied at the Tarbut School. Therewere also cheders, a small yeshiva, a library named A. F./P.Pryal/Faiel, a drama club and a choir. Almost everyonebelonged to a Torah study society (Shas Mishnayot, EinYakov or Tiferet Bachurim). The youth participated in YoungZionists, Tsofim (Scouts), Maccabi and Hechalutz (Pioneers)- 45 of whose members made aliyah to Eretz Yisrael. Theyall knew Hebrew fluently.THE COMMUNITIES155There was a synagogue and two minyans. Charitableinstitutions included a gemmach (charitable loan fund), LinatHazedek and a volunteer fire department.From the rabbinate: R. Shimon bar Shabbatai [teacherand rabbi; died 5582/1822]; R. Zalman-Simcha bar Avraham-Shimon Troip, [5632/1872]; R. Meir Rabinsohn; R. Yeho-shua-Yosef Periel/Feriyel; R. Eliahu-Meir Feivelson; R.BenZion Notlevitz [until5665/1905]; R. Haim-Meir Feldberg[his son, Dr. Leon Feldberg, was editor of the Jewish Timesin Johannesburg]; and the last rabbi, R. David Goldberg*[related by marriage to R. Feldberg].Community leaders: Shabbatai Farber [ritual slaughterer];Yakov Fried and his son Haim; R. Tocker; Levy Vidokler;Moshe-Ichye Abramson and David Feldberg.KRON (RRUONIS) - Kovno District D3Kron is a town about 18 miles southeast of Kovno.Before the Holocaust, about 25 families lived there.There was a beit midrash in the town.KROP (KRAOPIAI) - Shavli District C1Krop was near Zhager (12 miles) in Shavli District. Ithad a Jewish community at one time.KROZH (RRAZIAI) - Rasin District B2Krozh is approximately 35 miles from the East Prussianborder. Its primary commercial ties were with Kelme (11miles) and Memel (50). The nearest rail line was in Ne-moksht. The town was near a large pine forest.Krozh was named for the River Krazhianta which flowspast it. The source of the river is the springs in Karklian (6miles). It flows by Krozh and Kelme to the Dubisa, atributary of the Nieman River.Krozh was known in the tenth century. It was used forpagan sacrifices to the goddess of the forest, Medeine. The156LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEScultic site is known as the "Mount of the Hunters." In recenttimes, it was used for hiking and recreation. Adjoining thetown is a pine forest, a well-known summer resort and animportant source of wood for heating and building. Thesummer vacation spot was loved by Duchess Radziwill ofPoland.In 1257, the town was conquered by the Livonian Orderof the Teutonic Knights. It was later returned to Lithuania.At the beginning of the fifteenth century, Vitovt, the GrandDuke of Lithuania, erected a Christian Church and a Benedic-tine monastery. At the end of the century, a "temple formonks" was established in a large stone building.In the seventeenth century, Jesuits, expelled ffomEngland, settled in Krozh. They built a second large ChristianChurch, which was well-fortified. They erected a gymnasium(a classical high school) for the children of the elite. In 1846,it was transferred to Kovno under the name "KrozhianGymnasia."In 1892, a Catholic rebellion against the politics ofRussification of govemment occurred in the town. Theauthorities transferred the second church to the Provo-Slavsof the area. Cossacks were sent to the town. The rebellionended with mass arrests and with many injured. Many wereexiled to Siberia.The Jewish community dates ífom the fifteenth century.In the following century, the community organized. Dignitar-ies were active in the "Council of the Lands." At that time,the town was part of the Keidan northem circuit. Krozh wasa center for the surrounding communities. Delegates from thenorthem circuit would assemble there. At the end of theseventeenth centuiy, the first rabbi was appointed. The townbecame a center for leaming Kabbalah in Lithuania.In 1766, there were 1048 Jews in Krozh. In 1888, therewere 220 Jewish families or 1125 people, 32% of the generalpopulation of 3375. In 1925, 650 Jews (130 families) livedTHE COMM UNITIES157there, and in 1929 - 535 Jews (107 families). Before WorldWar II, about 100 Jewish families lived there. In 1941, 462Jews were killed in the Holocaust.In 1848, a large fire destroyed much of the Jewishcommunity. The town itself was partially rebuilt. Prior to thistime, Krozh extended for over a mile southward to theVillage of Sovitishuk and 2 miles to the west, to Linkovza.After the fire, the Jewish community waned. From 1880,when the road to Prussia via Kelme and the Libau-Rumanianrail line were laid, Shavli and Kelme advanced and Krozhdeclined fiirther. A large emigration began to America, SouthAfirica and Australia.In the 1890’s, a post ofifice was established. Previously,two Jews went once or twice a week to the nearest branch ofthe post offíce to bring and receive mail.The Jews of Krozh were mainly involved in crafts andtrade. Market day was Monday. In 1880, there were 192crafismen, including 53 tailors, 25 shoemakers, 30 brushmakers and 12 butchers. There were 129 merchants, includ-ing 27 retail shopkeepers, 2 wholesalers, 12 brandy sellers,18 horse-traders, 12 fruit-garden tenants, 5 vegetable-gardentenants and 3 innkeepers. Of 79 laborers, there were 60worícing in 2 woricshops for processing bristles, 2 farmers, 4laundrymen and 3 porters. In addition, there was a rabbi, acantor, 2 shochets, 3 shammases, a doctor, a medic, 12melameds, 2 teachers and 29 beggars and widows. In thecheders, 120 boys were enrolled. In the last years before theHolocaust, there were 54 merchants and shopkeepers, 22crafitsmen, 4 laborers and 12 of the firee professions.In 1925, the Jewish Peoples Bank was founded. It had132 members in 1932. In 1925, the first automobile wasacquired for transportation and hauling to replace horses andwagons. For the first time, the trip to Shavli and back did nottake more than one day. In 1926, electricity was installed. In158LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES1927, sidewalks were laid and trees were planted along theirlength.Krozh had an old beit midrash in which there were 2shtiblach for prayer and Torah. In the mid-nineteenthcentury, a large synagogue was built for Shabbat and Holi-days. It had one of the woodcarved holy arks that wererenowned in Lithuania. Similar holy arks were also locatedin Kelme, Shukian and Yurburg.Long-standing societies for Torah and charity wereactive. In the mneteenth century, there was Gemara, Mishna-yot, Chayai-Adam, Ein-Yakov, Midrash, Tehillim, Menorat-Hamaor, Chafetz Haim (for study of his books), 2 Biblestudy societies, Chevra Kadisha (burial society), NetaaiShashuim (for the acquisition of books for the beit midrash),Tikun Sfarirn (school book repairs), Perchei Shoshanim (forbuying wood to heat the beit midrash), Bikur Holim, Hach-nasat Orchim, Talmud Torah (for the support of teachers ina special cheder); a loan society (to give loans to members,who initially deposited 5 rubles and paid a monthly sum of 2rubles. Needy people" at the end of the century receivedloans ffom the ' honorable wealthy man," Chaim-Neta Zacks.The "loan society" later became the Gemach Fund, whichalso gave loans to the poor). In the 1880’s, there was a"Dorshei Zion" Society, an organization of "Hovevei Zion,"which sent money to Rabbi Pines for Petach Tikvah. DuringIndependent Lithuania, some of the societies terminated. Butadded were Tiferet Bachurim (unmarried, religious men whoprayed and studied together in a special minyan) and LinatHazedek (providing medical assistance and overnight care atthe home of sick).Hovevei-Zion and preachers of Zionism appeared at thebeginning of this century. Two young men came from outsidethe country to organize Zionist organizations. Eidelmanfounded the Young Zionist Party and Yitzhak Biber founded" Young Israel” (a party of religious Zionists). Both organizedTHE COMMUNTTIES159meeting centers and Hebrew lessons. When they left, thecommunity had been organized and a committee elected.In 1922, a student library was organized. In 1924, anethnic public library was created with books in Yiddish andHebrew. The same year Tzofim (Scouts) and Maccabi wereorganized and activities began for Keren Kayemet L’Yisraeland Keren Hayesod. In 1925, the town had 61 Keren Kaye-met boxes. Later, Hechalutz (Pioneers), Young Pioneers,Socialist Democrats and Betar were founded. Abba Bonimo-vitz was a leading Zionist figure.Jewish pupils studied at the Lithuanian gymnasium(classical high school) and some relationships were formedbetween the Jewish and Lithuanian youth. There was a Jewishrepresentative in the municipality. However, the tendencytoward "Lithuanianization" persisted. An early example wasa law requiring Sunday closing. The Verslaniníd cooperativesundercut Jewish merchants. Lacking opportunities for thefuture, Jewish youth moved to the larger cities, especiallyMemel. Some emigrated to Eretz Yisrael, while others wentto other countries.From the rabbinate: R. Yakov bar Eliahu Halevy Shur[beginning of the eighteenth century; related to R. YehezkelKatzenelbogen, the Gaon of Hamburg. According to theintroduction of a responsa by the "Rema," R. Moshe Isserles,published in Amsterdam, the lineage ("yichus") of R. Yakovextends to the Rema, to Rashi and to the Tanna R. YochananHaSandler, who was the fourth generation to R. Gamaliel theElder of the royal family of David. From his descendants -R. Yehezkel Halevy Landau who was the third Beit Dinchairman in Vilna and sat on the bench of the Gaon RabbiAbly of Posvol]; R. Yehuda-Leib bar Ezriel Ziv [mid-eight-eenth centuiy rabbi]; R. Moshe Halevy Horwitz [taken toVilna to be a teacher of the children of the Vilna Gaon.Later, he was a maggid mesharim (preacher) in Vilna until1811. He was a religious court judge until his death in160LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES5581/1821.] R. Abraham bar Shlomo Zalman [brother of theVilna Gaon]; R. Uri [end of the eighteenth century; relatedby marriage to R. Eliahu]; R. Yom-Tov Lipman [end ofeighteenth century]; R. Avraham "Hasid" [mentioned in"Zichoron Avraham]; R. Mordechai Rabinovitz [beginning ofnineteenth century]; R. Yeshaya bar Eliahu [rabbinical courtjudge in Krozh and rabbi in Salant]; R. Bendt [son-in-law ofR. Eliahu]; R. Yakov bar Menahem [son-in-Iaw of R. Eliahu.Served 40 years as a rabbi in Krozh. Died in Jerusalem].Simcha Halevy Horwitz [1830-1895; at age 18 he became arabbi. He lived in Krozh, Shaduva and Lialchovitz. Descend-ed from Rabbi Yeshaya Hurvitz, the Sh’la. He was inHovevei Zion and a relief society. Some of his letters werepublished. An obituary was printed in "Luach Achiasaf" in5656/1896]. R. Zevullan-Leib bar Yom-Tov Lipman [Presi-dent of the rabbinical court of Darshunishuk, Gudleva,Filipova, Krozh and Plungian, in the mid-nineteenth century.He was a great-grandson of the "Rit" from the eighteenthcentury. R. Yitzhak Lipkin [son of R. Yisrael Salanter. Heserved later in Yanova and Ponevezh]; R. Zeev-Wolf barAaron Yehoshua Torbovitz [1846-1921]; R. Abraham-BaerHamburg [rabbinical court judge in Krozh in the 1890’s]; R.Yosef-Avigdor bar Yom-Tov Lipman Koshel-Kessler [bomin 1885; related through marriage to Rabbi Zeev Torbovitz,mentioned above. Served in the rabbinate of Verzhon andlater filled the place of his father-in-law in Krozh. In 1923 heemigrated to the United States and there was chosen as headof the Beit Din in Rockaway. In 1939 published the book"Tiferet Ziv" of his father-in-law with added notes under thename "Yad-Yosef." In 1941 "Tiferet Yosef"-part I, waspublished and in it a responsa and negotiation in Halacha withcontemporary rabbis. He was a member of the council ofrabbis in the U.S. and an enthusiastic religious figure]; R.Kalman bar Eliezer Maggid [1874-1941]; R. Eliahu-Morde-chai bar Zvi-Yechiel Halevy Velkovsky; and the last rabbi.THE COMMUNITIES161R. Eliahu Kremerman* [previously head of the KelmeYeshiva].Rabbis who came ffom Krozh and served in othercommunities: R. David [rabbi of Meretsh]; R. Shmuel [diedat age 30]; R. Mashhal Mainhes [died at age 40 in Vilna]; R.Yekutiel-Leib bar Yakov Elyon [a rabbi in Zhezmir; he wrotea book "Mishneh Yekutiel" or "Gelion Maharil" (Warsaw,1893]; R. Yakov Yosef ["Yankele Charif"]; R. MosheZebulun Margaliot [replaced R. Yakov-Yosef in New York].Notables: Eliahu bar Meir [a scholar and wealthy man atthe beginning of the nineteenth century. His sister was thesecond wife of the Vilna Gaon, who honored R. Eliahu byofficiating at his wedding. He had 4 sons. Yehezkel was arabbi in Shavli. Yeshaya, mentioned above, was the youngestson of R. Eliahu, born to him at age 90. R. Uri was relatedto him by marriage; R. Yakov and R. Bendt, mentionedabove, were his sons-in-law. R. Yitzhak (Itzhala Krezer), agreat and righteous rabbi, in Shas (Six Orders of the Mish-nah) and posim; in 1855, he founded a special cheder inVaigova. The second son, R. Yehoshua-Heshel Eliashsohn,was a rabbi in the communities of Shaki, Yanova, Zhezmir,Vilki, Sventzion and Sieni. He was called "Head of Iron."Lilienblum mentions him by this nickname in his writing. Inhis time he opposed the forming of the "Musar House" ofIsrael Salanter out of fear of establishing a new sect of Jews.He died in 1870. His daughter was Sarah Tzirel (1810-1878)and her husband R. Izik was one of the Torah greats ofVilna. He was invited there to help at the time of the decreeof Nicholas I and to make Vilna a spiritual center. Hereturned to Rrozh, and after his daughter was burned in alarge fire, he devoted himself to farming near Krozh. ShaynaElka was the daughter of Sarah Tzirel; her grandsonsincluded: the writers and agronomists Yitzhak, Meir andMordechai Vilkansky, the writer Eliezer-Eliahu Friedman andDr. Moshe Krieger. Eliezer Shulman [1837-1904, a writer];162LITHUANÍAN JEWISH COMMUNTTIESYehoshua Davidovitch (1865-1897, a poet. Ahad Ha’ameulogized him in "Hashaloach," vol. 1, p. 211]; NaftaliFriedman [1863-1921, attorney, a delegate ffom KovnoGubemia to the Third and Fourth Duma in Russia, and wasthe final Lithuanian delegate].KRUK (KRIUKAI) - Shavli District C1Kruk is near Yanishok (10 miles), Zhaimel (8), Zhager(25) and Poshvitin (10), and the Yanishok-Zhaimel-Birzhtrain line. The train station was one mile away. Kruk is nearthe Latvian border.Before World War I, there were about 200 Jewishfamilies living there, but during the War they were expelled.During Independent Lithuania, there were about 100 Jewishfamilies in the community.Before World War I, the town served as a commercialcenter for a large rural area. But then the new border cut itoff from its natural market in Latvia and caused it to declineeconomically. The Jews worked at small-scale trade withfarmers in grain, flax, work animals and fruits. In addition,they received support ffom relations abroad. A significantnumber emigrated to the United States and South Afirica orwent to Palestine. Before the Holocaust, the town had lessthan 50 Jewish families (about 200 people).There was a large synagogue and a Yavneh School.From the rabbinate: R. Dov bar Shlomo-Zalman Kook,R. Meir Verzhavlovsky* [served in Kruk for 17 years].KRUK1 (KRIUKAI) - Shaki District C1Kruki was a small town on the left bank of the NiemanRiver near Kovno (25 miles) and opposite Sardonik.Before World War II, about 100 Jews lived there (about20 families).THE COMMUNITIES163KUPISHOK (KUPISKIS) - Ponevezh Distríct E2Kupishok is near Panimunik (21 miles), Skopishok (12),Subotsh (12), Rakishok (24), Ponevezh (24), Ponidel (18),Kamai (12), and Vabolnik (13). The nearest train station wasin Suhotsh.During Czarist rule, the town was called "Slavianisky"and was included in Vilkomir District. It is located on theKupa and Levena Rivers. Around it are thick forests.A Jewish community existed there for over 300 years, asevidenced by old tombstones.In 1847, 1350 Jews lived there. In 1897, the Jewishpopulation was 2661, 71% of the general population.In 1875, the town bumed down.During World War I, part of the Jewish community leftfor Vilna and the interior of Russia. After the War (1921),the Jewish population was 1500, and in 1932 - 1444, 54% ofthe general population. During Independent Lithuania, manyof the young people left the town and emigrated to SouthAfirica or Palestine. However, by the time of the Holocaust,the Jewish population was close to 1500.The Jews engaged primarily in small-scale trade, craftsand peddling. In 1937, there were 22 artisans, including 5shoemakers and needleworkers, 2 tailors, 3 metal workersand a baker. A significant number of Jews depended uponsupport from relatives abroad.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 369 members in 1929.In the town were Hasidim and Mitnagdim; each grouphad a rabbi and a shochet. On Sabbath eve a siren wassounded at the flour mill owned by Hannan Milner as a signof the coming of Shabbat. After a few minutes, a secondsiren was sounded to announce candle-lighting time.The community had 3 prayer-houses: a Hasidic syna-gogue, a beit midrash of the Mitnagdim and the GreatSynagogue, which was a beautiful old building. There was a164LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESyeshiva, Talmud Torah, Yavneh School, Tarbut School,Yiddish School, Hebrew ldndergarten and library.There were societies for the study of Torah, such asTiferet Bachurim. The charitable institutions included LinatHazedek, Hachnasat Kalla and a loan fund. All the Zionistparties as well as Agudat Yisrael were represented.From the rabbinate: R. Meir Epstein (Shnipishker); R.Alexander (Sender) Hacohen Raplan [previously Head of theBeit Din in Vilkomir, in the days of R. Aaron. Afterward hecame to Kupishok and served for 45 years. He wrote thebook "Shlomi Nedarim," on a tractate concerning vows andannotations of the Six Orders of the Mishnah, which re-mained a manuscript; he died in 5644/1884]; R. Abba-YakovBorochov [5647-5649/1887-1889]; R. Yehuda-Leib-SholomTzinabel; R. Yehuda-Leib Fein; R. Avraham Zvi bar MosheBrodneh [Hasidic rabbi]; R. Eliahu-Meir Feivelson [died5688/1928]; R. Zalman Partzovsky* and R. Yisrael-NoahChatzkevitz* [the last Hasidic rabbi].Natives: R. Baruch Feivelson; R. Elhanan Cohen; R.Yakov-Shmuel Yaffe [agronomist]; Shlomo Kodesh [teacher,public figure and author of the book Zo Kupishok Shehyeta\.Additional reference:Shlomo Kodesh, Zo Kupishok Shehyeta, Tel-Aviv: N.Tversky Co., Ltd., 5706/1946. The book (in Hebrew) isa four-part poem telling about the life of generations inhis Lithuanian town of Kupishok.KUPRELISHKA (KAPRELISKIAI) D1Kuprelisbka is near Vabolnik (10 miles). It had a Jewishpopulation before the Holocaust.KURKLI (KURKLIAI) - Vilkomir District E2Kurkli is near Vilícomir (15 miles), Aniksht (9) andBolnik (11).THE COMMUNITIES165There were two prayer houses in the town: an old beitmidrash and a new "shul." The beit midrash was used in thewinter because it had a stove for heating. They would prayin the shul during the summer. In 1885, when the beitmidrash looked like it was going to fall down, the stove wastransferred to the shul.There was a cheder, but because of the small number ofstudents there was no Hebrew elementary school. A numberof children went to the Lithuanian school. They had aYiddish library, which was located in the home of the baker,Yisrael Yaffe."Hachnasat Orchim" was at the home of the shochet R.Neta-Bezalel Davidovitz. The charitable loan fund was alsohandled from his home. He served as the gabbai and treasurerof the synagogue. Money came from Jews formerly ofKurkali but living abroad and from Christian estate ownerswho had trade connections with the Jews. During IndependentLithuania and up to the Holocaust, approximately 250 Jewslived there (about 50 families), 20% of the general popula-tion.There were two Zionist organizations. One was theSocialist Zionists and the other was the general Zionists.There also was a small training kibbutz in which pioneersworked in wood cutting and house painting.Every Sunday goods were sold in the Jewish stores.During the rest of the week they would peddle in neighboringvillages and return home for Shabbat. There were a fewJewish artisans in the town. The pharmacy was owned byJews. The tlour mill was owned by a Christian, but a Jewleased it. Due to their poor living conditions, many Jewsemigrated to South Africa, Brazil, Cuba and the U.S.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe-Yitzhak Braver ffrom5654/1894]; R. Dimant.166LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESKURSHAN (KURSENAI) - Shavli District B1Kurshan is near Gruzd (13 miles), Luknik (15), Shukian(15) and Shavli (16). It is surrounded by hills and forests andis on the banks of the Venta River. The train station was 3miles ffom the town.In 1897, the Jewish community numbered 1542 people,48% of the general population. In 1921, there were about1000. In 1939, the Jewish population was about 900.There were two large fires in the town. In 1905, allJewish homes bumed down. The other fire occurred in 1915.Before World War I, there were 6 Jewish families in theneighboring settlement of Kuzhi. During World War I, theJews, headed by the Kibart family, were accused of hidingGerman soldiers. This accusation was used as a cause forexpelling the Jews from Kovno Gubemia. The Jews ofKurshan were forced to leave and abandon their property.During World War I, the town was destroyed, including255 Jewish homes. Afiter the War, a part of the Jewishcommunity retumed and reestablished a settlement.The main Jewish occupation was trade in produce,lumber, and flax. Jews also owned sawmills and factories fortile, oven porcelain and fired pots. The Jews developed ayellow cheese ("Tilzit") industry. In particular, the PeresBrothers had a large market for their products.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 207 members in 1932.The large synagogue, built in 1879, bumed down in1915. In 1921, two new prayer houses were built. In 1927,a Tarbut School was established with 150 pupils. Next to theschool was a library. There was also a Hebrew lcindergarten,founded in 1927.Among the charitable organizations was Bikur Holim anda charitable loan fund. Chapters of all of the Zionist partieswere present as well as youth groups and sports associations(Maccabi).THE COMMUNITIES167From the rabbinate: R. Yehiel-Michel Hacohen Gold[5634/1874]; R. Shmuel-Moshe bar Arye-Leib Shapira [from5659/1899 he was in Bobroisk]; R. Shlomo-Natan Kutler; R.Yisrael Riff; R. Yitzhak-Isaac Friedman; and the last rabbiR. Yerachmiel Litwin* [from 5689/1929].Natives: Haim Leibovitz [a rabbi in the U.S.]; Moshebar Shaul Hacohen [a rabbi in Chicago]; Dr. Arye Kobovsky[Israeli envoy to Czechoslovakia and Argentina and presidentof Yad Vashem].Additional reference:Mentioned in the family history: The Family by Josef Lavee/Leibowitch, 36 Beeri St., Tel Aviv, 64233 Israel.KURTOVIAN (KURTUVENAI) - Shavli District C1Kurtovian was near Shukian (6 miles) and Shavli (13). In1923, 103 Jews lived there. Before World War I, there wasa prayer house and a rabbi.KUSHIDAR (KAISIADORYS) - Troki District D3Kushidar is near Zhusli (6 miles), Zhezmir (5), Veviya(21), Visokidbor (24) and Kovno (21). It was a junction pointon the rail line to Germany and from Libau to Rumania.Before World War I, there was also a Jewish settlement inthe village of Tshabisky (11 miles). The train station waslocated a mile from the town.The first four Jewish families to settle next to the stationwere those of David Tekatch, Shmuel Morgenstem, HaimStershon and Yakov Chiyot. The men of these families werein the wood business, while the women ran hotels, restaurantsand tavems.The Jewish settlement developed rapidly. Prior to WorldWar I, about 60 Jewish families lived there. They had asound economic situation. There was a beit midrash, a rabbi,shochet and mohel, cheder metukan and a library.168LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESDuring World War I, the Jews were expelled, but laterreturned. New borders were in effect, and the train line toPoland was cut off. The town’s value as a junction pointdeclined.The drop in economic conditions caused many toemigrate to the United States, South Africa, Uruguay orEretz Yisrael. The Jews who remained sustained themselvesmainly on the trade they did on market days (Mondays andWednesdays). The Jewish Peoples Bank had 119 members.In 1921, 659 Jews were living in Kushidar (about 200families). But, on the eve of the Holocaust, they numberedonly 60 families. [YehadutLita, vol. 4 says about 150 Jewishfamilies]Fifteen children attended the local cheder. The TarbutSchool had 42 pupils. A number of children continued theirstudies at the Hebrew high school in Kovno. There wereZionist associations, youth groups, sports groups (Maccabi),a Tiferet Bachurim Society, a Psalms society, Mishnayot andShas.From the rabbinate: R. Eliahu [President of the Beit Dinof Kushidar and Pilten]; the last rabbi, R. David-AaronYaffe*.Native: Morris Gest (Gershonovitz).KUZHI (KUZIAI) - Shavli District C2Kuzhi is near Kurshan (8 miles). Before World War I, 6Jewish families lived there.KVATKI (KVETKAI) - Birzh District E1Kvatki was near Birzh (18 miles). Before World War I,there were Jews living there.THE COMMTJNITIES169LABANOR (LABANORAS) - Utían Dlstríct E2Labanor is near Maliat (16 miles), Lingmian (6) andSugint (13). The Jewish community had close contact withthe neighboring towns.LAIPOON (LEIPALINGIS) - Sieni District C3Laipoon was a village near Vishay (6 miles), Serhai (20),Meretsh (15) and Ropchevo (10), by the Shfengla River. Inthe 1850’s, a track of the Vilna-Warsaw line was laid nearthe village.The Jewish village of Laipoon was founded in 1851 ona section of land from the government estate at 01kenik. Thatyear the Jewish community consisted of 67 men and 56women. There were also 2 Christian families.At the end of the nineteenth century, some residents leftfor America. In 1897, there were 25 Jewish families, 134individuals. The Jews left in World War I and not allretumed after the War. Then Christians began to settle there.However, by 1921 the Jewish population was 160.In 1863, a Jewish community called "farmers of Deksh-na" was created. It included the villages of Laipoon andPansishok. This community lasted until 1880. However, theland was of very poor quality, and the Jews lived in poverty.Before World War I, Jewish settlements existed in thenearby villages of Lishkova, Blatshishok and Kamirintza.In 1920, a fire broke out destroying 12 houses. As aresult, a volunteer fire department was set up. All themembers were Jews.During Independent Lithuania, the Jewish farmers tradedtheir products on market day, which was Thursdays, and atthe 4 annual fairs.There was no school in the town. The children went toschool in nearby towns, such as Serhai and Meretsh. Some ofthe youth emigrated to Palestine.170LITH UANIA N JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe village had a shochet who also served as the moheland helped in some other religious matters. There was a smallbeit midrash and a bathhouse. They used the cemetery in01kenik.The last rabbi there was Isaac Stanfer*.Additional reference:Information on Laipoon is included in Olkeniki In Flames: AMemorial Book, published by the Association of FormerResidents of 01keniki and Surroundings, Tel Aviv.LAIVISHUK D2Laivishuk was a village southwest of Vilkomir (4 miles).A few dozen Jewish families lived there in the nineteenthcentury. It had a synagogue.LANDVAROVA (LENDVARAVAS) - E3Trolri DistrictLandvarova is near Vilna (10 miles) and Troki (6). It hada Jewish community before World War I.LATZKOVA (LECKAVA) - Mazhiak District B1Latzkova is near Mazhiak (7 miles), Layazhova, Pikelnand Zhidik, on the Venta River.The Jews lived along the single street that stretchedthrough the town. The Christians lived at the edge of town.In 1897, the Jewish population was 830, 70% of thegeneral population.In 1915, the Jews were exiled into Russia. OnIy 25Jewish families, about 100 people, retumed after the War.The Jews had little shops and carried out small-scaletrade with farmers ífom the outlying areas. Market day wasevery Thursday. Each year in June, there was a fair whichlasted 10 days. Market days and fair days were the only timeswhen there was traffic in and out of the town, and life wasTHE COMMJJNITIES171lively and active. On other days, merchants and peddlerswould go out to villages and nearby towns.Most of the Jewish families received some support ffomtheir families living abroad.There was one beit midrash and Shas and MishnayotSocieties.About 10 Jewish families lived there at the outbrealc ofthe Holocaust.From the rabbinate: R. Avraham Horvitz [5624-5658/1864-1898]; R. Shlomo-Yakov Shein [5658-5694/1898-1934,previously was rabbi in Tzitovian and a rabbi and teacher inTavrig. He wrote the book "Avnei Shaysh"]; and the lastrabbi, R. Yakov Abelson*.Natives: R. Moshe Zemach; R. Ratriel Natan [rabbi inAugustova, author of "Keter Hamelech"]; R. Sholom-MosheShapira; Reuven Glick, [author of "Mishpatei Benai Adam";he later settled in Petach Tikva]; and Shalom Ligum [indus-trialist].LAYAZHOVA (LAYAZUVA) - Mazhaik District B1Layazhova is near Mazhaik (11 miles), Veksna (13),Akmian (11) and Klikul (12).In 1855, a large fire destroyed half of the town.In 1897, there were 434 Jews, 46% of the generalpopulation of 931. During Independent Lithuania, the Jewishpopulation was 300, 70 families. Just before the Holocaust,the number was down to 50, 13 families. Jews made theirliving from small trade and crafts.Jews emigrated to the U.S., South Africa, England, andPalestine.There was one beit midrash.From the rabbinate: R. Zvi Pashdamsky [died in 5682/1922].172LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESLAZDAI (LAZDIJAI) - Sieni Distríct C3Lazdai is near Vishay (12 miles), Laipoon (18), Serhai(13) and Maríampole (24). The nearest train station was atShostakova (8 miles).Lazdai was named for its founder, Prínce Lazdas. Jewishsettlement began in the sixteenth century when Prince Lazdasinvited Jews to come and develop commerce.Before World War I, Lazdai was in Suwalk Region.After the War, boundaries were established between Polandand Lithuania. Lazdai was included in Lithuania. Suwalk andSieni, which were nearby, were included in Poland. Never-theless, Lazdai continued to be in Sieni District.In 1914, the Jews were expelled and their propertystolen. That same year the town bumed down. When the Warended, Jews retumed to Lazdai. The establishment of nationalLithuania was accompanied by pogroms against the Jews inconnection with disputes between Lithuania and Poland, bothdemanding the town. When the area including Sieni went toPoland and Lazdai remained within Lithuania, the town wasdeprived of its natural economic base. Sources of a livelihoodfor Jews declined. Youth began leaving the town and emi-grating. In 1922, the town again was damaged by fíre.In 1923, 1140 Jews lived in the town, 50% the generalpopulation.Most Jews were engaged in trade and crafts. Market dayswere Wednesdays and Fridays. A hundred families engagedin farming. Three flour mills and an electric station wereowned by Jews. The Jewish Peoples Bank had 262 membersin 1929. Next to the bank was an interest-ffee loan charity.The synagogue was built in the nineteenth century andserved as a center for the social life of the community. Inaddition, there was a beit midrash and 2 other prayer houses.Fifty young men studied at the yeshiva. The Yavneh schoolhad 300 pupils. Many of the local students went to study atthe Hebrew High School in Mariampole. Eighty JewishTHE COMMUNITIES173students went to the Lithuanian high school. The Jewishlibrary had 2000 volumes.Youth were active in chapters of Hashomer Hatzair,Betar, Maccabi, Hapoel and pioneer training groups. TheZionist movement was active in the town. Only a smallminority participated in the non-Zionistic stream. Thereligious youth were active in Tiferet Bachurim. In thesynagogue and beit midrash, there was a Shas Society,Mishnayot and Ein Yakov. Great effort was put into organiz-ing various charities (Lechem Aniim, Ezrat Holim, andcharitable loans).From the rabbinate: R. Avraham-Zvi bar Meir [author of"Divrei Habrit"]; R. Avraham-Moshe [died in 5585/1825];R. Moshe bar Aaron [author of "Hapardes-iam"]; R. Zvi-Hirsh Kehane [wrote "Likutei Ratzba"); R. Haim-Yehoshuabar Reuven Hacohen; R. Yehuda-Leib Ginzburg [from5632/1872]; R. Avraham-Ever Yaffe; his son Yehuda-LeibYaffe; and the last rabbi, R. Yakov Hacohen Gershtin’.Natives: Yosef Achron [violinist and composer] andPesach Marcus [writer; in his book "Erum Shtal" he de-scribed Lazdai. He wrote a trilogy on the Vilna Gaon].Additional reference:Dorothy Kohanski, The Ethical Will of Rabbi Joseph MosesAbraham LevinsM: The Tsaddik ofLazday, Passaic, NJ:ASKO Press, 1982.LIDOVIAN (LYDUVENAI) - Rasin District C2Lidovian was a small town near Rasin (9 miles) andBetigola (20). At the time of the Holocaust, a few dozen Jewslived there.LIEPLAUKA (LIEPLAURE) - Telz District B2Lieplauka is a village near Plungian (12 miles) andAlsiad (4). It had a Jewish population before World War I.174LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESLIGUM (LYGUMAI) - Shavli District C1Ligum is near Shavli (18 miles) and Pokroi (7). Thenearest train station was in Statziony (6).In 1897, the Jewish population was 482 out of a generalpopulation of 801.At the beginning of this century, many Jews emigratedto the U.S., England and South Africa.During World War I, the Jews were expelled to Russia.After the War, 40 Jewish families lived there. Just before theHolocaust, the number had declined to 30 families.The Jews of Ligum were involved in small-scale tradeand crafts. Market day was Wednesday. In a local wool-spin-ning factory there were Jewish workers.For 2 years during Independent Lithuania, there was alocal Jewish public school, but it closed due to a lack ofpupils. Children studied at the cheder of R. Meir, theshochet. Some students continued their studies in the localLithuania school, and others went to a Hebrew school inShavli or in Kovno.The town had one beit midrash.From the rabbinate: R. Zvi-Yehuda Rabinovitz barBenjamin [firom Vilkomir]; R. Dov Rabinovitz [until 5648/1888]; R. Mordechai-Yitzhak-Isaac Rabinovitz [later in Salantand Memel); R. Yisrael-Natan [5666/1906]; R. MosheHorvitz [5667-5675/1907-1915]; and the last rabbi, R.Yehuda-Leib Lava*.Natives: R. Eliezer-Yehuda Rabinovitz; Mordechai-Bezalel Schneider [educator and author]; Yosef Yanover [aZionist figure]; Dr. Raphael Rabinovitz [educator andattomey].Additional reference:Ligum is mentioned in The Family (English) by Josef Lavee/Leibowitch, 36 Beeri St., Tel Aviv, 64233 Israel.THE COMMUNITJES175LILION (LELYUNAI) - Utian District E2Lilion is near Utian (7 miles). The nearest train stationwas in Trombachishuk (3 miles).Before World War I, 140 Jews lived there. In 1915, theywere expelled to Russia.During Independent Lithuania, the Jewish population was90. They made their living mainly ffom trade in flax, poultryand produce. Market day was on Thursday.There was a cheder in the town, but many children wentto school in Utian. The cemetery at Utian also served theJewish community of Lilion.LINGMIAN (LINKMENYS) - Utian District F2Lingmian is near Utian (17 miles), on the Polish border.During Independent Lithuania, 200 Jews lived there,working in trade, crafts and farming. During those years, theLithuanian-Polish border was closed. The town was a meetingplace for Jews on opposite sides of the border. On TishaB’Av and the Fast of Gedaliah, Jews were permitted to meetat the cemetery. Large crowds of Jews would come fromPoland to meet their relatives in Lithuania. In 1938, Lithua-nia stopped issuing permits and forbade the visits.LINKOVA (LINKUVA) - Shavli District D1Linkova is near Pokroi (9 miles), Yanishkel (9), Posh-vitin (9), Vashki (11), Zhaimel (13) and Posvol (18), nearthe Musha River. There was a Jewish settlement 3 milesaway in the Village of Pamusha.The town was founded in the sixteenth century. UntilWorld War I, the town had neither roads nor rail lines. In1915, the Germans laid a narrow track near the town, and thetown began to develop. In 1924, the town was in the newsbecause of a blood-libel case.Before World War I, 300 Jewish families lived there,working in trade, mainly flax, in crafts and small-scale176LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESagriculture. They depended heavily on 2 market days perweek, Mondays and Fridays, and the annual fair which lastedfor 8 days, July 15-23. There was a large flour mill inLinkova owned by Jews. The Jewish Peoples Bank had 167members. In 1923, the Jewish population was 625.In 1883, the town was engulfed in flames and manybuildings, including the wooden synagogue, bumed down.The synagogue was never rebuilt. There remained one beitmidrash and a kloiz.The youth participated in Young Pioneers and Gordonia,both of which had educational activities in their chapters.From the rabbinate: R. Yoel-Yitzhak Katzenelbogenfauthor of the responsa "Zera Yitzhak"]; R. Zvi-HirshHacohen Rabinovitz; R. Meir Hacohen Rabinovitz [father ofthe writer Zvi-Hirsh Rabinovitz]; R. Tnachum-Shraga Ravel;R. Zvi Halevy Levitas; R. Natan-Yerachmiel Litvin*; and thelast rabbi, R. Yekutiel-Zalman Levitas*.Natives: Yehezkel bar Yoel-Yitzhak Katzenelbogen[rabbi of Serhai and Shirvint]; R. Dov Ravel; Yisrael- Hillelbar Haim Kaplinsky [one of the martyrs of Hebron (5689/1929]; Haim-Zev-Wolf Kreiger and Zvi-Hirsh Rabinovitz[writer].LIODVINOVA (LIUDVINAVAS) - C3Mariampole DistrictLiodvinova is a town northeast of Kalvaria (7 miles) andsouth of Mariampole (5). In 1923, 20 to 25 Jewish familieslived there. It is estimated that at the time of the Holocaust,about 15 to 20 families lived there.LISHKOVA (LISHKAVA) D3Lishkova was a village near Laipoon (7 miles). It hadJewish residents before World War I.THE COMMUNITIES177LIUBOVA (LIUBAVAS) - Mariampole District C3Liubova is southwest of Kalvaria (9 miles). It had Jewishpopulation before World War I.LOIKZIM (LAUKZEME) - Kretinga District A1Loikzim was a village north of Darbian (4 miles). At thebeginning of the nineteenth century, it had a sizable Jewishpopulation. Then, the local Fritz became angry with the Jewsand expelled them. Most of the Jews went to Darbian tosettle, including the Jacobs family.LOYKUVA (LAUKUVA) - Tavrig District B2Loykuva is near Ritova (12 miles) and Tver (9), and ison the main road from Kovno to Memel.From cemetery markers, it appeared that a Jewishsettlement existed there firom the beginning of the eighteenthcentury. In 1897, there were 418 Jews, out of a generalpopulation of 753. Before the Holocaust, about 450 Jewslived there. Many emigrated to South Africa, America andPalestine.The main road provided a city-like commercial trade inthe town. There were owners of large businesses, includingwholesale dealers Binyamin Levita, Aaron Katin and ShlomoAharonovitz. There were few crafitsmen.Loykuva had one beit midrash, a Tarbut School, andTalmud Torah, a Jewish Peoples Bank, an interest-ffee loanfund, Linat Hazedek, and a women’s organization adminis-tered by Elta Katzav. There were branches of Mizrahi, Betarand Hechalutz.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe Kushlovitz and the lastrabbi, R. Haim-Zelig Kaplansky*.LUKNIK (LUOICE) - Telz District B2Luknik is near Kurshan (18 miles), Voma (16), and Telz(13).178LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESA Jewish settlement existed in the eighteenth century. In1766, there were 566 Jews.In 1847, the Jewish population was 949 people. In 1897,it was 798 (about 200 families), out of a general populationof 1626. In 1921, there were 542 Jews.Many emigrated to South Africa, America or Palestine.At the outbreak of the Holocaust, about 100 Jewishfamilies lived there.From the rabbinate: R. Shmuel bar Yosef; R. Shlomo-Zalman bar Meir Zakash J "Zalmaleh Frumach"; 5574-5636/1814-1876; rabbi in Birzh and Kretinga}; R. Shlomo-NatanKotIer; and the last rabbi, R. Shlomo-Effaim Krevitzky'[related by marriage to Shlomo Halevy Feinzilver].Natives: R. Abraham-Abba Zack; R. Dov-Arye Olshvang[rabbi in Grayavah and Kreslovka; he died in Samarkand in5702/1942]; R. Haim-Sholom-TuviaRabinovitz; andEmman-uel Bank [an attomey].LUKSHI (LUKSIAI) - Shaki District C3Lukshi was a village near Grishkabud (8 miles) andShaki (5). In 1923, there were 42 Jews in the village. Priorto the Holocaust, a few Jewish families lived there.LYBISHOK - Vilkomir District D2Lybishok is a village southwest of Vilkomir (4 miles). Inthe nineteenth century a few dozen Jews lived there, worlringin farming on estate land.There was a synagogue in the village.MAISHIGOLA (MAISIAGALA) E3Maishigola is near Gedrovitz (14 miles), Vilna (13) andShirvint (16). It is on the road from Vilna to Vilkomir. It hadsome Jewish population before the Holocaust.THE COMMUNITIES179MAISIAD (MOSEDIS) - Rretinga Distríct A1Maisiad is near Shkud (7 miles), Salant (6), Yelok (12)and Barshtitz (12).The beginning of the Jewish community dates from theeighteenth century.In 1897, there were 363 Jews, 40% of the generalpopulation. Duríng Independent Lithuania, several dozenJewish families lived there. Before World War II, 35 Jewishfamilies (approximately 130-150 people) Iived in the town.From the rabbinate: R. Sholom-Yitzhak Levitan [5670-5675/1910-1915]; R. Yekutiel-Isser Hadas [died in Jerusalemin 5684/1920, at the age of 76]; R. Issachar-Bendt Rabinovitz[son of Shmuel-Yakov Rabinovitz firom Yelok]; and the lastrabbi, R. Kaleb-Meir Ziv’.Natives: Professor Moshe-Zvi Segal [researcher] andArye Esterman [Zionist leader].MAKUSHKI - Telz DistrictMakushki was a village near the town of Alsiad [Bl].There were some Jews living there at the outbreak of theHolocaust.MALIAT (MOLETAI) - Utian District E2Maliat is near Intorik (7 miles), Avanta (9), Bolnik (13),Podzelve (13), Gedrovitz (15), Utian (21), Vilkomir (30) andVilna (42). It is 25 miles from the railway.The Jewish communities in the nearby towns of Vidni-shok (4 miles) and Kazakishok (9) ceased to exist príor toWorld War I, when Jews were expelled from the villages bythe Czar.The town consisted of one street, from the "estate" to theCatholic Church. It was about half a mile long, with theJewish shops in the middle.Jewish settlement began in the eighteenth century. In1765, there were 170 Jews. In 1847, the Jewish population180LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESwas 1006, and in 1897 - 1,948, more than 80% of thegeneral population. In 1914, 500 Jewish families lived there,over 2000 people.In 1906, a fire destroyed a large part of the town. Withina few years, it was rebuilt.During World War I, many went to Vilna or Russia.Forced labor and confiscations imposed by the occupyingGerman authorities caused great hardship. After the War, theexiles began to return to their homes. With the help ofrelatives from the U.S. and South Africa, and variousinstitutions, they reestablished their homes and businesses.However, the town was cut off from Vilna, an importantmarket for trade. Jewish merchants were also undermined bythe "Verslaninkis," the Lithuanian cooperatives, cáusing theJewish population to decline.Many Jews emigrated to the U.S., Uruguay and especial-ly South Aífica. Between 1927 and 1932 about 30 familiesand several single people emigrated from the town. Beforethe Holocaust there were less than 400 Jewish families.The Jews made their living fforn small trade on marketday, Tuesday, and at the annual fairs. In 1929, the PeoplesBank had 332 members.The town had 4 prayer houses, a cheder with 30 pupilsand 2 ethnic schools, a Tarbut School and a Yiddish Schoolin which 160 children were enrolled. The teachers at theschools included A. Helfer, A. Shapiro, M. Packman, G.Burgin, R. Gordon, A. Sodavsky, A. Shadhan, Tortz, Zang,Varis, Shapiro, Rosenthal, Reznik, Pilvasky, Kosover andEisen. There was a library and a drama club. Part of theyouth studied at the high schools in Vilkomir, Utian, andKovno.From the rabbinate: R. Meir-Sholom Hacohen Gurionben Shamirya [student of R. Haim of Volozhin. He madealiyah to Jerusalem in 5597/1837 and died there in 5599/1839]; R. Aaron bar Yehezkiel (5593/1833); R. Yisrael-THE COMMUNITIES181David Heilprin [died in 5643/1883. He is included in "SederHadorot”]; his son R. Moshe Heilprin; R. Yakov-Meir Yaka[wrote the book "Truraat Yakov"]; R. Yitzhak-Arye Bilitzky[died in 5689/1929]; and his son R. Nette Bilitzky\Natives: R. Raphael Gordon [Head of the Beit Din ofVaslikova].Additional reference:Chapter on Maliat by Fruma Melamed of Holon, Israel in thememorial book, Utian un Umghegnt (Utian and Sur-rounding Areas), published by the Committee for theRemembrance of Jews from Utian and the SurroundingArea, Tel Aviv, 1979.MARIAMPOLE (KAPSUKAS) - District Capital C3Mariampole is near Kovno (34 miles), Vilkovishk (13),Virbaln (21) and Ralvaria (10). It is on the banks of theSheshupe River amidst forested hills. The main road ftomPetersburg to Berlin, laid in 1829, goes past the town,connecting it with Kovno. From 1923, the town was connect-ed by rail with Kazlova-Ruda and the Berlin-Moscow railline.Mariampole is a relatively young town in Lithuania. Atthe location stood the large village of Staripole ("old field")founded in the seventeenth century. In the beginning of theeighteenth century, the entire area was hit by the plague.The first mention of Mariampole was in 1732. In 1758,a monastery was erected and called "Miriam the Holy.” Itwas a gift from the Rozen Butler Family, owners of the estatein the area. The monastery divided up the land for farmers.In time, the village became the town of Mariampole. Stari-pole, on the other side of the river, also grew.In 1792, Mariampole and Staripole received the rights ofa city ffom the King Stanislav-August. From that time, the 2182LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESsettlements, on either side of the River, were jointly calledMariampole.Following the division of Poland in 1795, Mariampoleflrst was under Prussia. Afterward, it was included in theprincipality of Warsaw. After the Congress of Vienna, theentire area passed to Russian control.During the Napoleonic War in 1812, it was traversed bya number of armies, including the retreating French Army.During the Polish Revolution in 1831, the forests in the areasheltered Polish revolutionaries.To further Russification, the Russian authorities estab-lished a Russian high school, which later served as animportant cultural center.Until 1866, most buildings were of wood. Afterward,stone houses were built. In 1868 and again in 1899, therewere large fires in the city.The Jewish population in 1856 was 2853; in 1897 -3268, 49% of the general population; and in 1923 - 2545,21% of the general population.Before World War I, the city belonged to SuwalkiProvince.The Jews played a large part in developing the town.Most of the city was inhabited by Jews. Before World WarI, 5000 Jews were living there. The Jewish populationdeveloped the economy and the public aspects of the city.The advancement of the city was aided by its geographicallocation, between Kovno and Suwalk, as well as its neamessto the border with Germany and its connections with Russia.During World War I, many Jews were expelled. In theveiy first weeks of the War, the city was near the firont.Yakov Gershonovitz a respected member of the community,was accused along with his son Dr. Haim Gershonovitz ofassisting the enemy. In a show trial, they were found guilty.The attomey Oscar Grozenberg defended them. The verdictTHE COMMUNITIES183stirred up a storm. The prisoners were released firom jailduring the Kerensky administration.Upon the capture of the town by the Germans, the Jewsbegan to retum. Jews from other towns settled there, havingbeen sent by the Germans. Many Jews ffom Hydatzishukfound housing. The rabbi of that town, R. Popel, later servedas a rabbi in Mariampole.During Independent Lithuania, there were 3 flour millsand a sawmill, an electric station and some small industriesowned by Jews. A number of Jews had small vegetablegardens. There were also several Jewish land owners. The"Ungarina" estate of the Skerisky brothers was used as atraining place for pioneers (halutzim). In 1929, the JewishPeoples Bank had 524 members. Several private banks alsooperated in the town.The Russian public school for boys admitted Jewishstudents on a 10% quota basis. No quota existed for extemalexams. Among the students were the brothers Yehoshua andAaron Bronstein, who later became professors of medicine inRussia; Gintzburg, a lecturer at the University of Moscow;Dr. Yakov Vigodsky, a public figure in Vilna; Dr. AaronSolovetchik, a physician in Warsaw. There was a Russianprivate high school for girls. One of the students was thewriter Devorah Baron.Jewish youth studied mainly in the old style cheders.Prior to World War I, a modem Hebrew school ("chedermetukan") was established. Its teachers included K. Gellesand Yehiel Yehieli.Some of the Jewish youth participated in the socialistmovement and in the revolution of 1905. There were bran-ches of the "Little Bund" and the Bund. A number of youngpeople were sentenced to hard labor in Siberia, includingYosef Sobol.In 1919, the first Hebrew high school in Lithuania wasestablished in Mariampole. It served as an example for184LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESsimilar institutions. Two ethnic schools, Tarbut and Yavneh,were set up and there were ORT vocational courses, akindergarten, 2 libraries, and a drama club.Zionist and Hebrew enterprises were active. Among thefirst activists in the Zionist movement were Abba-YitzhakRosenthal, Dr. Moshe Shkodsky, Yakov Gershonovitz andArye-Leib Kaplan. Youth participated in the various Zionistorganizations, especially Maccabi, Hapoel, Shomer Hazair,Betar and Hechalutz. The first olim to go to Eretz Yisraelfrom Mariampole, including Moshe Yankovsky, Dr. BaruchBen Yehuda and Yablokovsky, went there before World WarI. Hebrew periodicals and literature were widely distributed.There were active Zionist women’s organizations.Charitable institutions included an old-age home,orphanage, Bikur Holim societies, Linat Hazedek, HachnasatOrchim, an interest-free loan charity and a branch of "Eza".The city had 3 prayer-houses, a beit midrash, a synago-gue and Kloiz "Hachnasat Orchim".Prior to the Holocaust, the Jewish population was over2500.From the rabbinate: R. Haim Perlmutter bar ZvulonYakov ["Shershaver," the first rabbi of Mariampole, begin-ning in 1780; wrote "Elef Omer" and "Shira L’Haim; serveduntil 1820]; his son-in-law R. Yehuda-Leib Harlap [5625-5632/1865-1872]; R. Yehonatan Aliashberg [5638-5647/1878-1887]; R. Ezriel-Arye Rakovsky (died in 5654/1894];R. Eliahu Klatzin [until 5670/1910]; R. Yakov-Meir Kra-vachinsky [5671-5675/1911-1915]; R. Avraham-Dov Popel[died 5683/1923]; R. Avraham-Zev Halevy Heller* [firom5688/1928]; R. Yosef bar Yehuda; R. Shlomo-ZalmanGordon [died 5632/1872]; R. Shlomo Betnitzky.Natives: Alter Abelson [poet]; Julius Greenstone,Abba-Abraham Rachovsky and Shmuel-Zvi Peltin (writers);Abraham Frank (joumalist); Z. Lamport (philanthropist);Alexander Goldstein and Abba-Yitzhak Rosenthal [ZionistTHE COMMUNITIES185leaders]; Professor Yehoshua Bronstein, his brother ProfessorAharon Bronstein; Dr. Baruch Ben Yehuda [educator];YahonatonBetnitzsky [journalist]; Moshe Rosenthalis [artist];and Izis-Israel Biderman [photographer-artist].Additional references:Mariampole Aid Society Bulletin, David Passman, Editor, 30North LaSalle St., #2630, Chicago, IL 60602.A. Hyman Charlap, "Toldot Edat Mariampole," in YalkutMaarabi, a literary annual, vol. 1, edited by HermanRosenthal and Dr. Adolf M. Radin, New York, 1904,issued by the Ohole Shem Association, pp. 116-122.Memorial book, Mariampole, Uthuania, on the River She-shupe, includes sections in English and Hebrew. Photo-graphs of the town, a list of victims of the Holocaust.Articles especially on the Hebrew Gymnasia of Mariam-pole. Editor: Avraham Tory-Golub. Published by acommittee of survivors firom Mariampole in Israel, 1983.Family history, The Family, by Josef Lavee/Leibowitch, 36Beeri Street, Tel Aviv, 64233-Israel.Benzion Raganoff, A Dictionary ofJewish Names and TheirHistory, 1977. Raganoff says the last name Altfeldcomes firom the Yiddish translation for Staropole, inPoland, which means "old field."MASHKUTZ (MESKUICIAI) - C3Mariampole DistrictMashkutz is a village south of Mariampole (4 miles),along the Kazlova-Ruda-Alyta rail line. Two Jewish familieslived there before World War II, Shlomo Tov and hismarried son and both of their families.Note: there was also a Maskotzio (Maskuciai) near Shavli(7 miles) in the north of the country along the rail line.186LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESMAUROTSH (MAURUCIAI) - Kovno Distríct C3Maurotsh was a village near Gudleva (5 miles). At thetime of the Holocaust only a few Jewish families lived there.MAZHAIR (MAZEIKIAI) - District Capital B1Mazhaik is near Tirkshla (4 miles), Latzkova (6) andSiad (11). Mazhaik is near the Latvian border, on the VentaRiver. It is at the junction of the Libau-Rumanian andRiga-Oriol train lines.The settlement grew with the laying of the Libau-Rumanian rail line in 1868 and the Mazhaik-Riga in 1874.Until World War I, it was in Shavli district. In 1901, itsname was changed to Morviova, after Governor GeneralMarviov of Vilna. In 1918, it regained its former name andfrom that time was a District Capital.Jewish residency was forbidden there according to the"temporary regulations" of the Czarist authorities of 1882.The prohibition was cancelled in 1903, but the law forbiddingJews to own property remained in effect. Jews built theirhomes on land registered in the name of non-Jews.In 1897, the Jewish population was 435. During WorldWar I (1915), the Jews were exiled into Russia. The townwas destroyed. When the Jews retumed after the War, theyrebuilt the town. During that period, Jews from surroundingtowns, including Pikeln, Latzkova and Siad, settled there. In1921, 300 Jews lived there. The numbers increased and in1939 the Jewish population was 800.Jews worked mainly in trade, especially in export oflumber and farm products to Engíand and Germany. Jewsowned 2 factories for processing flax, factories for makingmatches, fiimiture, tiles, cloth and a tannery, a flour mill anda winery.Their geographical proximity to Latvia and the railwayjunction promoted economic prosperity.THE COMMUNITIES187Before World War 1, a significant number of the Jewishchildren went to Russian schools, the public school and thehigh school-trade school. During Independent Lithuania, therewere Hebrew schools - a Tarbut School and a high school(administered by Yaffe and later by Dr. A. Heselsohn).There were also 2 Jewish libraries, a Jewish Peoples Bankwith 280 members, an "Eza" clinic and various charitableinstitutions. The youth were largely affiliated with Zionistand sports organizations. Many were in Betar, includingAbba Zarkinovitz\ who was killed in the summer of 1941 inShavli.From the rabbinate: the first rabbi, R. Zev Aberach{5645-5682/1885-1922], and the last rabbi was R. Yosef-ZevMamiofa*.Natives: Eliezer Aberach [son of the rabbi]; Yosef-ZevWolfson; Zvi Minster [ritual slaughterer and cantor]; TuviaRabinovitz [father-in-law of R. Meir Bar-Ilan]; his sons, R.Yosef Rabinovitz; the writer Haim Kruger [writer]; ShmuelRubinstein; Yakov bar Natan Aaronovitz [R. Natan Venter];Zvi Eitelson; Eliahu Birzhensky; Avraham Getz; HaimGlickman; Zvi and Mones Gross; Shraga Metz; Leib andShmuel-Yehuda Fohan/Pohan; Yisrael Portnoy; Avraham andAlter Kaksett; Avraham and Heshel Rachmil; ShabbetaiRobel; Leib Tov; and Lifnitzky.Additional reference:The town is described by Meir Bar-Ilan in his memoirs,From Volozhin to Jerusalem.MEDINGIAN (MEDINGENAI) - Telz District B1Medingian was a village near Ritova (8 miles). TheMiniya River goes through the center of the village. At thetime of the Holocaust only a few Jewish families lived there.188LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESMEMEL (RLAIPEDA) A2Memel is a port city on the Baltic Sea located on theKurschis (Kurskaya) Peninsula. A railway and road systemconnect it with all the centers of Lithuania. It was previouslycalled Memelberg and became ÍClaipeda during IndependentLithuania.The city was founded in 1252 by the head of the Teuton-ic Order, Papa von Ostema. It was an important trade center.In the 13th-15th centuries, the city was plundered and bumedby the Poles and the Lithuanians. Sweden ruled it brieflyduring the seventeenth century. In 1757 and 1813, it wascaptured by the Russians.In the 1919 Treaty of Versailles, Memel was detachedfrom Germany and tumed over to the Allies under a Councilof Delegates. In 1923, the Allies agreed to transfer control ofthe city and the surrounding territory to Lithuania. Theagreement was ratified by the League of Nations in May1924.Lithuania granted the territory broad powers of autono-my; however, decisions of its legislature required the acqui-escence of the Lithuanian govemor.The first Jews to arrive in Memel came in the fifteenthcentury, but in 1567 they were expelled.In the 1600’s, Frederick Wilhelm of Brandenburgpermitted the family of Moses Jacobson de Jong to settle inMemel. Jacobson, a wealthy Jewish merchant, developedtrade connections for the city with other countries. Jacobsonwas allowed to have a private synagogue and to bring withhim a shochet, chazan and melamed for his family. After ashort time, Jacobson was forced to leave the city.Throughout the eighteenth century, Jews were forbiddento settle there permanently. They would come to the city forbusiness and stay there during the week. Before Shabbat theywould leave. These merchants served as middlemen betweenthe "West” and the "East." During this period, Memel sawTHE COMMUNITIES189a lively trade in Hebrew books. German Jews would sendholy and secular Hebrew books to Memel to sell in Lithuaniaand Poland.In 1812, based on an order giving citizenship to PrussianJews, residency was permitted. Permanent Jewish settlementin the city is dated from that time. Among the settlers wereBaer Cohen and his 3 sons, Yosef, Aaron, and Shmuel, andthe family of Yosef Wald. Jewish merchants, who cameprincipally from Poland and Lithuania, controlled the lumber,produce and flax trade.In 1847, the first synagogue, called the " Polish Syna-gogue," was built in a small alleyway. In the 1850’s, a beitmidrash of Lithuanian Jews was built by R. Yisrael Salanter.In 1875, it was transferred to a building on BaderstrasseStreet. A chevra kadisha was established in 1862. Among thefounders were R. Yisrael Salanter and R. Yitzhak Ruelf. R.Yisrael also founded the Shas and Alfas Societies.R. Dr. Yitzhak Ruelf built the "Synagogua" in 1860 forGerman Jews. He established a Jewish elementary school andhospital which also served nearby Lithuanian towns. More-over, Dr. Ruelf was the founder and editor of a Jewish dailynewspaper.In 1886, Prussia expelled all Russian subjects from theterritory of Memel, purportedly in response to the expulsionof Germans from Kovno.Only about 100 Jewish families remained. They were thefamilies of the top Jewish merchants from Lithuania, who hadmajor trade connections with Russia. However, their rightswere limited, and they were subject to surveillance andrestrictions.When the War broke out in 1914, an order was issuedexpelling all Russian Jews from Memel and sending them toan island in the Baltic Sea. As a result of efforts by thekehilla, the office of trade, the mayor and the govemor, theorder was amended to allow a Jew who could present a190LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESguarantor and a recommendation from 2 German citizens, andwho was not suspected of espionage, to remain. Most"foreign" Jews were thereby exempted ffom the expulsion.At the end of World War I, the Memel region was takenover by the Allies and administered by the French. Alllimitations on Jews were eliminated. Every Jew in the cityand the territory received citizenship. Jews moved there ffomLithuanian border towns and ffom more distant places. TheFrench governor appointed a Council of Four, which includ-ed 2 Jews, 1 German and a French officer as chairman, tohandle citizenship requests of the Jews. The 2 Jews wereMoritz Altschul and Leon Rostovsky.Memel was a port city with a developed trade and adeveloping industry. Conditions were most favorable forJews. It was also a convenient point from which to leave forEretz Yisrael. Many Jews ffom Lithuania were attracted bythese conditions and moved to Memel. The Lithuaniangovernment, wishing to strengthen non-German elements,looked favorably upon this immigration.Jewish population figures of Memel were: 1867 - 887,1875 - 1040, 1880 - 1214, 1885 - 903, 1900 - 1214, 1910 -2008, 1928 - 4500, and 1938 - 6000 (12.5% of the totalpopulation).When Lithuania annexed Memel in 1923, the resultinginflux of Lithuanian Jews gave a boost to the community.The majority of Jews in the city were Zionists. The Kehillaallocated a large plot of land in the center of the city for atraining area and provided a large budget. In 1927, BeitHehalutz was established. The "Yiddisher Kultur Bund" wasa local non-political organization, but later took on a Zionistorientation.Sports associations for youth included Bar Kochba andMaccabi. Other Zionist youth organizations were HashomerHazair, Betar, General Zionist Youth, Herziliya, YoungWIZO.THE COMMUNITIES191There were the General Zionists, Hamizrahi, SocialistZionists, and Revisionists associations. Jewish women’sgroups (Ayd Froyen Ferayn) did social work, headed by Mrs.Rosenberg. Among the leaders of Histadrut of ZionistWomen were Mrs. August, the chairman, Mrs. A. Chazanand Mrs. Yehudit Lesem.Other organizations included the Association for JewishHistory and Literature (Farayn Fir Yidisha Gasikhta OnLiteratur) and the Society of Hebrew Speakers. A Hebrewkindergarten was established. The Jewish children of Memelattended a German language school. The German Jewishchildren had a religious school, Izraelit Religians Schoola,that was founded in 1879. A Talmud Torah was establishedin 1927 and the first Jewish ethnic school in 1936.Despite their joint work for a Jewish homeland, thePrussian Jews and the Eastern European Jews of Memelmaintained separate identities. They each had their ownrabbis and community leaders.In 1938, most Jews worked as merchants in lumber, flaxand produce or in industry. At the beginning of 1939, Jewsowned 330 factories and industrial plants, such as amber,wood, beer, tobacco, textiles, chocolate, and soap factoriesand flour mills. The Jewish Peoples Bank, administered byM. Landau, had 383 members in 1929. There were alsoJewish private banks in the 1920’s, including the bank ofTrade of Konikov and the Bank of Yavshitz and Zomer.There was friction between Lithuania and the Germanmajority of the population. The Nazis called for the return ofMemel to Germany and conducted their propaganda in theform of anti-Semitism. On February 26, 1937, a law waspassed forbidding Jews to work in the professions. Althoughthe Lithuanian govemor vetoed it, incitements increased.During ensuing clashes between the Nazis and Lithuanians,Jews and synagogues were attacked. As Memel began to betaken over by the Nazis, the Jews left Memel for other192LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESlocations in Lithuania. Most went to Kovno; others went tonearby towns. By the beginning of 1939, half of the Jewishpopulation had left, taking with them property estimated at100 million Lits. The Nazi Army entered Memel on March22, 1939.From the rabbinate of the "West": Dr. Yitzhak Ruelf[rabbi in Memel 1865-1898; he fostered closer relationshipsbetween the Jews of the "East" and "West"]; Dr. EmmanuelCarlebach; Dr. Stein [died 1915]; Dr. Lazarus and R. D.P.Shalzinger.From the rabbinate of the "East": R. Yeshayahu Vleg-mot; R. Gavriel Feinberg; R. Meir Noshlovsky; R. Morde-chai-Yitzhak-Isaac Rabinovitz [died in 5680/1920]; and hisson, the last rabbi of the city, R. Eliezer-Yehuda Rabinovitz'.Public figures: Moritz Altschul [official of KerenHayesod and the Office of Trade in Memel]; Alexander[trade-consultant; head of the kehilla for 20 years; and headof the Office of Trade. He died in Germany and willed mostof his estate to the Jewish hospital in Memel]; members ofthe Yonah Balah family; Isadore Horvitz [head of thecommunity council; chairman of the Zionist Agency. He wasmurdered in Kretinga by the Nazis]; BenZion Heniman[distinguished scholar of the school of Yisrael Salanter. Whenthe Jews were expelled from Memel during World War I, hewas told he could remain in the city, but refused, as long asother Jews were exiled]; Moritz Heniman’ [head of the SocialZionists]; Eliezer Tatz [Hebrew educator and Zionist figure];Dr. Herman Jacobson [head of "Bar Kochba"]; FeibushYavshitz [wood merchant; member of the kehilla council; andhead of the Zionist Agency; died in France]; Abraham Meller[Keren Kayemet L’Yisrael figure; was active in all Zionistand Hebrew activities]; Natan Naftal [member of the kehillacouncil, chairman of ORT; he was in the Kovno ghetto andwas later killed at the Dachau concentration camp]; MosheKlein [Hebrew educator; Zionist pioneer in the region]; LeonTHE COMMUNITIES193Callenbach (administrator of the Jewish hospital and founderof Bar Kochba. His brother Herman was a friend of Ghandi];Leon Rostovsky [maskil; brother-in-law of Alexandermentioned above. In his old age, he liquidated all of hisbusinesses and devoted all of his time to the Jewish hospital.He was chairman of the board of govemors and financedmost of a new wing]; Yehoshua Rubin [Zionist figures]worked actively for Hechalutz and was a member of thekehilla committee]; Yosef Shulman [member of the kehillacouncil and member of the board of directors of the hospital];Arye Sheinhoiz [founder of Lit-Fareyn and a Hebrew-spea-kers society; editor of "Memeler Damfvot”].MERETSH (MERKINE) - Alyta District D3Meretsh is near Alyta (18 miles), Oran (16) and Serhai(18), on the Nieman River. The nearest train station was atMarchikantzy (Marcinkonys) (7 miles). The Vilna-SuwalkRoad and the Kovno-Grodno Road passed the town. Prior toWorld War I, the town was part of Troki District. DuringIndependent Lithuania, it was in Alyta District.The Jewish settlement of Meretsh dates from the earlypart of the sixteenth century. Jews were mentioned indocuments dated 1539, conceming a dispute between Chris-tians and Jews and in 1551 conceming their release from aspecial tax. In 1765, there were 444 Jews. In 1847, theJewish population numbered 1565. In 1897, there were 1900Jews, 73% of the general population.In 1919, half the town bumed down.Jews engaged in trade and crafts. About half were crafts-men. Four families made their livelihood in agriculture.Many had small gardens beside their homes. A numberworked transporting lumber on the Nieman River to Germa-ny. There were 4 flour mills and 1 sawmill.194LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBefore World War I, the economy benefitted from abank established in 1907 by Yosef Ziman, Mendel-GersonYanilov, and Avraham-Hertz Miller.The Jewish Peoples Bank during Independent Lithuaniahad 325 members.The town had 3 synagogues, 6 cheders for boys and 1 forgirls. At the end of the nineteenth century, there was ayeshiva, a Talmud Torah, a Shas Society, Mishnayot,Shulhan Aruch, Tehilim, Tiferet Bachurim, and aid societiessuch as Hachnasat Orchim; Bikur Holim, Linat Hazedek anda women’s association for social assistance.During Independent Lithuania, there were 2 ethnicschools, Tarbut and Yavneh, and a local library with about3000 books.Branches of all the Zionist parties and a communistassociation existed. Among the youth groups were Gordonia,Shomer Hatzair, Socialist Zionists, sports groups, scouts andHehalutz.From the rabbinate: R. Yitzhak bar Zvi; R. David Velpa[R. David from Kroz, died 5644/1884]; R. Benzion Stem-feld; R. Yehuda Halevy Lifshitz [author of' David Yesharim"and "David Emunah"]; and R. Michel-David ShtupaT.Natives: Zelman-Yakov Friedman, David-Tavli Efrati;the brothers David-Eliahu and Loure Stauven; Zvi-HarryFishel [philanthropist]; Judge Simon Rivkind; Max-LeopoldMargalit [scholar] Aaron Frankel [joumalist]; Dr. MenahemGelen [writer]; and Yosef Ziman [Zionist figure, a founderof "Nahalat Yitzhak" in Israel].MERGILOPRA - Alyta District C3Mergilopka is near Simna (1 miles). At one time DovGoldberg and his sons Abraham and Max owned a large farmthere and extensive property in the Simna area.THE COMMUNITIES195MINTZAMintza was near Targin [F2] (8 miles) and had a Jewishpopulation before World War I.MIROSLAU (MIROSLAVAS) - Alyta District C3Miroslau is near Alyta (8 miles), Daug (17) and Serhai(7). The nearest train station was 5 miles away.In 1897, the Jewish community numbered 60 families,75% of the general population. During World War I, theJews were expelled to Russia. After the War when someretumed, the Jewish population then amounted to 40 families,50% of the general population. Before the Holocaust, therewere 20 families left, 25% of the general population.The Jews engaged in trade, agriculture (10 families) andcrafts (10 families). Market day was Wednesday.The synagogue was founded in 5656/1896. The childrenfrom the town studied at a cheder and many continued theirstudies in Alyta or Mariampole.The association of Zionist youth had 30 members. Someof the youth made aliyah to Eretz Yisrael. Some werepioneers at Emek-Hefer.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe Shapiro; R. Shmuel-Aaron Plotkin; R. Shmuel Chatzon.Natives: Benjamin Brody [Dov Brodov, President of theZionist Histadrut in the U.S.].MISHTIMishti was a community in the northem section ofNaishtut-Shaki [B3]. Five Jewish families lived there.MITZINTZRESMitzintzkes was a village near Poshvitin [C1] (4 miles).It had a Jewish population before World War I.196LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESMONTVIDOVAMontvidova was near Datnuva. There were Jews livingthere before World War I.MORLISHORMorlishok was a village near Antaliept (4 miles). It hada Jewish population before World War I.MUSNIK (MUSNINKAI) - Vilkomir District D3Musnik is near Shirvint (5 miles), Gelvan (10), Bogo-slavishok (8), Vilna (21) and Vilkomir (24). It is 3 milesfirom the Polish border. The nearest train station is in Zhusli(10). Its name comes from the Musa River, which flowsabout a third of a mile firom the town.There were many Polish estates in the area. The townwas of a mixed Polish and Lithuanian character. But, aconcerted effort through education and Lithuanian nationalis-tic preaching changed this character.The beginning of the Jewish settlement is not known.However, a ledger book (pinchas) remains ffom the BurialSociety ffom the years 5494-5586\ 1734-1826. It is one of theoldest extant ledger books ffom the time of the LithuanianCouncil. It gives regulations of the Society, a description ofits customs, a report on income and expenditures, a list ofmembers and a list of books studied by the brotherhood. Atthe end of the book are matters involving the cemetery,disputes on enforcement of rules and burial fees and also anoverview of the economics and spiritual situation of the Jewsin the town and the surrounding area.During Independent Lithuania, the Jewish communitynumbered 60 families (351 individuals in 1923). The Jewshad a good relationship with their Christian neighbors.Jews engaged mainly in trade. On Tuesday, market day,villagers brought in their produce to sell, and they boughtproducts ffom Jewish shoplceepers. Before the "Saulists" (theTHE COMMUNITIES197Lithuanian nationalist guard) was established during Indepen-dent Lithuania, the Jews were the only suppliers to theChristian population. Some were peddlers who traveled intheir carts to the neighboring villages every weekday. Therewere also Jewish artisans. including tailors, needleworkers,blacksmiths, shoemakers, tinsmiths, glaziers and oven-build-ers. There were exporters of farm products, grain, poultryand timber. A number of Jews leased fruit and vegetablegardens and supplied produce to Vilna, Kovno and Vilkomir.Almost every Jewish family had its own vegetable gardenbeside the house, a cowshed and chicken coop, whichsupplied a large part of the family needs.Homes were built of wood. When a fire broke out mostof the town bumed down. After it bumed down during WorldWar I, the Jews rebuilt the town with the help of the JointDistribution Committee.They had 2 prayer houses, a synagogue and a beitmidrash. There were societies for the study of Torah.During World War I, the Jews of Musnik and itsenvirons were not expelled. In 1919 and 1920, battlesbetween the Lithuanian and the Red Armies and between theLithuanians and the Poles broke out in the area. Jewishsoldiers encamped nearby were guests in the town. Undertheir influence a Hebrew library was established and a branchof "Pioneers" and a movement for aliyah to Eretz Yisraeldeveloped.The home of Henia-Frieda Pokominsky was a meeting-place for maskil youth and a center for the spirit of Zionism.She had 5 daughters and was herself a leamed person.Prior to the Holocaust, about 65 Jewish families lived inMusnik. Reuven Kronick had a large farm in a village outsideof Musnik.From the rabbinate: R. Kamo; the last rabbi, R. Avra-ham-Yitzhak Beniash'; and R. Shlomo-Yitzhak Barzak [ritualslaughterer, cantor and teacher].198LTTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESNative: David Notik [1857-1919; writer and Zionist].NADZING (NEDZINGAS) - Alyta District D3Nadzing is a village south of Daug (7 miles) and west ofOran (7). Jews lived there before World War I.Native: Eliezer Shavlat [1897-1941; journalist andtranslator].NAISHTUT-PONEVEZH (NAUMIESTIS) - D2Ponevezh DistrictNaishtut-Ponevezh was a small town near the DistrictCapital city of Ponevezh (10 miles).In 1923, it had 157 Jews, out of a general population of739. A few Jewish families lived there prior to the Holo-caust.NAISHTUT-SHAKI (NAUMIESTIS-SAKIAI) - B3Shaki DistrictAlso known as Naishtut-Schirwint and Naishtut-Kudirka,Naishtut-Shaki is near Kibart (9 miles) and Virbaln (9), towhich it was connected by road to the south, and Vilkovishk(12) and the train station (Kovno-Virbaln rail line).It was a city on the Prussian-German border. The LittleSchirwint River to the west was the natural border withGermany. Across the river was the small German town ofSchirwint (not to be confused with the Lithuanian city ofShirvint). Naishtut-Shaki was surrounded by rivers on ttireesides. On the Schirwint River (the border) there was a cementbridge with customs houses on either side.To the north was the community of Mishti where 5Jewish families lived.In 1643, the Polish Queen Cecilia Renata, wife of KingWladislaw, granted the Rights of Magdeburg to the city. Inhonor of the King, the town was renamed Vladislavov(Wladyslawow). During Czarist rule, Naishtut was a DistrictTHE COMMUNITIES199Capital. During Independent Lithuania, it was annexed to theDistrict of Shaki.Jewish settlement dates back at least 200 years. BeforeWorld War I, 1600 Jews lived there, 40% of the generalpopulation. In 1925, Jews numbered about 1000 individuals.In 1941, approximately 700 Jews lived there, 23% of thegeneral population. There were also 30 Jewish families whoarrived after the Germans expelled the Jews from SuwalkiProvince in 1939.In the 1870’s, the city burned down. The Jews rebuilt itover a larger area. Wooden homes were replaced by brickhomes.In 1904-5, Jews began to emigrate to America and toSouth Africa. Because of natural increases, the total numberof residents did not decline.During World War I, the Jews were deported. More thana quarter of the city bumed down. For a number of yearsNaishtut remained in rums.At the end of 1918, municipal authority was reestablishedunder Independent Lithuania. The city began to be rebuilt.Jewish refugees retumed and began fixing up and buildingwith the help of the Joint (JDC) and the Jewish PeoplesBank, which was established at this time. Up to 1925, theBank served the city of Shaki and had 150 members.The transfer of District Offices from Naishtut-Shaki toShaki and the Lithuanian national economic pressures on theJews caused a drop in the number of Jewish residents duringIndependent Lithuania.Many emigrated to South Africa and to the U.S. Theyouth went to Kovno for schooling and some stayed there.Most Jews engaged in trade. Until the rise of Hitler andthe closing of the border with Germany, many families tradedwith the German residents of Schirwint, which had only 3Jewish families. The Jews sold the Germans farm products,vegetables, fruits, chickens and eggs and bought industrial200LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESproducts. About 20 Jewish families made their living ffornfarming and even owned some land. Some had small farmswith vegetables, fruit trees and poultry. There were alsoJewish artisans, shoemakers, needle-workers, tailors, tin-smiths, blacksmiths, metalworkers, clockmakers, hat makers,barbers, bakers, and butchers. There were 4 factories,employing only Jewish workers, for processing bristles; 3factories for processing flax; 3 flour mills and 3 beverageplants. The factories and the electrical power plant wereowned by Jews. Just prior to World War II, the factorieswere taken away and given to Lithuanians. Three flour millsand a power station remained in the hands of Jews until 1940.A number of Jews maintained an intercity transportationservice with cars. In 1936, this business was expropriated.The community had 2 shochets. One also served as thecantor. The synagogue, built in 1880, was large and verylovely. There was a beit midrash, a kloiz, baths and a mikva.Institutions included a charitable loan fund, a BikurHolim society and a burial society; Linat Hazedek providedmonetary assistance and personal treatment for the sick.There were daily lessons at the beit midrash and kloiz for theShas Society (Gemorah), Mishnayot Society, Tehillim(Psalms) Society for reciting psalms everyday at sunrise andat sunset; Ein Yakov Society and Menorat Hamaor.Boys went to school at the cheder. A few years beforethe Holocaust, the local rabbi established a small yeshiva.There was a Tarbut elementary school, which was in a large,modern building established by the Lithuanian Office ofEducation, 2 libraries, Hebrew and Yiddish. A special wingwas set aside for the Jewish school. There had been a Hebrewhigh school, which closed in 1927 due to financial difficul-ties. The majority of the young people were Zionistic andbelonged to branches of Maccabi (founded in 1924), ShomerHatzair (in 1926) and Hechalutz (in 1932).THE COMMUNITIES201There were 3 Jewish representatives on the municipalcouncil along with 5 Lithuanians and a German.From the rabbinate: R. Natan Stern, R. Arye-Leib barYehiel Luria; R. Eliahu-Yehuda Daichas [died in Jerusalem];R. Yisrael-Haim Daichas [ÍTom 5644/1884; in 5657/1897 hemoved to Leeds, England]; R. Yitzhak Esh; and the lastrabbi, R. Nehemia Hacohen Fortman/Portman' [author of thebook "Torat Chaim"].Natives: R. Yosef-Zechaira Stem; R. Meir Verzheblov-sky; R. Avraham Hershman; R. Yonatan Zerachy; R. Adolf-Moshe Radin; R. Shlomo Forer/Porer; Dr. Abba-Hillel Silver[Zionist leader]; Max Band [artist]; Herman Bemstein[statesman and joumalist]; Zvi-Hirsh Bemstein [publisher];Leon Haznovitz [representative of Poalei-Zion]; ShlomoTalpiot, Yehuda Abelson, Arye-Louie Rosenthal, YeshayahuValgmot, Avner Tannenbaum [writers]; Shlomo-YosefHerberg [writer and translator]; Dr. Zemach Feldstein[educator]; Dr. Zalman Libai (Liobovsky) [writer andeducator]; Professor Mordechai Bobtalsky; Dr. LazarGoldstein-Golden.Additional references:From Ghetto Kovno to Dachau, a memorial to Dr. LazarGoldstein (1901-1981), edited by Berl Kagan, publishedby Esther Goldstein, New York, 1985; English transla-tion by Max Rosenfeld.Dr. Goldstein wrote an article on his native town of Naishtut-Shaki in the memorial book Lite (Yiddish).NAISHTUT-TAVRIG (NAUMIESTIS-TAURAGE) A2- Tavrig DistrictNaishtut-Tavrig is a town on the Shusta River, near thePrussian border (1 mile), near Tavrig (21), Skudvill (24),Shilel (21), Shvefcshna (11), Payura (17) and Vainuta (9).202LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe nearest train station was in Kulishan (1 mile). UntilWorld War I, it was also called Neishtut-Sugint.Its Jewish settlement was among the fírst in Lithuania.In 1914, nearly the entire town bumed down, with only30% of the homes not damaged. In 1915, the Jews wereforced to flee because of the proximity to the war front.During Independent Lithuania, the Jewish community had300 families, but before the Holocaust, only 200 familiesremained. Those who left went mainly to South Africa andAmerica. The youth went to Eretz Yisrael.The Jews engaged largely in trade, especially grain andflax, with Memel, Roenigsberg and Hamburg. A few Jewishfamilies made their living by growing vegetables.At the initiative of R. Liesin, the old synagogue, whichhad bumed down in 1914, was rebuilt by town natives Louisand Max Rothschild, who were living in South Africa.Before the Holocaust, 80 students were studying at theschool. Many went to the Hebrew high school and yeshivasin nearby communities. About 120 Jewish families lived inthe town before World War II.Mutual aid societies, such as Linat Hazedek and GemlaotHasadim, provided assistance.From the rabbinate: R. Avraham [brother of the VilnaGaon; author of "Maalot HaTorah"]; R. Eliahu bar Avraham[son of R. Avraham]; R. Shlomo-Zalman [grandson of R.Avraham]; R. Yakov Bendtman, [later rabbi in Boisk]; R.Eliezer-Yehoshua-Zelig Shapira [died in 5687/1927]; R.Yakov Moshe Liesin [son-in-law of R. Shapira].Natives: Eliahu Ragular, Shlomo-Zalman Abel; AbrahamRabinovitz; Yosef Benzion Friedman; and Shmuel Kelmer.NATEN (NOTENAI) A1Naten was a village near Plungian (12 miles). It had aJewish population before World War I.THE COMMUNTTIES203NAZIONISHOK - Rakishok Distríct E2Nazionishok was a farming village beside Lakes Paskanand Gromabela and near Yuzhint (4 miles), Kamai (6),Sviadoshitz (10) and Rakishok (17). The nearest train stationwas at Panimunik (13).Before World War I, there were 20 Jewish families,constituting the entire population of the village. The Jewsremained during the War, but they suffered at the hands ofthe occupying Germans. During Independent Lithuania, thenumber dropped and in 1935, only 3 Jewish families wereleft.At one time, each family had about 100 hectares of goodfarmland. They grew grains, flax and vegetables. Every farmhad large work animals and a chicken coop.Because of the primitive system of farming, income wassmall and had to be supplemented. In the winter, the farmersworked at trade in the nearby marketplaces or in crafts, asshoemakers. The women worked as seamstresses. Those notable to sustain themselves began to sell their land to neigh-boring farmers and work in nearby cities.ín addition, land redistribution during IndependentLithuania upset Jewish communal life. The fear of breakingoff from the Jewish people, assimilation and mixed marriagescaused an exodus from the village. The first to leave wasAvraham from Nazionishok, who sold his land and emigratedtotheU.S. After him, others liquidated their farms and wentto the United States or to South Africa. In tíiis way, theentire Jewish village emptied out.There was a beit midrash and also a cheder in thevillage. The local rabbi also worked in agriculture and servedas the shochet for the village and for the nearby town ofYuzhint.204LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAdditíonal reference:Chapter on Natzunishok (Nazionishok) in Yizkor-Book ofRaJdshok and Environs, 1952.NEI-RADVILISHOK (NEMUNALIS RADVILISKIS)- Birzh DistrictNei-Radvilishok was near the Latvian border, near Birzh[Dl]. In 1923, the Jewish populatíon was 205, out of ageneral populatíon of 723.NEMORSHT (NEMAKSCIAI) - Rasin District B2Nemoksht is near Kelme (17 miles), Skudvill (9) andShilel (21). The nearest train station was in Vidukla (3).In 1847, 255 Jews lived there; in 1897 - 954, 80% of thegeneral population.In World War I, the Germans captured the town. In1917, many of the homes were destroyed by fire.During Independent Lithuania, about 150 Jewish familieslived there. The number dropped over the years. Before theHolocaust, the number was about 70 families.The Jews made their living mainly from trade and crafts.Three Jewish families had large estates, and one owned aflour mill. The Jewish Peoples Bank had 118 members in1929.There was a Tarbut School and a library in the town.From the rabbinate: R. Uri-David Efrion [later went toOld-Zhagerj; R. Moshe Halevy Zakesh [author of "DevreiMoshe," died in 5665/1905]; R. Haim-Zvi Hirsh Broide[later went to Old-Zhager; was one of the heads of Hamizrahiin Lithuania]; and the last rabbi, R. Yisrael Krantz*.Natíves: Moshe Markovitz [shoemaker; author of "ShamHagadolim Hashlishi"] and David-Matityahu Lipman [phar-macist and scholar].THE COMMUNITIES205NEMUNAITZ (NEMUNAITIS) - Alyta District D3Nemunaitz is near Alyta (7 miles). In 1923, the Jewishpopulation of the town was 142, out of a general populationof 727. Before World War II, 15 Jewish families lived there.NEVARAN (NEVARENAI) - Telz District B1Nevaran was a small town in northwest Lithuania, nearTelz (9 miles).In 1923, the town had 95 Jews, out of a general popula-tion of 456.Native: R. Haim ben Avraham Natansohn [1838-1904;rabbi in Pikeln and Zhidik].NIEMENTSHIN (NEMENCINE) E3Niementshin is a town near Vilna (16 miles) which hada Jewish community before the Holocaust. It is discussed inthe memorial book of Sventzion Region (see Sventzion).NOVIGOROD (NOVOGRUDOR)Novigorod is a suburb of Vilna.Additional Reference:It is mentioned in Jerusalem of Uthuania by Leyzer Ran,New York: Vilner Parlag, 1974, p. 80.OLKENIK (VALKININKAI) D301kenik is near Eishishok (13 miles) and Oran (15) insouthem Lithuania, within the borders of Vilna Gubemia andthe territory which became part of Poland after World WarI. It had a Jewish population up to the time of the Holocaust.01kenik is one of the oldest towns in Lithuania. Royalpalaces were built in the sixteenth century on a hill by theshores of the river '*Merchanka. " The Polish Kings, Sigmundthe Old and Sigmund August, ífequently visited there.206LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESJews began to settle in villages near 01kenik around themid-1500’s. In 1697, the Vaad Hamedina, Jewish-LithuanianState Committee, held a two-month conference in 01kenik.Delegates came ffom all of Poland.In the third partition of Poland in 1795, 01kenik becamepart of Russia.In 1802, a lovely wood carved synagogue was completedon the site of a previous synagogue which had been de-stroyed. In 1812, Napoleon visited the synagogue. He leíit acoat there and it was made into the "Napoleonic Parochet"(cover for the holy ark).In the 1800’s, Jews were forced to leave the villagesaround 01kenik, and they moved to the town. By the middleof the nineteenth century, 1153 Jews lived in the town. TheJewish population began to drop toward the end of thecentury with emigration to America.Up to 1840, 01kenik was a govemment estate, composedof 6 farming communities: 01keniki, Nonishki, Pansishok,Yakintzy, Poshkamia and Laipoon. The communities consist-ed of 41 villages and 5 settlements. In 1840, the area wasdivided into 4 parts by the Russians: 01kenik, Nonishki,Poshkamia and Pansishok.Between 1848 and 1850, the villages of Dekshna-Sela (2miles), Laipoon (5) and Panashishok (11) were founded byJewish farmers.Jews fought with Polish insurgents during the PolishRebellion of 1863.Before World War I, the Jewish community organized aself-defense unit, a city public theatre, a library, Hebrewschools and religious schools. Some halutzim (pioneers) wentto Eretz Yisrael in 1920. Between the Wars, the economicsituation of the Jews deteriorated gravely.THE COMMUNITIES207Additional references:Haira Belahavot (Olkeniki In Flames: A Memorial Book) isthe name of the yizkor book published in 1962 by theAssociation of Former Residents of 01keniki and Sur-roundings, Tel Aviv. It has a small section in English,which gives an historical summary, a list of victims ofthe Holocaust, and numerous photos of families whichperished. It has a photo of the old synagogue of 01kenikand one of the synagogue in Laipoon.There is a picture of the synagogue of 01keniki in the bookWooden Synagogues by Maria Piechotek.ORAN (VARENA) - Alyta District D3Oran is near Daug (13 miles) and Meretsch (16). Perloi(6) and Nadzing (6) also had Jewish residents at one time. Aroad connected it with the District City of Alyta.Oran is named after the Verenka River, which goes bythe town and flows into the Meretshanka. The train station is2 1/2 miles away.There were numerous summer camps in the area. TheLithuanian govemment established a hospital for patients withrespiratory problems near the town.In the year 1847, there were 158 Jews in the community.When the railroad tracks were laid, commerce developed andthe Jewish population grew. In 1897, there were 1473 Jewsout of a general population of 2,624.Before World War I, close to 500 Jewish families livedthere. In 1915, battles were fought in the vicinity. Almost theentire town bumed down.After the War, the town was divided between Lithuaniaand Poland. The border ran along the Meretshanka River.Relatives who lived on opposite sides of the border wouldmeet at the bridge. About 15 Jewish families remained inPolish Oran. Most of them retumed to Lithuanian Oran and208LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESrebuilt their homes after the War. In 1923, there were about300 families in Oran. In 1940, there were 240 families.Before World War II, Jews made their living in trade,crafts, and agriculture. Army bases in the area served also asan important source of income. A number of Jews worked inthe carton factory which belonged to David Yarshansky. Thedoctor and pharmacist was Meir Levine.The wood business, developed before World War I,declined when Vilna was cut off ffom Lithuania. The JewishPeoples Bank, administered by Isser Veksler, had a member-ship of 91 in 1929. Tuesday was market day.The Jews emigrated mainly to Argentina, the U.S. andto Palestine.They had one beit midrash, a Tarbut School with 30pupils, and one cheder with 25 pupils.From the rabbinate: R. Genin and the last rabbi, R. ZviBlyman*.PABIRZHA (PABIRZHE) - Birzh District D1Pabirzha is a village in northem Lithuania, near Birzh (5miles) and Salat (9).In 1923, only one Jew lived there. At the time of theHolocaust, there were two Jews in Pabirzha, evidently onefamily.PACHINEL (POCIUNELIAI) - Keidan District C2Panchinel is near Baisigola (8 miles), Krakinova (10) andKeidan (22), on land belonging to Baron Yagman. He builtthe town in the nineteenth century and invited Jews to settlethere.During World War I, the Jews left the town. DuringIndependent Lithuania, there were only 10 Jewish families.They worked as farmers and as shopkeepers.There was a lovely synagogue, a rabbi, a shochet and amelamed. Older children continued their studies in Keidan.THE COMMUNITIES209On the High Holidays and on Festivals, people from theoutlying settlements would come to the town.From the rabbinate: R. Eliezer-Moshe-Zvi Laba.PADOVISA C2Padovisa was a village near Lidovian (4 miles) andChitovian. It had Jewish population before World War I.PADUSHA (PADUSIE) - Alyta DistrictPadusha is near Simna [C3] and Serhai. At one time,Zev Ziman and his son Abraham from Padusha owned a largefarm and extensive property in the Simna area.PAGIR (PAGIRIAI) - Keidan District D2Pagir was a small town near Keidan and near Remigola(11 miles). In 1923, there were 83 Jews there. It is estimatedthat the number dropped by a few dozen by the time of theHolocaust.PAKALNISHKY - Rasin District B2Pakalnishky was near Yurburg (8 miles). Before WorldWar I, it had a Jewish community.PAKON (PAKUONIS) - Kovno DistrictPakon is near Pren (5 miles), Birshtan [D3] (4 miles) andKovno (16).In 1923, the Jewish population was 51. At the time ofthe Holocaust, only a few Jewish families remained.PALANISHOK C1Palanishok was a village near Poshvitan (1 mile). AJewish community existed there before World War I.210LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESPALOBY (PALUOBIAI) - Shaki DistrictPaloby was near Grishkabud (5 miles) and Shaki [C3J.There was a Jewish community there before World War I.PAMUSHA (PAMOSE) - Shavli District C1Pamusha is a village near Linkova (3 miles), Shavli andPoshvitan, on the Muse River.The Jewish community dates from the nineteenth century,when Jewish farmers from the area settled on govemmentland.In 1897, there were 79 Jews farming about 500 acres.Native: Pesach-Leibman Hersh [1882-1955; sociologistand economist; son of Meir-David HershJ.PANASHISHOK (PANOSISRES) - Troki District D3Panashishok was a small Jewish settlement near 01kenik(11 miles) in southeastem Lithuania. It was on the border ofVilna Gubemia which belonged to Poland up to World WarII.Until 1840, Pansishok was part of the govemment estateof 01kenik.The local Jewish population was less than 100. Almostall of the families engaged in agriculture on their own landwhich was on the other side of the border.In the middle of the nineteenth century, about 20 Jewishfamilies lived on land which the Russians gave them after theland apportionment. The village was set in a lovely land-scape, surrounded by forests, lakes and natural pools forraising físh. In winter, the farmers were unemployed becausethey had no altemative occupations.There was a beit midrash, a shochet and a baal-tefillah(leader of services) in the last years before World War I. Thebaal tefilla before World War I was Mordechai Snitko. At theend of the 1800’s, R. Shlomo Shtzrbach lived in the village.THE COMMUNITIES211The houses in the village were small; the roofs werecovered with straw, like the houses of the peasants. l'hevillage did not grow or develop. Parcels of land belonging toJews were sold to the gentiles, and the young people went toAmerica.After World War I, the village remained on the borderof Lithuania and was cut off from the town of 01kenik.Additional reference:The memorial book of 01kenik, Ha ’lra Belahavot (Olkenikiin Flames: A Memorial Book), edited by Shlomo Farber,published by Association of Former Residents of 01ke-niki and Surroundings, Tel Aviv, 1962.PANIMON (PANEMUNE)Panimon was a town in westem Lithuania which had aJewish population at one time.PANIMUNIK (PANEMUNELIS) E2- Rakishok DistrictPanimunik is near Rakishok (10 miles) and Kamai (7),along the railroad line to Dvinsk.This Jewish community came into being with theestablishment of the railway station. Previously, the town hadbeen part of the estate of Squire Shvintatzky. The busy trainstation served Sviadoshitz, Kamai and Skopishok. The stationwas mainly used to ship grain, produce and firuits.At the beginning of the century, a large fire engulfed thetown, but in a short time it was rebuilt.Before World War I, 200 Jews lived there. They wereexpelled during the War, and the town bumed down. The 22Jewish families which retumed made up 25 % of the generalpopulation. Because the town was cut off from Dvinsk it lostits former importance in trade. The Jews did small-scaletrade. There were no Jewish craftsmen, except for 2 butchers.212 LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThere were large shops owned by Zalman-Yitzhak Mizrahi,Yonah Krabelnik, Haim-David Meltzky and Shmuel Avirer,a tavem owner.The Jews of the town were Hasidim. There was a beitmidrash. The town did not have a rabbi or a doctor. In timesof need they would travel to Rakishok. There was no Jewishschool. A few children went to Lithuanian schools, but mostwent to schools and yeshivas in nearby areas. The cemeterywas in Kamai.From the rabbinate: R. Yitzhak-Moshe [son of the rabbifirom Ponidel].Additional reference:Two chapters on Ponemunok appear in the yizkor book ofRakishok and Environs, edited by M. Bakalczuk-Felin,So. Africa; Johannesburg: The Rakishker Landsman-schaft, 1952 (Yiddish).PANSISHOK (ZIDKIEMIS) - Shavli DistrictPansishok was near Shavli [C2]. It was a village ofJewish farmers who settled on about 1000 acres of govem-ment land in 1849.In 1897, 158 Jews lived there. After World War I, onlyabout 20 Jewish families remained.PARASIYE (POROWSIE) C3Parasiye is a village near Vilkovishk (10 miles). It hada Jewish population, including the Shimansky Family (familytree at the Association Lithuanians in Israel, Tel Aviv).PASAIKI - Alyta DistrictPasaiki is near Simna [C3]. At one time Israel Frankowned a large farm and extensive property in the Simna area,including Pasaiki.THE COMMUNITIES213PASAMEVA - Trold DistrictPasameva was a village near Visokidbor [D3] (4 miles).A few Jewish families lived there before World War I. (SeeVisokidbor for additional information.)PASHALA D1Pashala was a village near Salat (3 miles). It had aJewish community before World War I.PASORISHORPasorishok is near the town of Simna [C3]. At one timeLeah Veinstein, daughter of Israel Frank, owned a large farmand extensive property in the Simna area.PATILZHE (PATILCIAI) C3Patilzhe is a village near Mariampole (10 miles),Balbirishuk (9) and Vilkovishk (22). It had a Jewish popula-tion, including the Shimansky Family (family tree at theAssociation of Lithuanians in Israel, Tel Aviv).PAYURA (PAJURIS) - Tavrig District B2Payura is near Tavrig (24 miles), Shilel (7), Chaviadan(9), Vainuta (9), on the Shilel-Vainuta Road. The town,which is in a valley surrounded by forested hills, is namedfor the Yura (Jura) River, which surrounds it. Payura was apopular site for vacationers during the summer months.Before World War I, Jewish communities existed in thenearby villages of Tenanis (5 miles) and Zhving (4). Thenearest train station was at Tavrig.During the Czarist regime, the town was included inRasin District. In Independent Lithuania, it was attached toTavrig District.During the Czarist period, about 50 Jewish families livedthere. In 1921, there were about 70 families, 296 people. Justbefore the Holocaust, the number was down to 30 families.214LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe reduction of the Jewish community was due to emigra-tion to South Afirica.The Jews worked in trade and crafts. Market days wereMondays and Fridays. There were 4 annual fairs. Almostevery family had a small vegetable garden, fruit trees and achicken coop. There were also some well-to-do woodmerchants.Jewish farmers ffom the surrounding area would come tothe town for Holidays and Festivals.The Jewish Peoples Bank in Shilel served Payura.They had a beit midrash, a Tarbut School and a cheder(10 boys). The boys would continue their studies in theyeshivas at Kelme and Telz. There was also a library and adrama club. There were Bikur Holim and Linat Hazedekinstitutions.From the rabbinate: R. Sholom-Gershon bar Moshe-ZeligKav [served as rabbi 5660-5685/1900-1925] and R. MosheRravitz’.PERLOI (PERLOJA) - Alyta District D3Perloi is near Meretsh (10 miles) and Oran (6), on LakeGeliev.Before World War I, a few dozen Jewish families livedthere. There was a large, beautiful synagogue.During World War I, the Jews left. After the War, onlysix families retumed. The synagogue stood empty.The Jews worked in fishing and farming.There was a melamed, a teacher for young children. Theolder children went to school in neighboring towns.PETRASHONPetrashon was a suburb of Kovno [C3] and had a Jewishcommunity.Native: Yisrael-Yakov Shwartz [bom 1885; son of R.Yitzhak-Isaac Shwartz].THE COMMUNITIES215PIKELN (PIKELIAI) - Mazhaik District B1Pikeln is near Layazhova (18 miles), Zhidik (9), Siad(9), Yelok (12), Latzkova (4), Mazhaik (13) and the LoshaRiver. The train station was 4 miles away.Pikeln is named after the "PikelhoF estates. UnderCzarist rule, the town was in Telz District. During Indepen-dent Lithuania, it was in Mazhaik District.The center of the town was the market square. From itbranched out 4 streets.In 1897, 1206 Jews lived there, 68% of the generalpopulation, but in 1914 there were only about 150 Jewishfamilies.The Jews were expelled during World War I. After theWar, some retumed. In 1921, there were 286 Jews, and thenumber continued to drop. Before the Holocaust, only about30 families remained.The Jews worked mainly in small-scale trade, peddlingand crafts. There were also large flour merchants, owners ofa soap factory, 2 flour mills, a sawmill and 2 inns. TheJewish Peoples Bank, administered by Moshe Natansohn, had87 members.There were 2 prayer houses and a yeshiva mn by ZevAbrech and later by Haim Natansohn. There were 2 chedersand a library. Before the Holocaust, only 7 boys werestudying at the cheder.There were chapters of Bikur Holim and Kupat Gemach(charitable loan fund).From the rabbinate: R. Moshe-Shimon Zivitz; R.Binyamin Rabinovitz [5592-5612/1832-1852; who lived ingreat poverty[; R. Abraham Harif [died in 5637/1877]; R.Zev-Wolf Abrach; R. Abraham-Yehoshua; R. Moshe fromSkudvill; R. Yakov Vilentzik [author of "Dilatot Tshuva,"5648/1888]; R. Yosef Benzion Friedman; R. Arye-LeibFmmkin; R. Haim Natansohn [died 5664/1904]; R. BenzionMelamed [died 5689/1929]; R. Dov Melamed; R. Todres216LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESLokshin; R. Yisrael Mosinsohn; R. Yisrael Farber*; and thelast rabbi, R. Haim-Zalman Kron*.Natives: Abraham Kerim [writer and translator]; brothersRobert and Albert Shiff [businessmen and large contributorsin New York]; Marcus Shiff [rabbi in Cincinnati; descendantof Mordechai Shiff, owner of a fabric store in Pikeln];Eliahu-David Rabinovitch-Taumin.PILVANA (PALEVENE) D2Pilvana is a village near Kupishok (5 miles) and Pone-vezh (20). Jews lived there before the Holocaust.PILVISHOR (PILVISKIAI) - Vilkovishk District C3Pilvishok is near Vilkovishk (7 miles), Mariampole (14)and Kovno (34), adjacent to the German border on the Pilvaand Sheshupa Rivers. It is on the Virbaln-Kovno-Vilna trainline.In 1865, the Jewish community numbered 976; in 1897- 1242, 53% of the general population; in 1921 - 909; and in1939 - 700. At the outbreak of World War II, about 1000Jewish residents lived in the town.The Jews were mainly engaged in trade of grain, flax,farm products and poultry, especially geese which wereexported to Germany. Merchants would go to central Russiaand buy geese and fruits for export. There were also ped-dlers, who would go to villages all week and return home forShabbat. A number of Jews engaged in crafts.After World War I, when Lithuania was cut off firomRussia, trade dropped and the Jewish community diminished.Many emigrated to the United States and South Africa. Somewent to Palestine.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 194 members.There was a synagogue and a beit midrash, which bumeddown during World War I but was later rebuilt. Boys studiedin cheders and in the "little yeshiva." They would continueTHE COMMUNITIES217their studies at yeshivas in Kovno, Slobodka and others.During Independent Lithuania, there was a Hebrew kinder-garten with 15 boys enrolled and a l arbut School with 130pupils. The students continued their studies in Hebrew highschools in the area. There was a library and a drama club.Youth belonged to Zionist youth organizations and sportsgroups.From the rabbinate: R. Aaron bar Zvi Hirsh; R. Yakov-Meir Levine; R. Yehiel-Yakov Veinberg; and the last rabbi,R. Abraham Reznik*.Natives: Arye-Leib Bialovlotzky; Hillel Bavli [poet] andProf. Shmuel Bialovlotzky [scholarj.Additional reference:Photo of "Market Day in Pilviskis" in Encjclopedia Judaica,vol. 11, p. 369.PINIAVA (PINIAVA) - Ponevezh District D2Piniava was a village near the District City of Ponevezh(4 miles). In 1923, 58 Jews lived there. At the time of theHolocaust, the number was much less.PLODNOGY - Keidan DistrictPlodnogy is near Keidan [D2|. In 1922, a training farmrun by Shbatiel Deutsch was established to train Pioneers togo to Palestine. It was the first such pioneer farm in Lithua-nia.PLOTEL (PLATELIAI) - Kretinga District A1Plotel, on Lake Plotel, is near Salant (8 miles), Plungian(11), Alsiad (20), Siad (17) and Maisiad (18). The nearesttrain station was in Shataiky (9).Jewish communities existed before World War I in theneighboring villages of Kalvaria-Zhamot and Gintalishok.218LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESIn 1897, the Jewish population was 171, 28% of thegeneral population. In 1914, there were 30 Jewish families,and in 1939, 18. The decline in Jewish population reflectedemigration to America and South Africa, as well as expulsionin 1915. In 1923, about half of the town bumed down.The Jews eked out a living from small-scale trade,peddling and fishing. Thursday was market day and therewere fairs 10 times a year. A family generally maintained avegetable garden.There was a beit midrash, but no school or public institu-tions.Before the Holocaust, the Jewish population was about100.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe-Zev bar Shaul Hacohen;R. Shlomo bar Eliezer Shkolnik [ served as rabbi in Plotel 50years; he wrote the rabbinical responsa "Tshuvot Shlomo."He died in 5675/1915]; and the last rabbi, R. A. Zelnitz*.Native: Abba-Hillel Shkolnik [author].PLUNGIAN (PLUNGE) - Telz District A2Plungian is near Telz (17 miles), Salant (13), Ritova(14), Kool (11) and Plotel (l 1). It is located 7 miles from theGerman border. The Shavli-Telz-Plungian-Memel train linewas laid in the year 1931. Before that, the town was far fromthe railroad.Before World War I, Jews lived in the nearby villages ofShataiky (9 miles), Lieplauka (12), Renishky (9) and Naten(12).The Jewish community in Plungian was among the fírstin Lithuania. The cemetery contained gravestones from thesixteenth century.A Jewish family (Rasetts/Rasts) possesses documentsshowing residence in the town for about 350 years.In 1847, the Jewish community had a population of2197; in 1897 - 2502, 55% of the general population; inTHE COMMUNITIES2191921 - 2200; in 1923 - 1815, 44% of the general population;and in 1939 -1700. The Jews of the town emigrated to SouthAfirica, the United States, Argentina and Palestine.Three large fires struck the town. In 1894, the largesynagogue and large beit midrash bumed. Fires also occurredin 1917 and 1928.The town served as a trade center for the surroundingrural area. It had trade contacts with Memel and EastemPmssia. Market day was on Monday and Friday. Large fairswere held twice a year.Most Jews worked in trade. During Independent Lithua-nia, they were gradually forced out. During the years1931-1935, the number of Jews involved in trade level-Bdropped from 30 to 14 and in level-C from 100 to 50. Thenumber of licenses for trade in tobacco went down from 50to 25. About 200 families worked in crafts and a few dozenfamilies were in farming.Jews owned a chocolate factory with 30 workers, a flourmill, a sawmill and electricity station. The Jewish PeoplesBank had 321 members in 1929. The Assistant Mayor of thecity was Jewish.The Jewish community had 6 prayer houses: a beitmidrash, built by Yehiel Heller in 1864; a synagogue, the"shul" built in 1814; a "Chayei Adam" kloiz; a benevolentsociety kloiz; "the yellow kloiz" of the artisans; and the"kloiz of the shammashim." About 50 young men studied inthe local yeshiva and about 120 boys studied in the TalmudTorah. A Tarbut School had 130 pupils, and the YiddishSchool had 100. In a Hebrew pro-gymnasia (secondaryschool), there were 100 pupils. There were 2 libraries, aTarbut and a "Kultur-Leagua" library. In addition, there wasa reading room named for Y.L. Peretz.All the Zionist streams had organizations. In addition,there was a Communist organization, sports groups of220LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESMaccabi and Hapoel, a women’s organization with 300members, youth groups and Hechalutz (Pioneers).Charitable organizations included a hospital, BikurHolim, and Eza clinic, summer camps and Gemach (charita-ble loan) fund. A children’s organization, Perchei Shoshonim(rose blossoms), collected books for the synagogue. AfterSimchat Torah, the books were presented in a festive ceremo-ny, and the children were blessed.From the rabbinate: R. Dov-Baer [Head of the Beit-Dinof Plungian and the region (5476/1716]; R. Yehuda-Leib Ziv;R. Yehiel Heller [died 5623/1863]; R. Gershon-Mendel Ziv;R. Haim-Yitzhak Bloch; R. Zebulon Barrit [died 5663/1903];R. Shmuel-Avigdor Feivelson [died 5689/1929]; R. LevyShefitz/Shpitz'; and the last rabbi, R. Avraham-MordechaiVesler’.Natives: Rabbis Haim-Yitzhak Bloch, Yitzhak-ZevOlshvonger, Meir Metz, Eliezer Gutman, Yosef-YoselHorvitz; Dr. Lazarus Goldschmidt [Talmud scholar andtranslator to German]; Mordechai Plungian [Hebrew writer];Benjamin Nathanson [community leader of Vilna]; and LuisRosenthal [sculptor].Additional reference:Photos in Encyclopedia Judaica - " The Great Synagogue ofPlungian," vol. 13, p. 653, and "The Jewish FireBrigade in Plungian," vol. 11, p. 379.Lithuanian Plungianer Yiddish Museum Committee of USA,5501 N.W. 15th St., Margate, FL 33063, Teddy Sherr,Rep.PODBEREZHE (PODBEREZE) E3Podberezhe is a town near Vilna (17 miles). It had aJewish population until World War I.THE COMMUNITIES221Natives: Elhanan Leib Levinsky [1858-1910; writer] andAvraham Kahan [1860-1951; writer, leader in Socialistmovement, founded the "Forward" in New York in 1897].PODZHELVE (ZELVA) - Vilkomir District E2Podzhelve is 13 miles ÍTom the towns of Vilkomir,Gedrovitz, Maliat, Shirvint, Kurkli and Avanta.The Jewish population in 1939 was about 400.It was one of the early Jewish communities in Lithuania.In the nineteenth century, it was subordinate to the Vilkomirkehilla (community) and its institutions, including thecemetery, until Podzhelve Jews rebelled and established theirown cemetery.Their livelihoods came from market day and smallvegetable gardens. There were also a few artisans.In 1927, a Yavneh School was founded by Mrs. Cherit-Mosel. The teachers were Hirsh-Leib Stokol, HannahLevine-Gershtein, Yakov Cherit and Shpiz.The Hasidim and the Mitnagdim each had a prayerhouse.From the rabbinate: R. Yehuda Halevy Lifshitz; R.Zvi-Yehuda Koshlevitz ffrom 5650/1890]; R. Krins; and thelast rabbi, R. Leib Levy*.Natives: Yitzhak Grodzensky and Zvi-Nissan Golomb[writer].POKROI (PAKRUOJUS) - Shavli District C2Pokroi is near Posevol (12 miles), Linkova (9) andLigum (7). The town was on land which belonged to theBaron Ropp, who was ftíendly toward to the Jews. He diedin 1894.The Jewish community was among the fírst in Lithuania.Under the Lithuanian Council, the community served as agathering point for Birzh District within the Zhamot Region.222LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBefore World War I, about 300 Jewish families or 1400people lived there; in 1921 - about 100 families or 406individuals, and in 1939 - 120 families, or 454 people.The Jews engaged in small-scale trade and crafts. Theylived in great poverty. The youth emigrated mainly to SouthAfrica, Mexico and Uruguay, and some to Palestine. Someof the first emigrants from Lithuania to South Afirica werefrom this town.Between the World Wars, the Jewish Peoples Bank, with107 members, served as a primary source of economicsupport for the Jewish community.By the eve of Holocaust, the town had emptied out;mainly the elderly remained.From the rabbinate: R. Meshulam-Zalman bar HaimBach [afterward lived in Vilna]; R. Haim bar Tuvia Katz[later a judge and teacher in Vilna. He went to Eretz Yisraelin 5570/1810 and died in Safed in 5573/1813]; R. YosefYaffe; R. Mordechai; R. Nahum Shapira; R. Shmuel-Meirbar Yosef-Yakov Shur [died in 5658/1898] and R. Haim-Zal-man Kron\Natives: Yisrael Finn [Zionist figure, poet and writer];Yehoshua Latzman [poet].POLANGEN (PALANGA) - Kretinga District A2Polangan on the Baltic Sea is near Kretinga (7 miles),Memel (12) and Libau (42). The nearest rail station was inKretinga.The Jewish settlement began in the fifteenth century. Inan old pinkas (recordbook) of the burial society were foundlists from the year 1487. The first Jews were border guardsand customs collectors for the Grand Duke Vitovt. In 1540,the King of Poland allowed the Jews to build a synagogue,set up public buildings and a cemetery and use pasture landsin the area. In an edict of rights in 1639, King Wladislaw IVallowed Jews to work as artisans and to buy land to farm.THE COMMUNITIES223These rights were reaffirmed in the year 1742 by KingAugust III. The edicts were very useful to Jews in thenineteenth century in legal cases with the Polish noblemenAuginsky and Tishkevitz over land ownership rights.In 1765, 398 Jews lived there. In 1887, the Jewishpopulation in the town was 1100. After World War I, therewere 950 Jews, 40% of the general population, and in 1939- less than 700, 150 families.The Baltic Sea near the town was rich in amber whichwas used by the jewelry industry. There were broad marketsin Western Europe and in Russia. Amber was processed indozens of factories, in which nearly all of the workers wereJewish.The decline in population came as a result of the cuttingoff of the city from Russia and from Latvia. The economywas hurt by the high customs duty levied in Westem Europe-an countries on amber jewelry.The town was a resort and bathing place for thousands ofvacationers from all over Lithuania. During the summer,local residents and people from the nearby towns of Kretinga,Gorzhd, Darbian, and Salant ran health resorts and otherbusinesses.The streets were broad and clean. Next to the houses wasan abundance of greenery and flowers.There was a large synagogue, built in 1878, a beitmidrash built 1900 and a kloiz (5660/1900). In 2 cheders anda Yavneh School, 100 pupils were enrolled. All the Zionistparties were active, as well as youth groups, Pioneers andmany charitable institutions.During his years in office, R. Yehoshua Heller not onlylooked after matters of religion. He also worked for improve-ment of the living conditions of his people, especially theworkers. Through his efforts, workers eamed full wages, butworked only half a day on erev Shabbat and Holidays. Jewish224LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESworkers were given half an hour each day at 4:00 for minchaprayers.In 1938, a fire broke out. Most of the Jewish homesbumed down. Due to the efforts of R. Shmuel-MenachemHalevy Katz, means were acquired to rebuild them.From the rabbinate: R. Yakov (5479/1719) and R.Yechezkiel Feival [bora 5596/1836 in Polangen, where heserved as a rabbi and teacher later in Drechin and Vilna];Yehoshua Heller, Nahum-Michal Kahane; Yosef-HillelBerman; Haim-Yitzhak Korb; Shmuel-Menahem HalevyKatz; and the last rabbi, Aaron-Yitzhak Katz'.Natives: Professor Dov (Boris) Brutzkus [1874-1938]; hisbrother Dr. Julius Brutzkus [1870-1952]; Yoel Brutzkus[Principal of the Hebrew gymnasia in Kovno]; Yakov Mark[writer].PONEVEZH (PANEVEZY S) - District Capital D2Ponevezh is situated on both banks of the NeviazhaRiver. The northem part, set on hills, was less developed.The southera portion, situated on a plain, housed the com-mercial center, the market and the Jewish neighborhoods.After World War I, a new Jewish neighborhood called"Palestinka" was established. Ponevezh was one of the largestDistrict Capitals in Lithuania and had the third largest Jewishpopulation after Vilna and Kovno.A small settlement of Karaite Jewish families was estab-lished in the old city in the fomteenth century. They werepart of 153 íCaraite families brought as prisoners-of-war ffomthe Crimea. In time, they became the second largest Karaitesettlement in Lithuania after Troki. Most of them lived onRemigola Street, where their prayer house stood. Afiter someyears, their numbers declined. Only a few remained inIndependent Lithuania.THE COMMUNITIES225By the middle of the sixteenth century, Ponevezh wasalready a large town. A large number of certificates andcontracts written there in 1554-6 are extant.It grew in importance when official institutions movedthere from Upita in 1568. By the end of the sixteenthcentury, a new section of the city was built.Ponevezh suffered severely firom the Swedish invasionsof the 17th and early 18th centuries. In 1704, the SwedishArmy passed through the city and plundered it.After the Third Partition of Poland in 1795, the citypassed to Russian rule and became a District Capital. In1802, it was included within the borders of Vilna Region.From 1843, it was in Kovno Region. The Napoleonic Warsdid not affect it, as it was far from battlefields. The city washarmed during the Polish rebellions in 1831 and 1863.In the seventeenth century, Jews began to settle on theleft bank. The "Old Synagogue," was built in the eighteenthcentury. It was a tall wooden building, beautifully furnished.Community institutions, like the bathhouse and the butchershop, were concentrated nearby. The cemetery was in awestem suburb of the city.Trade was centered in a market square. From there roadsbranched out in all directions. The Jewish communitydeveloped the trade, crafts and small industries of the city.During Russian mle, Jews could not live in all sectionsof the city. This restriction was cancelled in 1882. TheJewish quarter was in "Slobodka," between Hoifsher andRemigola Streets. The homes were mainly of wood.In 1766, there were 254 Jews. In 1847, there were 1447Jews. In 1897, there were 6627 Jews, 50% of the generalpopulation. Before World War I, about 7000 Jews livedthere, 39% of the general population. In 1915, the Jews wereexiled to Russia as refugees. The Slobodka quarter wasbumed.226LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESWhen the city was conquered by the Germans, the Jewswho evaded the evacuation by remaining in neighboringtowns and in Vilna Region retumed. After the peace treaty ofBrest-Litovsk, Bolsheviks temporarily held the city. When theLithuanians followed, soldiers killed several Jews, and therewere incidents of libel and thefts.With the establishment of Independent Lithuania, theexiles began to retum. One source places the Jewish popula-tion in 1921 at close to 8000. The official census of 1923records 6854 Jews, 36% of the general population. In 1939,over 10,000 Jews lived there.During Independent Lithuania, Ponevezh was thecountry’s fourth largest city. The railroad connected it withDvinsk, Shavli, Kovno and the Pmssian border, and Utian.The city was a trade center for flax, linseed, grains, wood,and hides. The Chazan brothers owned the flax factory. Oneof the largest flour mills in Lithuania was there ("Yakov,"Rubinstein, Lev and others), as well as factories for liquor,beer, and yeast, and sawmills. Among other factories ownedby Jews were a sugar factory and a factory for castings. OnMonday and Thursday, thousands of farmers came to themarkets. During this period, old wooden houses werereplaced by 2 to 3 story brick houses.About 10% of the Jews worked in crafts. The organiza-tion of Jewish artisans had about 300 members in 1939. TheJewish Peoples Bank, founded before World War I as "TheJewish Bank for Loans," was administered by ShmuelLandau. The Bank had 984 members in 1929. There werealso branches of the Central Jewish Bank, The Trade Bank,Mutual Loan Bank and Bank Elizur.The Ponevezh community was known for its religious,educational and social institutions. It was a center for HarediJews.The yeshiva, called "The Ponevezh Kibbutz" (in GlikelKloiz) was founded by R. Yitzhak-Yakov Rabinovitch (R.THE COMMUNITIES227Itzek from Ponevezh, or Itzek Ponevezher), with support ofthe Gavronsky family from Moscow. The Shammas of theGlikel-Kloiz, R. Neta-Leib Katz (who died in Tel Aviv) hada "completion ceremony" for Talmudic study 200 times in hislife.In the kloiz of the Chabad Hasidim, Shmuel-Zvi Lisahanof the mechona "hasidel" arranged the seuda shlishit (thirdmeal) every Shabbat for 32 years, with a review of theteachings of Rabbis from Lubavitch. This kloiz operated acheder in the morning. In the evening R. Shmuel-Dov Cohenpreached the daily-page for adults.During Independent Lithuania (5688/1928) a largeyeshiva was founded by R. Y. Kahaneman. The spiritualleader was R. Abba Grosbard. This yeshiva with 400 studentswas one of the largest in Lithuania. There were also two''little yeshivas," one in the old beit midrash and the secondin the Glikel Kloiz, administered by R. Shlomo-Ezra Mar. R.Berchik Rickels taught Gemorrah for the leamed men of thecity.Before World War I, a substantial portion of the Jewishyouth studied at Russian schools and the Russian high school.Despite strict scrutiny, illegal socialist organizations existedin the high school, from which arose a number of under-ground movement activists, such as Paul Berman, Jon Milland Mordechai Broide.In the 1870’s, a modem Hebrew school was founded bythe writer Yitzhak Romesh, where Hebrew, Bible and secularsubjects were studied. Yehuda Leib Gordon also served as ateacher for Jewish students in a govemment school.The granting of national Jewish autonomy accelerateddevelopment of a modem Hebrew education. A HebrewGymnasia (high school) was established in a rented building.Afterward, it was moved to its own building on ElectricStreet.228LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe Gymnasia was administered by Dr. Klavry, GershonGurvitz, Dr. Levenhertz and Dr. V. Mehlman. It served asa cultural center for Jews in the city and the surroundingarea. In the Gymnasia there were lectures, evening classesand a national university for adults. Next to the high schoolwas a Tarbut Hebrew School. An ORT trade school wasestablished. At the initiative of R. Kahaneman, a yeshivapreparatory school and a Hebrew Gymnasia for girls (Yavnehschool) were set up. There was a public school where thelanguage of instruction was Hebrew and one where Yiddishwas used.Prior to World War I, the Zionist Movement was weak.Jewish autonomy granted under Independent Lithuania,Hebrew educational institutions and Zionist youth movementsactivated community life and a national awareness among theJews. Rapidly, chapters formed of all the Zionist parties.Young Zionists (United), Zionist Socialists, Revisionists andothers set up their own meeting places. Sports associations,including Maccabi, Hakoach and Hapoel had hundreds ofmembers. Youth organizations, including Hashomer Hatzair,Gordonia, Pioneer Scouts, Zionist Socialist Youth and Betardeveloped Zionist and communal activities. They establishedlibraries, organized parades, plays, literary parties, debatesand lectures on Zionist subjects and literature. The Hebrewlanguage was widely used. A broad range of national fundswere administered, including Keren Kayemet and KerenHayesod. A branch of Hechalutz (Pioneer) was established,as well as a training place for pioneers. Many went to EretzYisrael.During Independent Lithuania, the Community Councilrenewed its activities out of its building on Remigola Street.The big Jewish hospital reopened under the administration ofDr. S. Mar. An orphanage with 75 children was maintained.There was an old-age home with 30 residents, a society ofTHE COMMUNITIES229Somedch Noflim (loan society), Linat Hazedek, Eza clinic,summer camps for poor children, public libraries and others.Jews were active in municipal affairs. Avraham Fleisherwas Assistant Mayor of the city for many years.Ponevezh served at one time as a center for the HaskalahMovement and was called ’Little Vilna." Here the poetYehuda Leib Gordon lived and wrote his first poems. AlsoMordechai Plongian [scholar] and Yakov Yatzkin [writer andjoumalist] lived there, as well as, in a later period, UriahKatzenellenbogen [writer]. The city also served as a centerfor the Bund movement.From the rabbinate: R. Avraham Ably Yaffe; R. Yakovbar Yitzhak Halevy [died 5600/1840]; R. Shaul Shapira[author of "Chamat Shaul"]; R. Shmuel bar Avraham Shapira[author of "Me’il Shmuel"]; R. Moshe-Yitzhak Segel; R.Hillel bar Zvi Miliakovsky ["R. Hillel Kharif"] R. Eliahu-David Rabinovitz-Tomin [his daughter married R. Abraham-Isaac Kook]; R. Yitzhak-Yakov Rabinovitz; Haim-YakovChaviadansky [served as a rabbi in Ponevezh during WorldWar I; wrote the book "Derech Hamelech," Keidan, 5689/1929, on the Rambam]; R. Yeraham Leibovich; Moshe-Yitz-hak Rabin; and the last rabbi, R. Yosef-Shlomo Kahaneman.Communal leaders: Naftali Friedman [an envoy to thelast Russian Duma]; Avraham Ricklis; Alter Gurvitz;Avraham Fleisher; Dr. Leib Bemstein [served for many yearsas head of the National Fund]; Dr. Shachna Mar; HannahMar [widow of Dr. Mar; ran the Jewish hospital after thedeath of her busband]; Gershon Gurvitz [principal of theHebrew Gymnasia]; Dr. Benzion Eisenbod; H. Landau[attomey]; and Shmuel Landau Jattomey].Natives: R. Nahum-Barach Ginzburg; R. Zalman-PinhasKaplan; David Optiker/Afotiker [joumalist]; MaximilianArkin [writer]; David Param/Ferem [poet]; Miriam Dilon[sculptress]; Yakov Zakum [cellist]; Mark Dilon [attomey];230LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESWiliiam Lewis [Judge and Zionist leader]; Paul Berman[reformer]; and Jon Mill [a founder of the Bund].PONIDEL (PANDELIS) - Rakishok District E1Ponidel is near Suvianishok (12 miles), Panimunik (3),Skopishok (9), Popil (13), Rakishok (17) and Birzh (24). Itis on a hill at the foot of which runs the Oposhta River.Before World War I, it was in Novo-AlexandrovskDistrict. During Independent Lithuania, it was in RakishokDistrict.The houses there were made of wood. Only three wereof brick. The buildings were of one-story except for onehouse, which was three stories. The shops were walled andbuilt around the market square. In the middle of the squarewas a pool, a mikva, with rain water.In 1847, the Jewish population was 904; in 1897 - 1131,95% of the general population; in 1914 - about 200 families;and in 1921 - 150 families, 75% of the general population.At the outbreak of the Holocaust, about 100 Jewish familieslived there.Before World War I, Jews made their living mainly firomthe export of eggs to Riga. They also worked in processingflax and selling it in Dvinsk. They traded in wood, grain andfabric. There were peddlers, cartsmen and 2 Jewish herdsmen(shepherds). Afiter World War I, the town was cut off fromLatvia; trade connections were halted. With the help of theJewish Peoples Bank, which had a membership of 134 in1931 and the Joint (JDC), the Jewish community rebuilt whathad been damaged in the War. But tax burdens and an orderthat the remaining shops had to be removed ffom the marketsquare made the situation worse for the Jews. Afiter trade ineggs and flax was taken over by the Lithuanian cooperatives,the economic base of the Jews was destroyed. The Jews wereforced to go to other towns or to emigrate. Those thatTHE COMMUNITIES231remained made their living from market day (Tuesday) andfrom the annual fair.In 1937, there were 31 artisans, including 6 needlework-ers, 8 shoemakers and stitchers, 9 butchers, a baker and 4metal workers.The Jews of the town were primarily Hasidim andHaredim. They had wooden prayer houses, including 2sbtibls, a beit midrash and a synagogue. Before World WarI, they had cheders and a Talmud Torah, which continuedduring Independent Lithuania. The Kultur-Leagua set up aYiddish School and a drama club. Those Jews who wished togive their children both a Jewish and secular education sentthem to Rakishok. Virtually all the Jewish youth knewHebrew.Organizations included Aguda, Tiferet Bachurim society,Gemach (charitable loan fund), Linat Hazedek, Bikur Holim,Maccabi Shomer Hatzair and Hechalutz (Pioneers).From the rabbinate: the last rabbi, R. Michel Pohen/Fo-han*.Community leaders: Zev Herring, Chanoch Krok, Haimand Natan Badah; Taiba Michelovitz; Hannah Augnitz.Natives: Baruch Halevy Horvitz; Menahem Gilutz [oneof the founders of Tel Aviv] and Menahem Finkelman [headof the Keren Hayesod in Latvia until his aliyah to EretzYisrael].Additional reference:Chapter on Ponidel (Ponedel) in Yizkor-Book of Rakishok andEnvirons, edited by M. Bakalczuk-Felin, So. Africa,Johannesburg: The Rakishker Landsmanschaft, 1952(Yiddish).232LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESPOON (PUNIA) - Alyta District D3Poon is a small town near Butrimantz and Alyta (8miles), on the Nieman River. At the time of the Holocaust,about 15 Jewish families lived there.POPIL (PAPILYS)Popil was 15 miles from Birzh [Dl]. It had a Jewishpopulation before World War I.POPILAN (PAPILE) - Shavli District B1Popilan is near Kurshan (13 miles), Veckshna (12) andTrishik (11), on the Libau-Rumanian rail line.Prior to 1927, the town was an important railroadterminal for Telz District.Before World War I, the town had about 1000 Jews.Because of the railway, the economy was sound and theJewish population was well established. Jewish merchantsexported produce, flax and wood to Germany.There were a number of cheders and a small yeshiva inthe town.In 1915, the Jews were expelled to Russia. Most of thetown was destroyed by fire.At the end of 1918, some Jews retumed and startedrebuilding. A temporary synagogue was built through theefforts of R. Zvi-Hirsh Blumenthal (who died in 1923). Ateacher was brought to the town, a library was founded anda Jewish Peoples Bank administered by Yosef Itzikzon wasestablished, with a membership of 82.Since most of the Jews did not retum, the settlementremained small and loosely knit. Most of the youth emigratedto South Africa and some to Palestine. During the periodbetween the World Wars, the Jewish population was about200. The economic situation was difficult, and there wasvirtually no public life.THE COMMUNITIES233From the rabbinate: R. Shraga-Feivel [son of Yosef;5587-5652/1827-1892]; R. Hillel-Arye Lifshitz; R. Zvi benEzriel Valk; R. Abba-Moshe Rabinovitz; R. Yosef Lamadan[from 5662/1902; a delegate to the Sixth Zionist Congress];and the last rabbi R. Abraham Hacohen Levine’.Natives: R. Aaron-David Borak; Yakov-Shmuel Yudelo-vitz [born 1883; writer and Zionist worker from SouthAffica; editor of the "Zionist Record"]; R. Natan-Neta Yaffa[scholar, who took care of the Torah Fund of the town]; hisson Moshe [attomey and principal of the Hebrew HighSchool in Mazhaik ; R. Zvi Blumenthal; his son Dr. YehudaBlumenthal [public figure and doctor in Naishtut-Tavrig andafterward in Kovno]; his daughter, Dr. Berta Blumenthal-Perlov [physician in Popilan and Raisin]; Saul Miller [mer-chant and philanthropist]; Kalmen Rabinovitz; Dov-YehielRabinovitz; Moshe Stenstein.POPLAVY E3Poplavy is a suburb of Vilna. It is mentioned in Jerusa-lem of Lithuania by Leyzer Ran, with a photograph on p. 82.POSHELAT (PUSALOTAS) - Ponevezh Distríct D2Poshelat is near Pumpian (7 miles), Pokroi (10) andPosvol (14).In 1847, the Jewish population was 432, in 1897 - 920,about 70% of the general population; in 1913 - 500; in 1921- 210; and in 1939 - about 100.The Jews were engaged in crafts and farming. Mostemigrated to South Africa. Some went to Palestine.There was a bank for small loans and a Gemach (charita-ble loan fund). At the local Hebrew school, Yiddish was alsotaught. There was a library next to the school. The youthbelonged to various Zionist organizations as well as sportsgroups.234LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESFrom the rabbinate: R. Yehuda-Asher bar EliahuOzerman; R. Yakov bar David Kalmas; R. Aaron-ZalmanDat; R. Yosef Pagramansky’; and the last rabbi, R. ZviFlexman/Plechsman*.POSHVITIN (PASVITINYS) - Shavli District C1Poshvitin is near Linkova (9 miles), Kruk (10), Yanishok(11), Zhaimel (12), Shavli (25). In the villages of Palanishok(1), Mitzintzkes (4), Shikly (4), and Krapina (3) there wereJewish communities before World War I. The nearest trainstation was in Yanishok.In 1897, the Jewish population was 435, 59% of thegeneral population. In 1902, the town bumed down, but intime was rebuilt. Before World War I, there were 120 Jewishfamilies. Before the Holocaust, there were only 25 familiesremaining.Before World War I, the Jews made their living fromsmall-scale trade on market day, Wednesday, and at the 4annual fairs and from peddling and crafts. The inn and flourmill were owned by Jews.The few Jews remaining during Independent Lithuanianworked in small trade. Most lived off of support from theirfamilies in South Africa who emigrated before the War. Alsoduring this period many more left for South Africa. The townwas emptied of young people. Only a few of the elderly re-mained. The residents of neighboring villages settled in asection of town called "Zhilionka," in which previously onlyJews had lived.There was a beit midrash.From the rabbinate: R. Elhanan bar Yehuda Cohen; R.Mordechai Hillman; and the last rabbi, R. David-NachumDudman*.THE COMMUNITIES235POSVIESKELIPosvieskeli is near Grishkabud [C3] (6 miles). SomeJews lived there up to World War I.POSVOL (PASVALYS) - Birzh District D1Posvol is near Vashki (11 miles), Pumpian (8), Salat(12), Yanishkel (10), Birzh (17), Linkova (15), Pokroi (21)Vabolnik (16) and Zhaimel (21). The town was named forthe Posvolka River. A narrow train track connected the townwith Shavli and Birzh.The neighboring village of Krinchin had a Jewishcommunity before World War I.Before World War I, about 400 Jewish families livedthere. There were also a few Raraites, vestiges of an oldKaraite settlement. On April 28, 1915, an order was issuedfor the expulsion of the Jews, to take effect in 8 hours. Theevacuees were shut up in freight cars for 10 days until theywere transported to the interior of Russia.In 1920, about half of the town burned down. In 1921,the Jewish community numbered 525, and in 1939 - 700 (180families). Jewish emigration was mainly to South Africa andto America.Most of the Jews engaged in trade and a few in craftsand farming. Maricet days were Monday and Thursday.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 159 members.There was a beit midrash and a Tarbut School with 150pupils.From the rabbinate: R. Yitzhak bar Haim Zak; R.Avraham-Shlomo; R. Ably bar Avraham-Shlomo [later headof the Beit Din in Vilna]; R. Avraham-Leib Mintz; R. EliahuBinyamin bar Dov Dimand [introduced reforms in thecommunity and its institutions]; R. Moshe Rabinovitz (from5659/1899; he replaced his fatíier R. Mordechai. He died in5685/1925); R. Yisrael Shinkeman [author of "Tiferet236LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESYisrael." He later served as a rabbi in Atlantic City]; and thelast rabbi, R. Yitzhak Agolnik'.Natives: Haim-Yitzhak Bialostotzky [fcnown as the"Maggid of Posvol"]; Abba-Shimon bar Haim-Yitzhak [theritual slaughterer in Posvol; he wrote the book "DorotRishonim" (First Generations) on marriage contracts and thegreat men remembered ffom the Order of the Midrash inBabylonia and Jerusalem (part 1, 5695/1935, Keidan); R.Ably bar Avraham-Shlomo; Prof. Binyamin Bemstein[ mathematician]; Shaul Bemstein [painter]; Ari Gelzman[joumalist and writer].PRATKON F2Pratkon was a village near Salok (5 miles). Jews livedthere before World War I.PREN (PRIENAI) - Mariampole District D3Pren, on the Nieman River, is near Kovno (24 miles) andBalbirishuk (9) on the Warsaw-Kovno-Dvinsk road. The near-est train station was 15 miles away.This Jewish settlement dates from the fifteenth century.The pinkas kehilla (community recordbook) states that thecommunity belonged to Grodno Region. The regional rabbivisited and inspected on matters of religion and law.In 1766, there were 597 Jews; in 1856 - 1497; and in1897 - 1090, 40% of the general population. In 1915, theJews were expelled. Some settled in Vilna. When Pren wascaptured by the Germans, they retumed. In 1921, there were935 Jews, 29% of the general population, and in 1939 - about700 Jews.During Independent Lithuania, the Jews engaged in trade,crafts and industry. Five families worked in farming and fiftyin crafts. There were three market days each week: Monday,Tuesday and Friday.THE COMMUNITIES237Industry was important in the town economy. A beerfactory employed 20 Jewish workers. Three sawmills and 3flour mills employed 15 Jewish workers and a flour mill had5 Jewish workers. There were also tanneries, a factory for oiland beverages and others. The primary source of income wasfrom trade in wood and farm products.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 191 members.The wooden synagogue was built in the eighteenthcentury. The old beit midrash was rebuilt in 1903. Therewere 2 other prayer-houses, Goldberg Kloiz and AbelsonKloiz.Prior to World War I, children studied in cheders andTalmud Torahs. During Independent Lithuania, a TarbutSchool with 130 pupils and a Yiddish school were founded.Attached to the Hebrew school was a library with 3500books.Youth organizations included Socialist Zionists with 100members and Betar with 30 members. For a short time, therewas a group of yeshiva boys from Poland.Community institutions including Hachnasat Kalla,Hachnasat Orchim, Tzedaka Gadola, Linat Hazedek, ChevraRadisha, and a society for the study of Torah.From the rabbinate: R. Natan-Haim Zonn [descendedfrom Tura Zahav/Golden Columns (5603/1843), wrote thebook "Even Habochen" (words for sermons]; R. David-Menahem bar Yitzhak Velpert [5681/1921]; R. Tanchum-Shraga Ravel [related by marriage to R. Moshe-Yitzhak Segalfirom Ponevezh]; R. Yehuda-Leib Rif [5631/1871; previouslyin Shadova and later in New-Zhager]; R. Simcha-Dov Zilber-stein [later in Orla]; R. Benzion Zev Kamitz [later inShvekshna]; R. Avraham Reines; R. Avraham-YakovNeimark [firom 5669/1909]; R. Brishnik; and the last rabbi,R. Haim Fohan/Pohan*.Natives: R. Dov Raveh; Aaron Zegenik and MordechaiRodnik [educators]; David Trager [community worker].238UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESPUMPIAN (PUMPENAI) - Pooevezh District D2Pumpian is near Ponevezh (15 miles), Vabolnik (12),Posvol (9) and Poshelat (4).This Jewish community was one of the first in Lithuania.During the "Lithuanian Council," it belonged to Birzh Dis-trict in Zhamot Region.In 1766, 583 Jews lived there. In 1847, there were 694;in 1897 - 1007 Jews. At the outbreak of the Holocaust, about60 Jewish families lived there.During World War I, the Jews were sent to Russia. Afterthe War, some retumed and found their property bumed andplundered. In 1921, the Jewish community numbered about75 families.The Jews engaged in trade, crafts and agriculture. Animportant branch of the economy was the yelIow cheeseindustry. Economic conditions were strained. Many emigratedto the United States and South Africa.The town had one synagogue. In the courtyard, surround-ed by a fence, was a stone marker in memory of R. Yisraelof Pumpian. In the beginning of the nineteenth century,Christians accused the Jews of killing a Christian boy. R.Yisrael took all the "guilt" on himself, and the gentilesbumed him to death next to the synagogue. The stone markerwas erected on the site.During Independent Lithuania, there was a Hebrewschool in the town. Youth were directed toward aliyah toEretz Yisrael. Many were trained for pioneering.Pumpian served as a place of Torah for a large surround-ing area and had outstanding rabbis and educators.From the rabbinate: R. Yitzhak (Isaac) bar Eliezer [in theeighteenth century]; R. Yakov from Sventzian [previouslyserved in Vilkomir]; R. Yitzhak; R. Moshe-Eliahu [served asAv Beit Din in Pumpian for 15 years]; R. Shaul bar DovShapira; R. Yehonatan Eliasberg [1851-1898; son of R.THE COMMUNITIES239Mordechai Eliasberg]; R. Arye Lipkin; R. Yisrael barYehuda Katz; and the last rabbi, R. Yitzhak-Meir Chayat*.Natives: R. Asher-Nissan Levitan [rabbi in Shavli andlater in the Bronx, N.Y.]; Benjamin Bialostotzky [poet]; Dr.Joseph Lurie [a leader in Hebrew education and head of aneducational institution in Eretz Visraelj.RADAYK (RADEIK1AI) - Utian District E2Radayk was a village in eastem Lithuania near Utian (7miles) and Daugel (4) on the road to Utian. About 10-12Jewish families lived there, engaged in farming. Among themwere 2 families (Liss) who were owners by inheritance ofabout 25 acres of farmland. They hired Christian workers.Before World War I, one of the brothers built a steam-powered flour mill for the neighboring farmers.In 1941, there were approximately 10 Jewish familiesliving there, most of whom were farmers.Native: R. Abba-David Goldfine [1878-1934; rabbi inDvinsk and Moscow].RADVILISHOK (RADVILISKIS) - Shavli District C2Radvilishok, near Shavli (12 miles), was established onswamp land owned by Prince Radzivill.In 1870, a rail line was laid connecting Berlin withPetersburg by way of Dvinsk. The town became an importantrailroad junction, connecting with the Ponevezh-Dvinsk,Shavli-Memel, Shavli-Riga and Riga-Berlin lines. Nearbyarmy camps were of great economic benefit and aided itsdevelopment.In 1897, there were 676 Jews there, 17% of the generalpopulation. In 1915, the Jews were expelled to Russia. Theyretumed after the War. Jews from other towns settled therealso. In 1920, the Jewish community had 1200 people. Theirlivelihood was mainly from trade in lumber and produce.240LJTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThere were also a few aitisans. At the outbreak of theHolocaust, about 250 Jewish families lived there.They had 2 prayer houses and a Tarbut School. Amongthe founders were Mendel Kribushayv and Aaron Fine.The Jewish community in the town had an active culturaland social life. Many went as pioneers to Eretz Yisrael. Allthe Zionist parties were represented as well as Zionist youthorganizations and sports groups. Religious youth were inTiferet Bachurim.From the rabbinate: R. "Yosele" [the first rabbi, whowas also called the "Zadik" (righteous one)]. R. Meir Meltz[served as rabbi after the death of R. Yosele; he died in5665/1905]; R. Yitzhak Horvitz; R. Daniel Zacks; R.Yochanan Zopovitz-Zerachi; and the last rabbi, R. YitzhakBegun* [author of "Sadeh Yitzhak"].Native: David Rriboshiv [1905-1945; Zionist figure].RAITARADARaitarada is a village across the lake and less than a mileeast of Intorik (E2). It was considered a suburb of Intorik.The post office opened in Raiterada in 1926. About 20 Jewishfamilies lived there.Before the Holocaust, about 40 Jewish families lived inRaitarada.RAKENRaken was a village about 6 miles firom Salok (F2). Ithad a Jewish population before World War I.RAKISHOK (ROKISHKIS) - District Capital E1Rakishok is near Abel (9 miles), Dusiat (23), Ezhereni(7), Kamai (11), Kupishok (30), Ponidel (17), and theLatvian border (13). The train station on the line to Dvinsk,Libau, Riga, Ponevezh, Shavli, and Kovno was 2 milesaway.THE COMMUNITIES241The town developed from an estate owned by the Houseof Kroshinsky. The widowed Princess Helena, the last of thatfamily, married Baron Tisenhoif, and Rakishok passed to thefamily of the Barons Peshedietzky. The property administra-tor developed trade contacts with the Jews of the area andinvited them to settle there. The Baron established a largeCatholic Church. Thousand of peasants would come onSundays and holidays. Sunday was a big market day andhelped the town develop.The rail line helped the export trade in lumber, produceand particularly flax. The town became a trade center for alarge agricultural area.Before World War I, the town was in Novo-Alexan-drovsk (Ezhereni) District. After the Germans took the town(1915-1918), Rakishok became a District Capital.In 1847, the Jewish population was 593; in 1897 - 2067,75% of the general population; and in 1914 - about 3000, outof a general population of 3829. In 1921, 1900 Jews livedthere, and in 1923 - 2013. Prior to the Holocaust, 3500 Jewslived there, 40% of the general population.During World War I, most Jews fled. The Germanoccupation was difficult for the Jews that remained, due tolimitations on movement, confiscations and forced labor.After the War, some Jews returned. The Joint (JDC), thePeoples Bank and relatives from abroad helped restore theruined houses.In 1905, a loan fund was established by Hillel Eidelson.Later, a credit bank was formed. In addition, a merchantsbank was administered by M. Miller. During IndependentLithuania, there was the Jewish Peoples Bank with 357members in 1929, and a loan fund for artisans.Most Jews were small-scale traders and peddlers. Onmarket day, they would buy flax, cattle, hides, eggs andother farm products from the local peasants and sell themgrocery items, fabrics, machines, etc. Among the larger242LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEStradesmen were Rosen and Rabinovitz in produce, ChanochHemelnik in flax, Dovar Kramer with large animals. Prior toWorld War I, merchants received products from Dvinsk.During Independent Lithuania, products were brought in fromPonevezh, Shavli and Kovno.The post-War period was marked by brisk developmentand building. Many Lithuanians from the surrounding villagescame to settle and opened stores. Prior to World War I, only3 stores had been Christian-owned. Then Lithuanian coopera-tives came into being, with Lithuanian artisans and trades-men. The nationalization of trade in flax and produce,competition from the Lithuanian cooperatives, taxes andincitement against Jewish tradesmen and artisans caused asevere economic slump for the Jews. In 1925, there was awave of bankruptcies among the Jews. Between 1926 and1930, many emigrated to South Africa, the U.S. and Pales-tine.In 1937, there were 37 Jewish artisans, including 16tailors, 33 shoemakers and needleworkers, 24 butchers, 3bakers, 7 metalworkers, a carpenter and 2 clock makers.Several hundred Jews worked in Jewish-owned small indus-try, which included a tannery, flour mills, a sausage factory,a casting factory, and an electric station. A number of Jewswere porters and cartsmen. Two photography establishmentsand the cinema were owned by Jews. Nearly all doctors andpharmacists were Jewish.In 1940, all the businesses were confiscated by theSoviets. Many merchants were banished to Russia.The Jews were mostly Chabad Hasidim (Lubavitch,Bobroisk and Lyady). Before World War I, there were tworabbinates: one for the Hasidim and another for the Mitnag-dim; there were also two shochets. One of them was NatanFriedman.On the main street were 3 Habad beit midrashes. Theywere painted the colors of the Lithuanian flag. The yellowTHE COMMUNITIES243beit midrash was for scholars, the green one for communityleaders, and the red one - the largest - for the generalcommunity. At the edge of town was the synagogue. Therewas a prayer house in the Talmud Torah of Duvar Zelkind,the "Zionist Minyan” for holidays and a Tiferet Bachurimminyan every day.Before World War I, there were cheders and a yeshiva.Veteran teachers included Leibush, Moshe-Aaron Farber fromDvinsk and Zemach. Several Jewish students studied at theRussian high school. In 1910 a private school for girls wasfounded by Miss Gurvitz and Miss Rabinovitz. DuringIndependent Lithuania, there was a yeshiva and a smallyeshiva of R. Moshe Sidrer, a Tarbut School, with 200pupils; a Yavneh School; and a Hebrew pro-gymnasia with40 pupils. A sizable number of Jewish youth studied at theLithuanian high school. There was also a library and a dramaclub.Included among the charitable organizations were LinatHazedek, Bikur Holim, an orphanage with 40 boys and girlsadministered by Hannah Shador, and a charitable women’sassociation. In 1905, there was a revolutionary undergroundoperating against the Czarist regime.During Independent Lithuania, a community council(kehilla) levied taxes and established educational and charita-ble institutions. When this was eliminated, these institutionspassed to private societies and associations.At different times during the early days of the Indepen-dence, two Jews, Yitzhak Serber and Vulfert, held the officeof assistant to the Lithuanian mayor.Chapters of all the Zionist parties were active. Therewere Zionist youth groups and sports associations, includingMaccabi and Hapoel, Kultur-Leagua and Leftist organiza-tions. Among the religious organizations were TiferetBachurim, the youth of Young Mizrahi and Agudat Yisrael,which supported settlement in Eretz Yisrael. Shmuel Levitan244LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESfounded a yeshiva which existed until World War I. Later,the yeshiva was reopened by Dubar Zelkind. One of theheads of the yeshiva was R. Klein. The principal of the"Klein Yeshiva" was Moshe Sidrer.From the rabbinate: R. Eliahu Margeliot of the Mitnag-dim [before that in Radin]; his son R. Isser (Asher) of theMitnagdim; R. Yosef bar Meir Katz of the Hasidim; R.Bezalel bar Yosef Katz [died at the age of 96; was the rabbiof the Lubavitcher Hasidim for many years]; R. AvrahamMeirovitz [related by marriage to R. Bezalel; a student ofMir, Vlozhin and Slobodka; he was one of the founders ofthe Jewish Peoples Bank and was one of the Mizrahi rabbis.In 1928, he went to Abel]; R. Shmuel Levitin, of theMitnagdim [related by marriage to R. Isser]; and the lastrabbi R. Zelig Orlovitz*.Public figures: Hillel Eidelson; H. Eresh; David Rosen-shtein [school principal]; his wife, Yaffe Rosenshtein-Kaplan;Pesach Roch; Charmetz, Dubar Zelkind; Hannah Shador[sister of Hillel Eidelson]; Moshe Vasterman and AvigdorGlombotzky [one of the heads of Tzofim, the Hebrew Scoutsmovement].Natives: R. Shmuel-Abba Senig [army chaplain];Avraham Shapira [industrialist]; Yakov Shmushkevich[commander in the Soviet Air Force]; Shalit Levy [journalistand writer].Additional references:Yizkor Book ofRakishok and Environs, issued by The Rakish-ker Landsmanschaft of Johannesburg, So. Afirica, 1952,ed. M. Bakalczuk-Felin. Book in Yiddish, except forPreface and Table of Contents in English. Among otherchapters are: the Landsmanschaft of Rakishok and theManne-Manelewitz Family.Jewish Encyclopedia article on Rakishok.THE COMMUNITIES245RASIN (RASEINIAI) - District Capital C2Rasin is near Girtigola (6 miles), Nemoksht (15), Kelme(33) and Shidlova (9), on the Rasilca River and 5 miles íromthe Dubisa. The nearest train station was Shilovka (7). Untilthe Kovno-Rasin-Memel Road was built in 1936, it had noroads.Rasin is one of the oldest cities in Lithuania. In the 13thand 14th centuries, the name appears under different spell-ings, for example: Rossyen, Rushigen and Rasseyne. In1253, Prince Mindaugas transferred part of the ZhamotRegion, which included part of the Rasin area, to theLivonian Order. The remaining portion was transferred to thefirst Lithuanian Christian Bishop. The Livonian Order begandisseminating Christianity, which resulted in a cruel war fromwhich the city and the surrounding area suffered.In 1390, representatives of the city participated togetherwith other representatives from Zhamot in signing a peacetreaty in Koenigsberg. At the end of the fifteenth century, itreceived the Rights of Magdeburg. During United Lithuania-Poland, it became the most important city in the ZhamotRegion, having govemmental institutions and was the centerof trade for the entire region. In 1580, all the noblemen ofthe region elected their representatives there to the Sejm(Legislature) in Warsaw. From 1585, the Lithuanian Sejmwas located there. In 1792, the Magdeburg Rights wererenewed.The city suffered during the Napoleonic conquest andduring the Polish Revolution. In the Third Partition ofPoland, Rasin came under Russian rule. The rights of a freecity were cancelled and in 1796, it became a District Capitalin Vilna Region. Later, it was part of the Kovno Region.From that time, it went into economic decline. DuringIndependent Lithuania, it was a District Capital, but becauseof its geographical position and being far from a railway andmain roads, it remained economically backward.246LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESIts Jewish community was one of the first in Lithuaniaand was called "Jerusalem of Zhamot." Many Jews settledthere in the seventeenth century. It is mentioned in the book"Makan Shmuel" in 1722 by R. Moshe-Mordechai Rabino-vitz, in a question to R. Shmuel of Altuna on the matter ofa woman whose husband was killed near Krozh.In 1842, the population of the city was 7455, themajority of whom were Jews. In 1897, the number of Jewsrose to 9000, 90% of the general population. After WorldWar I, the number declined. In 1921, there were only 2226and in 1939, about 2000, 40% of the general population.[The Encyclopedia Judaica gives the following Jewishpopulation figures for Rasin: in 1797 - 4246, in 1847 - 2649,in 1897 - 3484 (46.7%), 1923 - 2305 (43.7%).]The Jews engaged mainly in trade. There were also 25artisans and a few farmers. Except for two flour mills andone sawmill, owned by Perlov and Kagan, there was noindustry in the town. Most Jews made their living on themarket days, which were Monday and Thursday.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 504 members in 1929.There were about 10 Jewish prayer houses, including thelarge synagogue, a large beit midrash, Kloiz Hachasid, IGoizChaiei Adam, Kloiz Ein Yakov and Kloiz Hakovanim.During Independent Lithuania, there was a small yeshiva.The rabbi and teacher was R. Roz; he was followed by R.Goldschlag. Before World War II there was a KaminitzerYeshiva, administered by R. Reuven Grozovsky. Societiesincluded Tiferet Bachurim led by Eliahu Alinik; Ben Zakkai,for which R. Avraham-Eliahu gave a Gemorrah class toHebrew high school students, Shas (Six Orders of theMishna) and Mishnayot, and Ein-Yakov.Educational institutions in the city included a Hebrewkindergarten, a Tarbut School administered by Levinsohn andAbba Yaffe, a Yavneh School whose principal was Kirsh,THE COMMUNITIES247and a Hebrew high school. There was a large library called"Mendali."There was also a Jewish hospital; an association foraiding poor women, led by Mrs. Bloch; Hachnasat Orchim;Chevrah Radisha, which kept a pinkas (recordbook) and anold constitution; and an old-age home. There were chaptersof the Zionist parties, Agudat Yisrael and youth groups thatincluded Betar, Brit Hak’naim, Gordonia, Hechalutz Hamiz-rahi, Zionist youth, Shomer Hatzair and Maccabi, andwomen’s organizations, such as Beis Yakov, headed by thepharmacist Velpert, and a WIZO chapter led by Roza Ziv.The majority of the Jews were Zionists. On the death ofHerzl, R. Haim Zaks gave a eulogy in the beit midrash.Avraham Mapu and Shneur Zaks lived in Rasin, as wellas the shoemaker-author Moshe Markovitz.From the rabbinate: R. Avraham ben Haim Lisker [wrotea commentary on the Mishnayot, "Ba’er Avraham." He diedin 1684]; R. Vulf; R. Moshe Tzeitlin; R. Avraham-ShmuelRabinovitz [died in 1906]; R. Alexander-Moshe Lapidot; R.Moshe Soloveichik; R. Yehoshua Mordechai Klatzkin and thelast rabbi, R. Aaron-Shmuel Katz*.Among the public figures from the last generation:Ezriel-Yitzhak Aaronson; Meshulam-Fishel Barr; Shmuel-Yitzhak Ger*; Gedaliah Halprin*; Zemach Velpa; Abba Yaffe;Lebovitz; Max Levy*; Fishel Mogilavsky; Friedland [attor-ney]; Asher Zirlin; Baruch-Reuven Kaplan; Leib Kaplan; ZevKaplan; Dr. Raphel Rabinovitz, and Yisrael Shugam*.Natives: Rabbis Avraham Lisker, Hanoch-HanichAygash, Yehezkiel Lifshitz, Pesach Pinfer, Natan-Zvi Finkel("the grandfather"), Eliahu-Baruch Komai, Simcha-ReuvenEdelman, Yakov Bendtman, Moshe-Yitzhak Segal, BenjaminFriedman, Tanchum-Shraga Ravel. Arye-Leib Gordon[grammarian], Feivel Getz [teacher and writer]; Yisrael-Yitz-hak Wolf [publisher]; Eliezer-Lipman Zilberman [publisherof "Hamaggid"]; Adolf Landau and Haim Raflovitz [writers248LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESand publisher]; Bar-Menashe Abramovitz; Dr. EmmanuelSoloveitchik [doctor]; Yehezkiel Feivel Rothstein [teacher andwriter]; Yosef Cohen Jjurist]; R. Menachem-Mendel Aaron-son [a íeader of Hamizrahi in South Africa]; Yosef Yehuda-Leib Bloch [rabbi of Telz and head of its yeshiva]; Dr.Zemach Rzamarion (Halprin) [writer and educator; moved toHaifa].Additional reference:The Encyclopedia Judaica.RAUDONA (RAUDONE) - Yurburg District C2Raudona was a small town in westem Lithuania, near theGerman border, 14 miles east of the District Capital, Yur-burg.In 1923, 80 Jews lived there. At the time of the Holo-caust, there were about 10 Jewish families.RAUDONDVARIS (RAUDONDVARIS) - C3Kovno DistrictRaudondvaris, also called "Roiterhoif," is near Kovno (4miles), on the Kovno-Yurburg Road, between the Neviazhaand the Nieman Rivers.It is situated on a hill (250 meters high), on the top ofwhich was built a red palace of Baron Tishkevitz, giving thetown its name of "The Red Estate." The palace consisted of150 rooms and halls. In the nineteenth century, it was acenter of high society of the Russian and Polish elite. At thefoot of the mountain was the Village of Solominlca with 14Jewish families. In 1924, the village bumed down. The Jewsrebuilt their homes and the village was annexed by "TheHill." From that time the entire town was called by itspresent name.Before World War I, the Jewish population was 25families. During Independent Lithuania, the number reachedTHE COMMUNITIES24955. Among them was Shimon Keveskin, owner of the inn andthe postal agency. At the outbreak of the Holocaust, only afew Jewish families lived there.The Jews made their living as shopkeepers, in agricultureand ardening. There was a doctor and a pharmacist, bothJewish.A rabbi from Slobodka served Raudondvaris. A shochetcame to the town twice a week. On holidays and for certainevents, Jews from the surrounding area would come into thetown to make a minyan in a private home.The children went to school in Kovno.REMIGOLA (RAMIGALA) - Ponevezh District D2Remigola is near Ponevezh (15 miles), Shatt (16),Krakinova (7) and Rogova (9). The nearest train station wasin Ponevezh.The Jewish community dates firom the eighteenth century.In 1766, there were 225 Jews living there, paying head-tax.In 1847, there were 190. In the middle of the nineteenthcentury, the Jewish community grew and in 1897 reached 650people, 50% of the general population. During World War I,the Jews were expelled from the town, but retumed after theWar. In 1921, the Jewish community numbered 800. Aliyahto Eretz Yisrael began in 1923. In 1923, the Jewish popula-tion was 480, and at the outbreak of the Holocaust, less than100 Jewish families lived there.The Jews there made their living in trade, peddling andcrafts.There were 2 beit midrashes, a Hebrew ethnic school anda charitable loan fund. There was a significant number ofTorah scholars and people studying Mishna. There was alsoa group of Maskilim and Hebrew speakers. The youth weremembers of Young Zionists.From the rabbinate: R. Shmuel-Moshe Shapira; R. YoelHatovsky; and the last rabbi, R. Zissel Steinfeld’.250LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESFrom its natives: Yitzhak Ben-Yakov fbibliographer].RENISHKY (RENISKES) - Telz DistríctRenishky is a village near Plungian (9 miles). It had aJewish community before World War I.RIBUK - Rasin DistríctRibuk was a village near Shidlova (4 miles) and Lidovian(1) on the Rasin-Shidlova Road. It was 11 rniles from Rasin(C2). Ribuk was also near the Berlin-Moscow rail line. Thenearest train station was at Lidovian.Jews began to settle there during the reign of CzarAlexander II. The 70 families that settled there receivedagricultural land firom the govemment. Most changed firomworlring in trade to farming. One of the first settlers wasVelvol Gen. In 1887, there were 60 Jewish families; in 1923,20 families; in 1939, 40 families, 50% of the generalpopulation. All were engaged in farming. Some hirednon-Jews to work on their farms.There were 2 plaster kilns, which belonged to Jews.The Jews were culturally isolated. There was neither asynagogue nor a rabbi. On Shabbat and Holidays, a minyanwould assemble in a private home. There also was no Jewishschool. From time to time, they would bring in a melamed.There were no Jewish institutions. Twice a year they collect-ed for charity and distributed the money in the nearby cities.RIMSHANI (RIMSE) - Ezhreni District F2Rimshani was a town near Ezhereni (Zarasi). It had asmall Jewish population before the Holocaust.RITOVA (RITAVAS) - Telz District A2Ritova is near Loykuva (12 miles), Kool (9), Chaviadan(13), Plungian (13) and Memel (30), on the Yura River andTHE COMMUNTTIES251along the Shavli-Plungian-Memel Road. The nearest trainstation was in Plungian.The Village of Andriava (9 miles) also had some Jewishfamilies. They were engaged in trade and agriculture. Thevillage relied on Ritova in matters of religion and culture.Jews resided there in the seventeenth century. Under theLithuanian Council, it was attached to Reidan Disinct. Anumber of meetings of the District Council were held in thetown.The land for the town belonged to the Aginskys. Thefirst Aginsky in mid-nineteenth century was a tyrant and allfeared him. He took the beit midrash of the Jews and,according to the memorial book on Ritova, in the 1860’s hetumed it into a shelter for pigs. Later it became a residencefor his land-tenants and his servants. When Count Aginskydied, they established a celebration in the form of a specialPurim observance.In 1911, on Tisha B’Av half of the town bumed down.In 1918, Count Zalvzky took over the town from theAginsky family, and he retumed the building to the Jews.In 1897, the Jewish population was 1397, 80% of thegeneral population, and in 1914 - about 2000 (400 families).During Independent Lithuania, the mimber declined and justbefore the Holocaust there were only 200 Jewish families left(less than 800 people).Most of the Jews engaged in trade; 10 were artisans; and4 were farmers. Market day was Wednesday.Many Jews emigrated to South Africa, the United Statesor Palestine.There were 2 beit midrashes, a yeshiva and a TarbutSchool with 120 pupils. The teachers were Eliahu Levita,Zalman-Leib Levita, Shimon Kaplan, Zvi Rosenzveig andMoshe Chavas.The Zionist parties, Hamizrahi and Zionist Socialists,were active, as were Shomer Hatzair, Maccabi and Pioneers252LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESyouth groups. There were 2 large libraries, one containingmostly Hebrew books and one with only Yiddish books. Nearthe town was a Hechalutz (Pioneer) training facility.Ritova was the first shtetl in Lithuania to have electriclights, when the Polish Fritz Aginsky installed electric lightsin his palace and in the streets in the beginning of thetwentieth century.From the rabbinate: R. Naftali Haratz [a native of thetown; author of the book "Mei Kior" about the washing ofthe hands. He died in 5588/1828)]; R. Leib Harif; R.Avraham-Aaron Burstein; R. Yitzhak-Eliahu Gefen; R. Shur;and the last rabbi, R. Shmuel Ponidler*.Natives: R. Zev-Wolf Abrach [1845-1922]; R. Aaron-Shlomo Zalmanovitz [1870-1940; rabbi of Haifa]; BaruchMarcus [orientalist and researcher]; Dr. Getzel (George)Zelikovitz [physician]; and Menachem-Mendel Serhai [Torahscholar]; Aaron-Benzion Shurin [rabbi and writer]; andGabriel Gerad [composer].Additional References:Memorial Book, The Ritavas Community: A Tribute to theMemory ofOur Town, edited by Alter Levite. It includesa section in English and has a list of Holocaust victims(in English)."Hoveret Ritova" - an addition to the memorial book withadditions and corrections to it. (In Hebrew). Names notin the memorial book include: Shimon Berkol (bom5656/1896), R. Dov Zvi Hyman son of R. MosheAaron, Rebitzin Bella Lifovitz, wife of R. Yosef LeibLifovitz, Toiba Goldberg, R. Eliahu Yitzhak Frisman,Moshe Mordechai Halevy Krasnopolsky, Zusha Grosh-lavsky, Moshe Koss, Mordechai Yitzhak Segal, AlterLevitan.Mein Shtetle Ritovas by Professor Zelikovitz. Numerousarticles in Hebrew with recollections of Ritova.THE COMMUNITIES253ROGOVA (RAGUVA) - Ponevezh District D2Rogova is on the road from Ponevezh (18 miles) toVilkomir (21). A number of Jewish farmers lived in theneighboring villages of Shil (5), Traip (6), and Chislivka.The nearest train station was in Rogovka (6), which was notconnected by road.The town was surrounded on all sides by the NeviazhaRiver. It had a large amount of swamp land and several lakesand canals.Henrik Senlcvitz mentions the town in his historical novelBy Fire and By Sword.The town is known to exist from the beginning of thesixteenth century. The owner of an estate, wishing to developthe site, invited Jewish settlers and provided them with landand wood for building. Old tombstones there show that itsJewish settlement predated the Ponevezh community, whichused the Rogova cemetery.Two large fires, one at the end of the nineteenth centuryand another at the beginning of the twentieth, each destroyednearly half of the town.In 1766, the Jewish population was 1187; in 1847 - 852;and in 1897 - 1223, 80% of the general population. DuringWorld War I, the Jews were expelled to Russia. After theWar, 3000 Jews lived there, 60% of the general population,but the numbers declined. In 1939, only 1500 Jews remained,25% of the general population.The Jews engaged primarily in trade and crafts. Busydays for Jewish shopkeepers were Sundays and Tuesdays.Fairs, called "Juliana," were held 3 times a year, on August15th, 22nd, and 29th. On the other days merchants would goto other villages and markets in nearby towns, buying flax,hides and farm produce. There were also wood merchantsand owners of small factories. Before World War I, FeivelPmtitn Mp ‘h \isaNtv-j whicfe. emplQyed 50 workers. Thebuilding was destroyed during the War. There were 3 flour254LITHUANLiN JEWISH COMMUNITIESmills and 1 sawmill, established by Jews who retumed firomSouth Africa. In the bristle processing factories mainlywomen and children were employed.Their meager livelihood created a very low standard ofliving before World War I, and after the War conditions werefurther exacerbated. Lithuanians, with the assistance of thegovemment, began displacing the Jewish economic position.Incitement against the Jews was not just witíi slogans andeconomic activities. In the winter of 1939, pogroms brokeout and the mob came down on the Jews and their houses.Groups of Jewish firemen prevented loss of life. The pogromatmosphere had prevailed for some years prior to that. Jewishyouth emigrated to Palestine, the United States and SouthAfrica.The Jewish Peoples Bank founded in 1924 had 101members in 1931.The old synagogue was built in the eighteenth century,and the beit midrash was put up at the end of the nineteenthcentury. There was a kloiz in which young scholars studied.It bumed down at the beginning of the century. In thesynagogue, the holy ark was hewn of wood, crafted by anartist.Before World War I, there were cheders and a yeshivain the town. From 1925, there was a Tarbut School with 100students. There was a Shas Society (Order of the Mishnah),Mishnayot and Ein Yakov.There were libraries of the Tarbut movement and theYiddishists; drama clubs; branches of Hamizrahi, Hitachdut(the confederation), Socialist Zionists and Kultur-Leagua.There were the youth groups of Gordonia with 30 members,Dror with 50 members, Hashomer Hatzair, Netzach with 50and Young Pioneers.Their charitable institutions included Ezra, a loan fundand Linat Hazedek.THE COMMUNITIES255From the rabbinate: R. Binyamin [father of R. Eliahu-David Rabinovitz]; R. Schneur-Zalman Hirshovitz; R.Eliezer-Simcha Rabinovitz [served also as rabbi in Shadova,Suwalk, Lomza and Kalvaria]; R. Mordechai Rabinovitz[5624-5646/1864-1886]; R. Moshe Mishel-Shmuel Shapira[served as a rabbi for about 50 years, until 5693/1933] andthe last rabbi, R. Yisrael Mal’.Natives: Yehoshua Pelovitz [writer]; Michael Higar[researcher]; Yehezkiel Yaffe; A. Lazarov [one of theorganizers of the Peoples Bank in Lithuania].ROMANOVA - Ponevezh DistrictRomanova was a village 5 miles from Sobotsh (D2). Ithad a Jewish community before World War I.ROZALIA (ROZALINAS) - Ponevezh District C2Rozalia is near Shadova (12 miles), Linkova (14), Pokroi(7), Ponevezh (24), and Shavli (25) and is 11 miles ffom thenearest train station.A Jewish community existed in Smilg (9) before WorldWar I.Before World War I, there were 50 Jewish families inthe town. In 1915, the Jews were expelled. During Indepen-dent Lithuania (1923), there were 173 Jews (about 25 Jewishfamilies). Before World War II, about 30 Jewish familieslived there.All the Jews except for 2 or 3 worked in trade or asshopkeepers. Monday was market day, and there were 2 fairseach year. On other days, Jews traveled to the fairs andmarkets in nearby towns.Most of those who emigrated went to South Africa.In 1930, about half of the town bumed down.In the town was a beit midrash and an ethnic school with30 pupils.256LJTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESFrom the rabbinate: R. Nachum Sahr* [served also inDaug j and the last rabbi R. Eliezer Goldberg*.RUDAMIN (RUDMINE) - Sieni District C3Rudamin is near Kalvaria (13 miles), Lazdai (4),Mariampole (17) and Vilkovishk (29), on the banks of theRudaminelis River.The town was founded by the Polish Prince Naveronskyat the beginning of the eighteenth century. He invited Jews tocome and settle, and he leased them land.Before World War I, the Ziman family bought land ffomthe Polish Squire Chaikovsky. One of the members of theZiman family, Henich Ziman from Rudamin, was parachutedinto the RudnÚc Forests during World War II by the Russians.He organized a group of Soviet Partisans in Lithuania, inwhich many Jews participated, especially from Vilna, Kovnoand their environs. A man by the name of Jurgis was knownamong the partisans. When the War ended, he continued toedit the central newspaper of the Govemment of Lithuania inVilna - "Tiesa" (Tmth).After World War I, a considerable number of Jews wereliving in the area, but they began to leave and go to largecities or to emigrate.The situation of the Jews in Rudamin and the surround-ing area was good. The Jews made their living in trade andfarming. They had normal relations with their neighbors.Before tíie Holocaust, there were a few dozen Jewish familiesin the town and an additional 50 families farming in thesurrounding area.There was a lovely old synagogue which served Jewsfrom the area.From the rabbinate: R. Mordechai Cohen* Iserved asrabbi ffom World War I until the Holocaust].THE COMMUNITIES257RUMSHISHOR (RUMSISRES) - Kovno District D3Rumshishok is near Zhezmir (10 miles), Zhusli (13),Kovno (12) and Kushidar (11), and on the Nieman River.The nearest train station was in Provinishki (3).Before World War I, over 100 Jewish families livedthere. In 1915, they were all expelled by the Russian army.Some later retumed.During Independent Lithuania, the Jewish communitynumbered about 50 families.The Jews engaged in trade of lumber and agriculturalproducts and in crafts. Jews owned a match factory, asawmill and a flour mill. In the summer, vacationers wouldcome to the town, especially people from the yeshivas.Before World War I, there was a beit midrash and 2cheders. During Independent Lithuania, a Tarbut School wasestablished. Charitable organizations included a eharitableloan fund, Bikur Holim, Linat Hazedek and HachnasatOrchim.From the rabbinate: R. Yosef Eliasberg, R. Meir-DovPagir [5626-5651/1866-1891]; R. Eliahu Hacohen Levine; R.Aaron Bendt Hacohen Schmidt; R. Yisrael Goldman Filipo-ver; R. Aaron Grazovsky [died in 5697/1937].Public figures: Mordechai Eliasberg; Yisrael Katz[founder of Menorat Hamaor and Hachnasat Orchim in thetown]; Mordechai-Yeshayahu Lufiansky [founder of TiferetBachurim].Natives: R. Yitzhak Levitan and R. Yakov Katz.SALANT (SALANTAI) - Kretinga District A1Salant is near Darbian (13 miles), Polangen (15), Plotel(9), Plungian (15) and Maisiad (7). The train station was 12miles from town.The Jewish settlement dates from the seventeenthcentury. According to a list dated 1766, there were 279 Jewspaying head-tax. In 1846, the Jewish population was 990; in258LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES1897, it was 1106; before World War I, it was 1200 (about300 families); in 1921, about 800; and before the Holocaust,about 500 (150 families).In 1926, almost half of the town bumed down.Jews worked in trade and crafts. Market days wereTuesdays and Fridays. Out of 19 artisans, there were 7shoemakers, 2 tailors, 2 tinsmiths, a blacksmith, a tanner, 2glaziers, a clock maker, a bookbinder and 2 hat makers.There was a small factory for making "Electra" paraffincandles. The owner of the company was Lipa Ziv and 2 of itsworkers were Jewish.Jews emigrated to South Afirica, America, and some toPalestine.There was an old synagogue, a beit midrash and 2shtiblach with lessons taught by a melamed or a rabbi. Oneof the melameds was Michel Manishevitz, father of theindustrialist Dov Manishevitz.From 1903 to 1910, there were 5 cheders and a yeshiva.During Independent Lithuania, there were 2 educationalinstitutions. One was a Talmud Torah. The other was aTarbut elementary school with 100 pupils. It was founded in1919 by Benzion Yuselevitz. The principal was Mrs. Ziv,and the teachers were Lazerovitz and Yuselevitz.A library was established in 1906 by Hirsh Olshtein andone of the sons of R. Rabinovitz. It was illegal until 1914.Finally, in 1918 it was authorized and was named afiter I.L.Peretz (Yiddish author, 1852-1915). In 1923, it had 1600books.One of the societies for the study of Torah was TiferetBachurim. Charitable institutions included Hachnasat Kallah,Linat Hazedek and Bikur Holim. There was a Jewish volun-teer fire department. Before the Holocaust, there werechapters of Hamizrahi, Agudat Yisrael and Zionist Youth.From the rabbinate: R. Zvi-Hirsh Broide; R. HillelMiliakovsky [R. Hillel of Salant]; R. Gavriel Fineberg; R.THE COMMUNITIES259Yosef Yaffe; R. Meir Atlas; R. Avraham-Aaron Burstein[5660/1900]; R. Mordechai-Yitzhak-Izaak Rabinovitz; R.Moshe-Yonah Viner*; and the last rabbi, R. Meir-Zvi Kallef.Natives: Yosef-Zondel Salanter; Naftali Amsterdam;Moshe bar Aaron [teacher in Mir and Ratzek and author of"Pardes Hachma"]; Elhanan Cohen ["Salanter," representedR. Yisrael Salanter and the great rabbis before authorities andcommittees in Petersburg. He died in Vilna in 5639/1879];Moshe Aaronson [maggid]; Yakov Berman; Mordechai-AaronGuenzburg [writer]; Josef Jaffe [born 1865/6; son of RabbiMordechai Jaffe; settled in U.S. 1892]; Saul Horwitz[attorney and author of a book comparing Russian andEuropean civil law with Hebrew law]; Dov Manishevitz[industrialist]; and William Lawrence (Ziv) [scientist].Additional reference:Mentioned in A.S. Sachs, Worlds That Passed.SALAT (SALOCIAI) - Birzh District D1Salat is near Birzh (14 miles), Posevol (14), Vashki (10)and Zhaimel (17) on the Musha River. It is on the Latvianborder. In the villages of Grivakla (1), Pashala (3), Komian(4), Kovilon (2), there were Jewish settlements before WorldWar I.A Karaite community existed from the end of theeighteenth century. For rabbinical Jews the local yeshiva wasforbidden until 1882.In 1908, about half the town bumed down.Before World War I, the Jewish population was about300 (70 families). In 1921, there were 156 (50 families), in1923 - 174, in 1939 - less than 100 (25 families).Market day was on Tuesdays. There was an annual fair.Many emigrated to South Afirica and to America. Somewent to Eretz Yisrael.From the rabbinate: R. Menahem-Mendel.260LJTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSALOK (SALAKAS) - Ezhereni-Zarasi District F2Salok is near Ezhereni (13 miles), Utian (24), Dusiat(17), Antaliept (12) and Targin (16), on the Polish border. Itis near the Vilia River and in an area of lakes and forests.The railway station on the Warsaw-Petersburg Line washalf-a-mile away.Before World War I, there were Jewish communities inthe villages of Pratkon (5), Uzvintz (7), Avanasta (4) andRaken (6). Six Jewish famiíies lived on the Zagrini Estates.The town was established about 400 years ago. In 1902,the entire town bumed down and was rebuilt.Before World War I, 500 Jewish families lived there. Onthe eve of the Holocaust, 200 families remained.The Jews worked in fishing and in the trade of farmproducts and lumber.The economic situation deteriorated after World War I.The new boundaries cut the town off frorn the train station,from Vilna and from the Vilia River. Many residents emi-grated to Palestine, America, South Afiica and Cuba.Those that remained worked in peddling, knitting socksand small crafts. In 1937, there were 56 Jewish artisans,including 14 needleworkers, 13 shoemakers, 4 stitchers, 6butchers, a baker, 7 metal workers, 4 carpenters and a clockmaker. A number of Jews worked as fishermen in the nearbylakes. The flour mill and the sawmill were owned by ZviGarvitz.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 161 members.With the Soviet occupation in 1939, Vilna again becamepart of Lithuania. The economy of Salok recovered. The Jewssupplied wood and farm products needed in Vilna andexported goods to Russia. The fear of war prevalent in theFall of 1939 changed as people were busy with trade andenjoying the sudden abundance.The Klatzk Yeshiva, which had been in Yanova, wastransferred to Salok. There was a beit midrash, a kloiz and aTHE COMMUNITIES261shtibl. Twenty-five boys studied in the cheder. The TarbutSchool had 110 pupils.From the rabbinate: R. Yakov Kelmas; R. Eliahu-Morde-chai Velkovsky; and the last rabbi, R. Yakov Relba*.Native: Dr. Arye Beahem [bacteriologist and Zionistleader].SAPIZISHOR (ZAPYSKIS) - Kovno District C3Sapizishok is near Kovno (9 miles), on the left bank ofthe Nieman River.In early times, the town was situated on the banks of theriver. In Spring it would be damaged by floods. During thereign of Czar Alexander II, the town was relocated in thehills.Sapizishok had an early Jewish settlement. Before WorldWar I, 70 Jewish families lived there; during IndependentLithuania - 40 families; and before the Holocaust - about 50Jewish families.In 1831, the Jews took part in the Polish Revolt againstIhe Czarist regime.The Jews were involved in the wood trade and in runningrafts on the Nieman River.There were the Gemach (charitable loan fund) and LinatHazedek societies. There were talmudists and maskilim(enlightened intellectuals). Many subscribed to Hebrewnewspapers. From 1910, there was a modem Hebrewelementary school. This school continued to exist duringIndependent Lithuania. There was also a drama club.From the rabbinate: R. Yisrael Avigdor; R. Haim-ZevKreiger [died 5663/1903]; R. Aaron-Shlomo bar Issachar-Dov Zalmanovitz; R. Meir Verzablovsky; R. YochananZopovitz-Zarachi; the last rabbi, R. Yitzhak Gerin*.Native: Dr. Moshe Kreiger.262UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSBOVODA C3Sbovoda is a village near Rudamin and Lazdai wheresome Jews, including the Kalvarisky family, lived before theHolocaust.SEMILISHOX (SOMILISKE) - Troki District D3Semilishok is near Visokidbor (9 miles), Vevyia (11) andZhusli (14). The nearby village of Katbishok (8) had a Jewishsettlement before World War I.Before World War I, 60 Jewish families lived there. Thesame number lived there on the eve of the Holocaust.The Jews made their living from trade. Tuesday wasmaricet day. Once a year there was a fair.There was a Yavneh School and a beit midrash in thetown.From the rabbinate: R. Dov Bergman and the last rabbi,R. Yeshayahu-Moshe Shaslrin*.SERHAI (SIERIJAI) - Alyta District C3Serhai is near Alyta (15 miles), Meretsh (17), Lazdai(12), Simna (12), Vishay (12) and Laipoon (12), in an areaof lakes.The neighboring villages of Shventezhery (7), Bobry (7),Yanitz (4) and Shlavant (7) had Jewish settlements beforeWorld War I.In 1812, the French Army camped there. Napoleon leftbehind a coat in the camp. The Jews took the coat and sewedit into a parochet (cover) for the Holy Ark.In 1912, about half the town bumed down.Before World War I, 400 Jewish families lived there. In1921, the Jewish population was 1050. Before the Holocaust,it was about 800, or 200 families.The Jews engaged in trade, fishing, and farming of fieldcrops and fruit trees. Some Jews owned large estates,including Yosef Grebarsky and Fruma Vezbotzky. A farmTHE COMMUNITJES263machine factory was owned by the Zviling family. A liquorand beer factory was owned by Yitzhak-Zvi Slavetitzky andMoshe Finkel. There was a large spinning mill, which servedthe area.Market day was every Tuesday and Friday. There were16 fairs during the year.During Independent Lithuania, the Jews experienced aneconomic decline due to the Agrarian Reforms and theLithuanian cooperatives. This led to increased emigration tothe U.S., Mexico, South Aírica and Palestine.The Jewish Peoples Bank, founded in 1923-25, had 211members.There was a beit midrash, a kloiz and shtibl. The TarbutSchool had an enrollment of 120 pupils. There was a libraryand chapters of Bikur Holim and Linat Hazedek.All the Zionist parties were represented. There wereyouth and sports associations, including Maccabi and Hapoeland some women’s associations. There was an all Jewishvolunteer fire department, equipped by Jewish money, whichserved the entire town. A nickname for those from Serhaiwas "Fodfalshtzikas,, (from bumings of fire).From the rabbinate: R. Yisrael Goldin; R. GershonRabinsohn; R. Avraham-Zvi Pinchas-Aliasberg; R. A. Kamo;R. A. Shchopek; and R. Haim Vassertzog'.The Vilna Gaon spent a year in the town with his studentR. Haim. The editor of Hamaggid, David Gordon, livedthere for 6 years. Community leaders included Meir Eivsha-kovsky.Natives: Eliezer Shapira [writer and publisher]; Eliezer,Zvi and Tanchum Rosenzveig [educators and Zionist figures].Additional reference:Morris S. Schulzinger, The Tale of a Litvah, New York:Philosophical Library, 1985. Part I includes Lithuania1900-1920; Chapter 6 - "A Shtetl Called Serei."264LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSESIK (SIESIKAI) - Vilkomir District D2Sesik is a small town near the District City of Vilkomir(12 miles). Before the Holocaust, 21 Jewish families (70people) lived in the town.SFERNA - Alyta DistrictSfema was a village near Simna fC31 where some Jewishfarmers, Moshe and Haim Fried, lived. Their farm was 3250acres in size until the agrarian reforms, when it was reducedto 325 acres.SHADOVA (SHEDUVA) - Ponevezh District C2Shadova is near Shavli (11 miles), Ponevezh (27), andRadvilishok (10). The nearest train station was about a mileaway.Before World War I, the land of the town belonged toBaron Ropp, who was benevolent to the Jews.The market square was in the center of town. From itbranched out 3 streets, Keidan, Ponevezh and Shavli Streets.In 1908, a fire destroyed almost all the houses on KeidanStreet.Jewish settlement at this location dates ffom the fifteenthcentury. Shadova was the birthplace of the rabbi and author,R. Moshe Hagola. In 1766, 508 Jews lived there and paidhead-tax. In 1847, the Jewish population was 1211; in 1897,it was 2695, 61% of the general population; in 1914, therewere about 500 families; in 1923 - 916 people, 28% of thegeneral population; and in 1939 - about 200 families, approx-ímately 800 individuals.The Jews worked in trade, farming and crafts. Theywould sell the best ffuits to merchants from Petersburg andRiga. There were 2 flour mills owned by Jews. The Cohenfamily had a dye-works plant and a weaving factory.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 216 members in 1929.THE COMMUNTTIESZOJThe Jews who emigrated went to South Aíirica, Americaand Palestine.The town had a yeshiva, 2 cheders, a Tarbut School anda library. The religious youth belonged to Tiferet Bachurim.Most of the youth belonged to Zionist organizations, includ-ing Maccabi and Hashomer Hatzair.From the rabbinate: R. Gershon Kramer; R. Eliezer-Simcha Rabinovitz [5621/1861]; R. Simcha Horvitz [from5631/1871; he died in 5656/1896]; R. Yehuda-Leib Riff[5646/1886]; R. Noah Rabinovitz [firom 5650/1890; he diedin 5661/1901]; R. Avraham-Aaron Burshtein [5661-2/1901-2]; R. Yosef Kanovitz [related by marriage to the Ridbaz;5663/1903]; R. Yosef-Leib Bloch [5665-5670/1905-1910]; R.Aaron Bakesht [until 5675/1915]; R. Benzion Notlevitz [firom5682/1922]; andthe lastrabbi, R. Mordechai-David Henkin*.Natives: Shmuel-Yitzhak bar Haim; Rabbi Hillman;Haim-Mordechai Katetz; Moshe bar Yakov; Pesach Merek/Marak/Mark [historian]; Yisrael Mayafit [ writerj; andShraga-Eliahu Cohen [founded a yeshiva for the poor].SHADVIGIShadvigi was near Grishkabud (6 miles) and Shaki [C3].It had a Jewish community before World War I.SHAKI (SAKIAI) - District Capital C3Shaki is near Naishtut-Shaki (15 miles), Vilkovishk (24),Kazlova-Ruda (36), Mariampole (36), Virbaln (24) andKibart (30) on the Nieman and the Sheshupa Rivers. Thenearest train station was in Shelmi (21 miles). A roadconnected it with Naishtut, Vilkovishk, Mariampole andKovno. It was near the border of eastem Prassia, 15 milesfirom Schirwint in Prassia.Shaki was an early Lithuanian settlement. Sources firomthe 14th and 15th centuries indicate that the head of theGerman Order of the Teutonic Knights visited there in 1352.266LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAccording to another source, the German Crusaders built awooden fortress there in 1405.In the eighteenth century, the town and its environsbelonged to the House of Chertorisky. The forested areasurrounding the town belonged to the Squire Pototzky. PrinceMikoli Chertorisky obtained the Rights of Magdeburg forShaki in 1776. He also allowed Jews to settle and open iimsthere.The Chertoriskys later sold their land to the GermanBaron Theodor von Kvital. The German barons and Polishsquires, owners of large estates in the area, exploited thepeasants and Jews. In 1863, the Polish noblemen rebelledagainst Russian rule. The population abstained firom partici-pating in the revolt but stiil suffered greatly.In 1856, the Jewish population was 1473; in 1897, it was1638, 74% of the generaí population; in 1914 - 4000; in1923 - 1267, 62% of the general population; and in 1939 -approximately 1000.During World War I, the retreating Russian Armyinstigated pogroms against the Jews. Torah scrolls werebumed and many Jews were injured. Some Torah parchmentsthat were saved were later tumed over for protection to theJewish Museum in Vilna. Most Jews left. Some retumed assoon as the Germans captured the town; others retumed afiterthe War.During Independent Lithuania, Shaki was a DistrictCapital. Lithuanian authorities attempted to strengthen theeconomic position of Lithuanians at the expense of the Jews.Despite these efforts, the Jews continued to play an importantrole in the economic and political life of the city. Four Jewsserved as Mayors, Gadalsky, Lobotsky, Altfeld and YakovPleksman/Fleksman.Jews worked as artisans and greengrocers. They weredependent on the market days, every Tuesday and Friday.Every 2 weeks there was a fair. There also developed smallTHE COMMUNITIES267industries, including an electric station, 2 sawmills, 3 flourmills, a factory for beer and soft drinks and a small factoryfor farm machines, most of which were owned by Jews.The Jewish Peoples Bank, administered by Lacks andFroman, had 170 members in 1932. It was closed in 1940.According to the "pinkas kehilla" (record book) for theyears 5531-5628/1771-1868, seven local leaders of the Jewishcommunity served as representatives before the authorities.There were committees for handling tax matters, education,economic concems and charity.There was a beit midrash and a synagogue for use on theSabbath and Holidays.After World War I, the community was reorganized. Inthe 1920’s, a controversy arose regarding the appointment ofrabbis. Prayer houses were closed intermittently over severalyears. It appears that the more well-to-do demanded a newrabbi, while the workers supported the local rabbi. For atime, there were 2 rabbis and 2 shochets.During Independent Lithuania, there were a number ofcheders, a Tarbut School with four grades and 2 preparatoryprograms with about 200 pupils. One of the administratorswas Yerachmiel Goldberg. Teachers included Broide,Kanovitz, Shur, Cohen, Hammer, Smilg, A. Yemshalmi, thebrothers Zvi and Eliezer Henin, Shmuel Golburt, Buchbinder,Vershavsky, and Zvi Vizhensky.There were branches of Young Zionists, Zionist Social-ists, Shomer Hatzair, Pioneers starting in 1922, YoungPioneers starting in 1932 and Maccabi. There were vestigesof the Bund. A farm machinery factory served as a trainingplace for members of the Pioneers.The economic slump in Lithuania at the beginning of the1930’s caused emigration to the United States and SouthAfrica. In 1932-33, a new movement to Pioneers occurredwith the goal of aliyah to Eretz Yisrael. With the restrictions268LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESon aliyah, Pioneers weakened, and many went to the largecities in Lithuania.From the rabbinate: R. Shmuel Mohilever; R. Moshe-Bezalel Lurie [5622-5635/1862-1875]; R. Zvi Peltrovitz; R.Shimon-Dov Anolik; R. Yirmiahu Plansberg [died 5674/1914]; R. Aaron Friedman; R. Shor; R. Yosef Goldin’ andR. Yosef Onochovitz’.Natives: R. Meir Verzhablovsky; Baruch Etilsohn[author]; the brothers Isaac-Leib and Dov (Boris) Goldberg;Y.B. Segal Yehuda Finn flabor leaderj; Yosef Peskeí[ophthalmologist]; Esther Robinstein [community worker;wife of R. Yitzhak Robinstein]; Cantor Aaron Friedman andCantor Arye-David Barzovsky; Yehuda Bloch [communityworker]; Eliahu Feif [ industrialist]; and Yakov 01eiski [ORTdirector].Additional reference:Yacob Oleisfci, A Man ’s Work, 1986, published by ORT andthe Association of Lithuanian Jews in Israel. 01eiski wasborn in Shaki. His book discusses his early years inShaki, his hometown, and his work as director of ORTin Lithuania. (Has a section in English.)SHARINA (SAKYNA) - Shavli District C1Shakina was near Zhager (15 miles). There were Jewsliving there at one time.SHANTZY (SANCIAI) - Kovno District C3Shantzy is a suburb of Kovno. Jews began to settle therein the late nineteenth century and were living there up to thetime of the Holocaust.From the rabbinate: R. Salant and R. Moshe-YakovSchmukler* jjcame to Shantzy in 1937 firom Trashkun].Native: Shlomo Kalzon [1896-1945; Zionist figure].THE COMMUNJTIES269SHATAIKY (SATEIKIAI) - Telz Distríct A2Shataiky was a village near Plungian (9 miles). It hadsome Jewish residents before World War I.SHATT (SETA) - Keidan District D2Shatt was near Pagir (9 miles), Zhaim (8), Keidan (11),Remigola (15) and Yanova (15). It had neither roads norelectricity.In the nearby villages of Bukantz (6) and Traskova (9),Jewish settlements existed before World War I.At the time of the Jewish Council of Lithuania, Shatt wasincluded in Birzh circuit. In 1847, the Jewish community hada population of 802; in 1897 - 1135, 68% of the generalpopulation; in 1921 - 406; and in 1939 - about 350.Jews worked in trade and crafts, or were cartsmen.Tuesday was market day. A fair was held twice a year. Thecharitable loan fund and the Jewish Peoples Bank, which had105 members in 1929, were important in the economic life ofthe Jews. Many of the Jews emigrated to South Aftíca andAmerica.There was a beit midrash and a kloiz.About 30 boys attended the cheder, and the TarbutSchool had 70 students. There was also a large library.From the rabbinate: R. Eliahu Ben Yakov Ragoler [ 1794-1849; rabbi in Shatt 1821]; R. Naftali bar Efiraim; R.Meir-Michel Rabinovitz; R. Nahum Shapira [the prodigy ofDokshitz (near Minsk); he died in 5662/1902]; R. Bonim-Zemach Silver; R. Zev-Wolf Abrech; R. Avraham Droshko-vitz [from 5657/1897]; R. Shlomo bar Meir-Michel Rabino-vitz [from 5663/1903]; and the last rabbi, R. Elhanan Viner’.Natives: Moshe-Yitzhak Rabin; Yehoshua Rabinovitz;Effaim Kaplan [writer]; and Mordechai-Menes Monesvitz[educator and author].270UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSHAUDINA (SIAUDINE) - Shald District B2Shaudina is located on the banks of the Nieman River,opposite the town of Yurburg. The connection with theneighboring settlements on the same side of the river was bya dirt road. Its connection with Kovno and Yurburg was onlyby way of the river.In 1931, 120 Jews lived there. Ten families lived off ofagriculture and the rest engaged in trade. At the outbreak ofthe Holocaust, 20 Jewish families lived there.The prayer house was built in 1920. Ten childrenattended the cheder. Some of them continued their studies inYurburg or in Kovno. There was no rabbi or cemetery inShaudina. They used the services of the Jewish community inSudarg.Native: Zalman Leviush [actor; born 1908; son ofMordecai-Meir].SHAVLAN (SIAULENAI) - Shavli District C2Shavlan is located near Shavli (21 miles), Radvilishok(11), Tzitovian (8), and Shidlova (9).In the center of town was a round marketplace. From itextended 3 roads, one to Shavli and Tzitovian, another toRadvilishok and the third to Shidlova.The Jewish community dated back over 400 years ago.In 1766, the Jewish population was 331; in 1847, it was535; in 1897 - 547, 53% of the general population; in 1921- 105; and in 1923 - 237.The synagogue was built in the mid-seventeenth century.It had a beautifiil holy ark of carved wood, which was a workof art. Not far from the synagogue was the old Jewishcemeteiy.A blood libel in the nearby village of Dirvianishukoccurred in 1861. It roused a storm at the time amongRussian Jews. A young Jew who fought with his father,Yankel Isaacsohn, vowed revenge. On the eve of Pesach, heTHE COMMUNITJES271put a bottle of wine in the Holy Ark and told the local PolishCount that his father and other Jewish community leaders hadslaughtered a Christian boy for the Pesach ritual. The fatherwas arrested and the authorities ordered an investigation. Theinvestigators, who hated Jews, certified the libel. Fearingdanger ffom the peasants, Jews requested a new investigation.Govemor General Nazimov consented and sent SquireTolstoy and the scholar L. Livnada to reinvestigate. In thisinvestigation, the young man and other witnesses admittedthat they had given false testimony. Isaacsohn was releasedand his son was sentenced to hard labor.The Jews worked in small-scale trade and grew somefiruits and vegetables.Because of the small Jewish population, there was noHebrew school. Jewish children attended the Lithuanianschool. There was a Jewish library and reading room.From the rabbinate: R. Shaul bar Moshe-Meshil Lurie;R. Shmuel Rabinovitz [5632/1872]; R. Mordechai-Uri-Semonov; R. Mordechai Krieger [died in 5667/1877]; R.Zev-Wolf Broide [5663- 5675/1903-1915]; R. Shmuel Hanich[5681/1921]; R. Yisrael Rosendorf [died in 5689/1929]; andthe last rabbi, R. Aldva Berlin*.Native: R. Hillel-Arye Lifshitz.SHAVLI (SIAULIAI) - District Capital C2Shavli is near the Dubisa and Rodapka Rivers. Locatedin the center of Lithuania, it is an important junction of roadand rail lines.Shavli was known as "Saula" in German documents dated1236 and 1254, and also in Livonian chronicles of 1358.In the eighteenth century, Shavli began to develop. Atthe initiative of a Tisnhoiz nobleman, crafthouses andbusinesses were started. In 1775, Shavli was granted Magde-burg Rights. Upon the annexation of Lithuania by Russia,272LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESCzarina Catherine II gave the city to Count Zubov, and in1802, it became a District Capital.Two large fires consumed the city, one in 1872 andanother in 1915.The first evidence of Jewish settlement in Shavli datesffom the seventeenth century, according to identity certifi-cates they received. In 1701, permission was granted to builda synagogue. A number of Jews settled on church land. TheShavli community is mentioned in a Lithuanian record bookin the eighteenth century when it was part of the region ofPinsk. At the time, there was no Jewish cemetery; they usedthe one in Shavlan, about 21 miles away. A cemetery inShavli was only established at the beginning of the nineteenthcentury, and the oldest tombstones date ffom 1840.The small Jewish community was badly hurt by theinvasion of the Swedes in 1710-1715 and frorn the BlackPlague which broke out thereafter.Heavy fíghting occurred around the city between rebelsand the Russian Army during the Polish Rebellion of 1831.Having captured the city, the rebels stole Jewish property andhung several Jews on suspicion of having connections withthe Russians. The Russian General Shirman suppressed therebellion. His Cossacks rioted in the city for several days,causing great suffering.After the rebellion, the situation improved. In order toweaken Polish influence, the Russian authorities allowed Jewsto participate in municipal elections.The years 1843-45 brought drought and famine inRussia. Many Jews of Shavli died of starvation, and othersleft. In 1849-50, 1866 and 1872, plagues and other difficul-ties caused 316 Jewish deaths. Soon after that, the city beganto recover.With the ascension of Czar Alexander II, Jews wereallowed to trade with regions in central Russia. In 1871, theLibau-Rumanian rail line was laid, followed by the openingTHE COMMUNITIES273of the Petersburg-Berlin Road. This helped to develop trade.Within a short time, the city became an important junctionand trade center for northem Lithuania.Haim Frankl set up a tannery in the late 1870’s. Othermanufacturers included Ragulin, the Norok brothers, YisraelChoronzhitzky and Yosef Fine. There were factories fortobacco and cigarettes (Isserles and the Harmon brothers),processing flax, casting iron, making beer, chocolate andcandies (the Cohen brothers) and soap (Zivs, and laterEidelstein). There were trading houses for export of flax,hides and grain.In the same period, there were 3 private banks, headedby Benzion Kagan, the Choronzhitzky brothers and Norok, acredit association and a savings and loan fund founded byGershon Veitzman and Haim Frankl. Most of the trade andindustry was in the hands of Jews.In 1776, there were 687 Jews in Shavli paying head-tax.In 1847, the Jewish population was 2565; in 1902 - 9847people, 71 % of the general population; and when World WarI broke out (1914) - about 12,000 Jews. Most of the Jewswere expelled in 1915. In 1921, the Jewish population was7000, (35%); and in 1939 - 8000 (25%).In 1879, a govemment school was opened in Shavli. By1900, it had 138 students.Before World War I, there were 30 cheders, in whichabout 450 boys studied. In the girls school, founded in 1894by Esh, there were 150 pupils. The Talmud Torah wasfounded in 1908 and had 250 boys. Haim Frankl was a largecontributor to these educational institutions.In 1913, a yeshiva was established by Yitzhak-MeirYudelevitz and R. Aaron Heller. It had 70 students studyingunder R. Yehuda Shapira, R. Kaplansky, R. Litvin and R.Meir Atlas.In 1915, the Jews were expelled, mainly to centralRussia, and their property was plundered. When the Russian274LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESArmy retreated, they burned down the center of the city,where most Jews lived. All but a few dozen Jewish homeswere destroyed. Between 1915 and 1918, Jews who had fledffom neighboring towns and firom the Vilna Region came toShavli. Afiter the War, many of those exiled into Russiaretumed and began to rebuild.During Independent Lithuania, Shavli was the secondlargest city in Lithuania.The new city of Shavli was modem, with wide streetsand new residential buildings. The owners of the Franklfactory retumed and succeeded in reviving their businesswithin 2 years. They opened new markets in England andother countries and set up a shoe factory. Many other Jewishfactories were established, and most of the workers and clerksin the industrial plants were Jews.In trade, Jews faced difficulties írom the Lithuaniangovemment cooperatives.In 1902, there were 1733 artisans, 80% of whom wereJews. In Independent Lithuania, the percentage of Jewishartisans declined significantly.During Independent Lithuania, new credit institutionswere established, including a branch of the central Jewishbank, administered by Tzivian; Jewish Peoples Bank,administered by Gilda, Mordechai Epstein, Landoi, Choron-zhitzky and Aaron Katz; a credit association, administered byAaron Heller; a branch of the Trade Bank, administered byAbba Heller; and a private bank of Norok.New prayer houses and educational, cultural and charita-ble institutions were established during this period.Before the Holocaust, there were 15 houses of prayer,including a beit midrash which was built in 1899. There weremany kloizes, such as KIoiz Landkremer, the kloizes of themerchants, Kanne Bina, Psalms Society of shoemakers,tailors, cartmen, butchers, grave diggers; Frankl KIoiz andthe Hasidic Heshel Kloiz.THE COMMUNITIES275Duríng Independent Lithuania, a small yeshiva wasfounded, and the Talmud Torah became a Hebrew school.The school principal was Pinchas Hoffenberg and the teacherswere Vizensky, Goldin, M. Shoob, Y. Danin, Goldshtik andPitlavitz. It had an enrollment of 400 pupiís. Other localschools included a Haredi school, founded by R. AlexanderLifkin; a Yiddish school with 300 pupils, administered byBaruch and Ita Kasin; a Yavneh high school (gymnasia); aHebrew gymnasia and a Hebrew kindergarten, administeredby Sarah Rubin; and an ethnic school.Besides the libraries in the schools, there were 2 otherlarge libraries, a Zionist library and a Yiddish library.A hospital, founded in 1891 was administered by EliezerEfrati and later Dr. A. Pik.Charitable institutions included Bikur Holim Society, anold-age home, Hachnasat Orchim and an orphanage, adminis-tered by Shlomo Boz. They were heavily supported by theFrankl and Norok Families.Zionists were active within the Shavli Jewish community.Local chapter heads of Hivat Zion were M. Choronzhitzkyand Bezalel Shapira. Other early Zionists were ElhananGoldberg, Nehemia Gislavitz [a delegate to the SeventhZionist Congress], Yerachmiel Lifkin, Shlomo Kvint, AaronMichel, Akiva Peskin, Avraham Hirshovitz, Shachna Shtein,Dr. Bernard Ram and Haim Zaks. Before World War I, therewas a Zionist association called Hazamir.During Independent Lithuania, the Zionist Committeefounded a library, a Hebrew kindergarten, and organizedHebrew lessons. The youth had Hechalutz (Pioneers),Hashomer Hatzair, Betar, Hapoel Mizrahi, Gordonia, theZionist Youth organization and the Maccabi and Hapoelsports associations. Zionist parties, such as Mizrahi, GeneralZionists, WIZO, Socialist Zionists and the Revisionists hadactive chapters in the city.276LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNTTIESOther associations in the city included Agudat Yisrael,Young Agudat Yisrael, and Jewish artisan associations. Thelast Jewish community council, headed by Baer Abramovitz,Attorney Bar-Menashe Abramovitz and Shmuel Petochovsky,was dissolved when the Soviets took over.From the rabbinate: R. Yechezkel bar Meir Luntz[served from 5508-5568/1748-1808J his son, R. Zvi Luntz[5568-5599/1808-1839]; R. Yechezkel of Pokroi; R. Eliezerof Kupishok [author of "Beit Levy” and "Torat Habayit"; heserved until 5575/1815]; R. Yakov bar Yosef Shapira [until5588/1828]; Yitzhak-Isik Rabinovitz [author of "NetaaiNe’emasim"]; R. Moshe bar Gerson-Mendel Ziv [author of"Machshevet Moshe"; died 5623/1863]; R. Yakov fromBoisk; R. Eliezer bar Zev Luntz; Haim bar Yitzhak-IsikRabinovitz [until 5636/1876[; R. Yosef-Zechariah Shtern[served from 5623/1863; died in 5664/1903]; R. Meir Atlas[5665-5686/1905-1926]; R. Asher-Nisson Levitan; R. AaronBakesht’ [from5670/1910]; R. Avraham-YitzhakNochomov-sky; R. Michel Daitsh (Kitai); R. Avraham-Abba Abelson;R. Aaron-Leib bar Yechiel Heller.Community leaders: Zev Norok; Yisrael Norok; Dr. N.Balas; Mrs. Gordon; Liova Gurvitz; Dr. Shmuel Verblinsky;Mrs. Ada Zilberg; Mrs. Zeligman; Aaron Zegemik; BorisZaks; Leib Tuders; S. Yakovson; Mendel Libovitz; YakovFrank; Beryl Karaton; Mordechai Kaplan; H.D. Klein;Mordechai Rudnick; Menahem Rubinstein; H.L. Shaskin;Aaron Shlomovitz; Dr. A. Pik.Natives: Yosef-Eliezer Epstein [writer]; Yakov-Zvi Sobol[writer]; Avraham-Baruch Rayin/Ryan; Professor TuviaDanzig [mathematician]; Victor Bamer [artist]; Raphael-Shlomo Gotz [philanthropist]; Grigori Gershoni; Dr. ShlomoChoronzhitzky; Michael Tzimkovsky [attomey].Mordechai-Aaron Guenzburg [writer; lived and workedin ShavliJ; Y.L. Gordon [poet] and Y.A. Epstein [writer;THE COMMUNITIES277founded the girls school}; R. Shlomo Elishuv/Elishoob[kabbalist]; Zisman Marík [maskil; died in 1887].Additional references:Sarah Yerushalmi, To the Ghetto I Did Not Retum, Jerusa-lem: Yad Vashem, 1980. The author’s experiencesduring World War II in the Shavli Ghetto, outside of itin hiding and on the long road to Eretz Yisrael. (InHebrew).Leivi Salit, So We Died, 1949. (In Yiddish)Eliezer Yerushalmi, Pinkas Shavli: A Diary From a Lithuani-an Ghetto 1941-1944, Jerusalem: Bialik Institute and YadVashem, 1958. Includes discussions on things thathappened in the neighboring towns as well as in Shavliitself. (In Hebrew).Shavli is mentioned in a family history called The Famity byJosef Lavee Leibowitch, Tel Aviv (36 Beeri St., 64233Israel).SHAYMENAShaymena is a village next to Vilkovishk [C3]. TheShimansky family lived there.Additional reference:"The Shimansky Family Tree,” held at the Association ofLithuanians in Israel, 1 David Hamelekh St., Tel Aviv.SHESHVILL (SESUOLIAI) - Vilkomir DistrictSheshvill, a small town east of the District City ofVilkomir ]D2] (9 miles), had 129 Jews in 1925. In 1941, theJewish population was approximately 30, including AbrahamRozin.278LfTHUANlAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSHIDLOVA (SILUVA) - Rasin District C2Shidlova is near Rasin (12 miles), in a forested areawhich was used as a summer resort. The nearest train stationwas at Lidovian (2).In 1847, the Jewish population was 245; in 1897, it was506, 40% of the general population; in 1914 - about 300; andin 1921 about 150 families. Prior to the Holocaust, thenumber dropped to 365, or about 80 families, due to emigra-tion to South Africa and Palestine.In 1915, the Jews were expelled to the interior of Russia.The Jews were in trade, crafts and farming. Market daywas Monday. In September, there was a fair which lasted fora week. The fair had a religious tone, as the town was a holysite for Catholics coming to the "Holy Mother of Shidlova."There was a large and beautiful Jewish prayer house,which was fixed up prior to the Holocaust with the help ofemigrants from the town living in South Africa.There were 3 Jewish schools: Tarbut, Yavneh and aYiddish School. Some students continued in the Hebrew highschool in Rasin. There was also a library.From the rabbinate: R. Zvi-Hirsh bar Avraham Ably[died in 5616/1856]; and the last rabbi, R. Yosef Pegraman-sky*.Natives: Aaron Frank [educator and writer] and JacobMedinetz [scholar and maskil].SHIKLYShikly was a village near Poshvítin [Cl] (5 miles) inShavli District. It had a Jewish community before World WarI.SHIL (SILIA) D2Shil was a village south of Rogova (5 miles). There werea few Jewish farmers living there.THE COMMUNITIES279SHILEL (SILALE) - Tavrig District B2Shilel is near Payura (7 railes), Vainuta (18), Loykuva(10), Chaviadan (9), Kaltinana (13) and Tavrig (20).A large Jewish settlement existed in the nearby village ofBalsh (2 miles) about 300 years ago. Also, a few Jewishfamilies lived in Tuvin (4) for some years.The beginning of the Jewish settlement in Shilel datesffom the eighteenth century. In 1847, 747 Jews lived there;in 1897, there were 786, 56% of the general population; in1921 - 850; and in 1939 - about 350 (80 families).Both in 1906 and 1939, very large fires occurred in thetown and the majority of the houses bumed down.The livelihood of the Jews came mainly firom trade withthe neighboring farmers. Market day was Thursday. I herewere 8 fairs during the year. Several key merchants tradingin wood and flax had contacts with merchants in Germany.They included Yisrael Rabinovitz, Hirsh Levinzon andNachmon Reichman. There were also expert craftsmen, suchas tinsmiths, roof-tilers, oven-builders and shoemakers.Emigration was to the U.S. and South Afirica. A fewwent to Eretz Yisrael.There was a beit midrash and a shtibl in the town. Untilthe fire of 1906, there was a synagogue housed in a very oldwooden building.The local cheder had an enrollment of 25 boys. DuringIndependent Lithuania, the Yavneh School was founded andhad 33 students.There was a Zionist library and a drama group foundedby Agudat Zion. In the years preceding the Holocaust,communal life centered around Agudat Zion, a non-partisanassociation. The association fostered Zionism, arranged playsand held evening classes in Hebrew. They had collectiondrives for the national funds. They acquired a large boat forsailing on the nearby rivers and donated all the proceeds toKeren Kayemet L’Yisrael.280LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESRelations with the Christians were considered good. Dr.Zak, a local physician, was admired throughout the area. Hedied at a young age of the plague and was moumed by Jewsand Christians alike.From the rabbinate: R. Aharon [later went to Rretingaand Pinsk; died in 5605/1845]; R. Binyamin ben Hadret; R.Avraham bar Shlomo-Zalman Rabinovitz [5631/1871]; R.Shmuel JCatzenelbogen [5663/1903]; R. Yosef-Yehuda Droia[5674-5680/1914-1920];; and the last rabbi, R. Caleb-MeirZiv’ [author of Galat Caleb].Natives: Eliyahu-Akiva Rabinovitz; Dr. Shmuel Mendol-son; Heinich Rabinovitz [Lithuanian Consul in the U.S.].SHIMANTZA (SHIMANZI) - Ponevezh District E2Shimantza was a town near Kupishok. It had a Jewishpopulation up to the time of the Holocaust.From the rabbinate: R. Meir ben Binyamin-Dov Verzhe-blovsky'[1881-1941]; R. Shimon ben Avraham Rozovsky'[1874-1941; later served in Eishishok].SHIMKAICH (SIMKAICIAI) - Rasin District B2Shimkaich was a village southwest of the District City ofRasin (11 miles). Forty-one Jews lived there in 1923. TheJewish population was the same at the outbreak of theHolocaust.SHIRVINT (SIRVINTOS) - Vilkomir District E2Shirvint is near Vilkomir (15 miles), Gelvan (11),Musnik (9), Gedrovitz (13), Podzhelve (13) and Dubinik(23), on the Shirvinta River and 2 miles ffom the Polishborder. The nearest railroad station was at Vilkomir.Jewish settlement existed firom the beginning of theeighteenth century. A number of Jewish families settled aslessees of land owned by Count Pisatsky. Other Jews ownedTHE COMM UNITIES281inns and tavems, and they settled along the road connectingKovno and Vilna.Over the years, the Jews were evicted from the land.Their main livelihood was fforn the inns and tavems andsmall shops. They were connected socially and economicallywith Vilna. Young apprentices studied and worked in Vilna.When they retumed for holidays and vacations, they broughtsome of the atmosphere of the big city.In 1847, the Jewish population was 216; in 1897, it was1413, 84% of the general population; and in 1914 - 1600.During World War I (1915), local Jews were exiled into theinterior of Russia. During the same period, Jews from Vilnaand outlying areas settled there. After the War, some of thoseexpelled retumed to Shirvint.The town was cut off from Vilna. Battles within the townoccurred between Lithuanian partisans and Poles. Economicconditions were very poor. All of these factors caused a largepart of the population to leave. Jews emigrated to SouthAfrica, the United States, Cuba, Mexico, and Palestine. In1923, the number of Jews in the town was 1800. In 1939,only 700 remained.During Independent Lithuania, the Jews engaged in trade,crafts and peddling. Thursday was market day. There was ashoe factory and a felt boot industry. A few families workedthe land.The Jewish Peoples Bank, founded in 1928, had 221members. Bank administrators were A. Raznikovitz and S.A.Chefetz.There were 3 prayer houses, a beit midrash, a synagogueand a kloiz. There was also a shtibl. In all of them, peoplestudied the daily page of Gemorrah.There was a Tarbut School with 100 students, twocheders with 50 students and a Yiddish school. The teachersin the Yiddish School included B. Kalmikov, Gurvitz, Zaidel,Gershter, Shaskin, Klatzko, Y. Makler and Baron.282LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe youth were divided between Zionists and anti-Zion-ists. This caused a split in the cultural life of the town in thelast generation. There were 2 separate libraries.There was also a Sirkin Society and a branch of Mac-cabi. Cultural activities were carried out by the local commit-tee for Keren Kayemet L’Yisrael.Charitable organizations included Bikur Holim and LinatHazedek.The maggid, R. David Kretinger, was active in the town.From the rabbinate: R. Eliezer-Lipman Sharshavsky[5646/1886]; R. Shlomo-Reuven bar David [died 5646/1886];R. Menahem-Mendel bar Eliezer-Lipman Halevy [”R.Mendel of Shirvint"; author of the responsa "Berkat Mena-hem”; he died in 5672/1912]; R. Yakov Blezer; the lastrabbi, R. Avraham-Arye Grossbard', and his son-in-law R.Zondel Krok*.Natives: R. Eliahu Grodzensky; Leon Heznovitz [leaderof Hapoalim]; Avner Tannenbaum [writer and joumalist]; andJoseph Schwartz [singer].SHKUD (SKUODAS) - Kretinga District A1Shkud is near Kretinga (26 miles), Darbian (14), Memel(37), Maisiad (9), Salant (15) and Yelok (12), on thePrussian border. Situated on the Bartova, Luba and EpshaRivers, it is made up of an Old City and a New City. Abridge joins the two. The nearest train station was 2 milesaway.In the sixteenth century, Shkud belonged to the House ofKatkovitz. It then passed to the Sapieha Family. A largebattle between the warring Swedes and Russians occurrednear the town in 1704.Jewish settlement began in the seventeenth century. Theold synagogue in the town was established more than 200years ago. There was also an old cemetery.THE COMMUNITIES283In 1766, the Jewish community had 576 paying head-tax.In 1847, the Jewish population was 1872; in 1897 - 2292; in1921 - 3853; and in 1939 - 2500, about 50% of the generalpopulation.The Jews worked in trade, agriculture, industry, trans-portation and crafts. There were Jewish farmers who hadlarge plots of land outside the city. The main trade was withCourland, especially Libau. The capture of Memel byLithuania opened new markets. It promoted local industry,especially a shoe industry, which produced 400 pair of shoesper day. Other industries included woolen yarn spinning anda button factory. Cartsmen transported products to and fromthe rail stations and fish from Darbian. There were a numberof small shopkeepers, especially in the New City, which wasmore affluent. There were 2 market days each week.There was a Jewish Peoples Bank, administered byMichael Fogelman, and prior to the Holocaust by MeirBloch.In the Old City, there were 3 prayer houses, including anold synagogue, which they used from Pesach to Sukkot. Thesynagogue had a magnificent holy ark of carved wood, whichstood about 40 feet high. In the New City, there were 2kloizes and a beit midrash.About a quarter of a mile from the Old City, there wasa Jewish cemetery. It was divided into 3 sections. The newpart was for the poor. The old part was for the rich anddistinguished. The middle section was for those of middlestanding.During Independent Lithuania, there were 2 cheders, aTalmud Torah, a Tarbut School and a Hebrew high schoolwith 6 classes. The principal of the high school was MichaelFogelman and the teachers included Moshe-Hesel Cohen, ZviRosenzveig, Benjamin Ryar, Yisrael Shaff, Haim-AaronHuvsha, Rodner and Reznik. There was also a library.284UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESMost of the young people belonged to the League forWorking Palestine. Also active were branches of the GeneralZionist Histadrut, the Mizrahi, Shomer Hatzair, Betar, Dror,Young Pioneers, Hapoel, an orchestra, a drama club and achildren’s religious organization called Perchei Shoshanim.From the rabbinate: R. Aaron bar Yosef Horvitz (in5520/1760]; R. Zvi-Hirsh Zak [before 5547/1787]; his sonR. Yitzhak Zak [5548-5561/1788-1801]; R. Haim-ZeevWolf; R. Eliahu-Baruch Komeiay; R. Yehiel-Michel Huvsha;and the last rabbi R. Haim-Yakov Troskin’.Community workers: D. David, Zvi Yuslovitz, S.Axelrod.Natives: R. Zvi-Hirsh Broide, R. Shimon Horvitz, R.Yosef Faimer/Paimer, R. Avraham-Zvi Komeiay, R. Yitzhakbar Zvi-Hirsh, R. Binyamin Rabinovitz, R. Haim-AaronHuvsha; Harry Lang [joumalist]; and Yisrael Shaff [writer].Additional reference:Memorial Book ofShkud. At the end is a listing of victims ofthe Holocaust. The book, in Hebrew and Yiddish,includes a chapter on the history of Shkud. Published bythe Committee of Jews firom Shkud, Tel Aviv, 1958.SHLAVANT (SLAVANTAI) - Alyta District C3Shlavant was a village near Serhai (8 miles) and Lazdai(7). It had Jewish residents prior to World War I.SHNIPISHOK (SNIPISKIS) E3Shnipishok is a suburb of Vilna, where Jews settled inthe fifteenth century. The rabbi from Kupishok, R. MeirEpstein, was called the ”Shnipishker."Additional reference:In Jerusalem of Lithuania by Leyzer Ran, N.Y. VilnarParlag, 1974, there are scenes from Shnipishok. It saysTHE COMMUNITIES285on p. 78, vol. I, "Jews settled in Shnipishok in 1668/9.In 1680 the ’Council of Lithuanian Jews’ established acode for cooperation of ’ Anshai Kehilas Shnipishok' withthe Vilna community. Since 1791, [it was) under thejurisdiction of the Vilna community.''SHUK1AN (SAUKENAI) - Shavli District B2Shukian is near Shavli (20 miles), Kelme (15), Kurshan(15), Uzhvent (9), Vaigova (9), Vorna (25) and Luknik (15).The nearest train station was in Kurshan.In Kurtovian (6 miles), there was a Jewish settlementwith a prayer house and a rabbi before World War I.The Jewish community and the synagogue in Shukianwere among the earliest in Lithuania. In 1766, 177 Jews livedthere according to records relating to head-tax. ln 1847, theJewish population was 569; in 1897 - 624, 62% of thegeneral population; in 1914 - 120 families; in 1921 - about500 Jews, and in 1939 - 519 (about 100 families).The Jews worked in trade with the neighboring villages.Market day was Wednesday. They had 12 fairs during theyear.Economically, the Jews were poor. Many emigrated tothe United States and South Afirica. Some went to Palestine.Besides the synagogue, there was a beit midrash and aYavneh school in which 54 pupils were enrolled.From the rabbinate: R. Yissachar-Bar Gabronsky [died5630/1870]; R. Yitzhak-Yakov Reinis [5627-5629/1867-1869] R. Nahum-Michel Kahane; R. Yosef-Eliahu Fried; R.Yakov Perlgeber; Yisrael-Binyamin Bendt Fievelson [5688/1928].286LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSHVEKSHNA (SVEKSNA) - Tavrig District A2Shvekshna is near Varzhan (6 miles), Naishtut-Tavrig(11), Gorzhd (16) and Ritova (22). The nearest train stationwas in Kukoriatin.The beginning of the Jewish community dates firom theseventeenth century. In 1766, there were 420 Jews payinghead-tax. In 1847, the Jewish population was 534; in 1897,it was 794. Afiter World War I, about 200 families livedthere. Their main work was in trade and crafts. The Jewishpopulation before the Holocaust was about 500.In 1922, Lithuanian nationalists attempted to bring ablood libel suit against the local Jews. A horde of rioterscharged at the house of Reuven Serolovitz, but he preventedthem firom entering. However, following the event, the Jewsof the town had to endure four nightmarish days of pogroms.In 1925, the town bumed down. A year later they beganto rebuild it.There were 3 prayer houses, including a synagogue, abeit midrash and a kloiz.Before World War I, there were 2 cheders, a TalmudTorah and a yeshiva founded by R. Kamitz. During Indepen-dent Lithuania, the youth attended a local Tarbut School, andmany of them continued their studies at the Hebrew highschool in Kovno.Most of the youth were Zionists and they trained forpioneering and aliyah to Eretz Yisrael. There were activechapters of Young Zionists (Socialist Zionists), Maccabiahand Tiferet Bachurim.From the rabbinate: R. Menahem Mendel [served firom5408/1648]; R. Yissachar-Bar Gabronsky; R. Moshe-YitzhakSegal (5624/1864); R. Haim-Zvi Broide; R. Shmuel-AvigdorFivelson (until 5661/1901]; R. Benzion Zev Kamitz (previ-ously in Pren; died in 5673/1913]; R. Yisrael-TanhumTHE COMMUNITIES287Natives: Shmuel-Yakov Rabinovitz; Baruch Bendt Gab-ronsky; R. Mordechai-Uri bar Aaron Samonov [5569-5624/1809-1864; later a rabbi in Shavlan; he had many publica-tions].SHVENTEZHERY (SVENTOZERIS) C3Shventezhery was a village near Serhai (8 miles). It hadJewish residents before World War I.SIAD (SEDA) - Mazhaik District B1Siad is near Yelok (11 miles), Zhidik (11), Tirkshla (11),Mazhaik (15), Telz (15) and Alsiad (7), on a large lake.Before World War I, there was a Jewish settlement in nearbyKalvaria-Zhamot, which had an annual fair that lasted for aweek.In 1885, a large fire destroyed most of the houses. In1897, there were 1384 Jews, 69% of the general population.Before World War I, there were about 800, in 1921 - 900,and in 1939 - about 400 (110 families).The Jews of Siad worked in trade, crafts and in small-scale farming. Next to the town there was an agriculturalsettlement of Jews, with 10-12 families. It was called by theGentiles "Zhidu Dvaras."There were 2 market days each week, Monday andFriday. There were also 3 annual fairs.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 151 members.The poor economic conditions caused the youth toemigrate to America, South Aífica, Canada, Westem Europeand Palestine.The town had a beit midrash and a Yavneh elementaryschool with 65 pupils. There were active branches of Hecha-lutz (Pioneers), Hashomer Hatzair, Zionist Youth Worker,Socialist Zionists, Maccabi and Hapoel. Most of the youngpeople knew Hebrew and went through pioneering training.288LJTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNTTIESFrom the rabbinate: R. Yoel-Yitzhak Ratzenelbogen; R.David Regensburg [5637/1877]; R. Yisrael-Ezra Levine[5652-5663/1892-1903]; R. Moshe-Baruch Halevy Horvitz;R. Mordechai Graf [ffom 5672/1912]; and the last rabbi, R.Mordechai Rabinovitz* [who was born in Loykuva andeducated in Telz].Natives: Prof. Benjamin Ziv [economist]; Yakov-MosheHerring (Gery) [former Minister of Trade and Industry ofIsrael; son of Shmuel Herring who founded a modem schoolin Siad]; Yitzhak Ben-David (Binder) [joumalistj; and LeahGreenstein-Kaplan [poet].Additional reference:Memorial Book of Telz has a chapter on the Shiff familywhich settled in Siad upon their arrival in Lithuania fromCzechoslovakia.SIMNA (SIMNAS) - Alyta District C3Simna is near Alyta (17 miles), Serhai (12) and Kalvaria(19). It is located on the Gilush, Zuvinte and Simna Lakes.A Jewish settlement existed there ffom the eighteenthcentury. According to documents regarding the payment ofhead-tax, 325 Jews lived in Simna in 1766. In 1856, theJewish population was 736; in 1897 - 493, 34% of thegeneral population; and in 1921 - 792. Before the Holocaust,about 200 Jewish families lived there.Their main occupations were in crafts, shops, agricultureand fishing. There were Jews who had large farms of about3250 acres each. They included Yitzhak Frank and his sonYehuda from Yanchiki, Israel Frank from Pasaiki, his daugh-ter Leah Veinstein from Pasorishok, Moshe Fried and his sonHaim from Sfema, Zev Ziman and his son Avraham fromPadusha, Dov Goldberg and his sons Avraham and Max firomMergilopka. Upon the introduction of the Agrarian Reforms,each one was left with 325 acres. There were also some JewsTHE COMMUNTTIES289who owned small farms. And there were vegetable gardensbeside almost every home.Nearby lakes provided a source of income for manyfishermen. Lake Zuvinte belonged to the families of Zev andNahum Ishlondsky and their brother-in-law Noah Rosenthal.Two other lakes belonged to 3 partners, Nahum Ishlondsky,Shaul Bialotzky and Avraham Goldberg. The main market fortheir fish was Kovno.One of the merchants was Shimon Virvalsky. He laterwent to Eretz Yisrael.Two flour mills were owned by Jews. One was owned byBilzky and Cohen and the other by Haim Feldman, Bergsonand Rabinovitz. One mill supplied electric power to the town.Simna supplied medical, legal and pharmaceuticalservices to neighboring communities.The Jewish Peoples Bank, administered by ZalmanVeldstein, had 150 members.There were a number of cheders and a Tarbut School.Students would continue their studies at the Hebrew gymna-sias (secondary schools) in Kovno, Alyta, VilkovisMc andMariampole. There was also a synagogue and a large library.There were many Zionist activities.From the rabbinate: R. Peltirovitz; R. Yohanan Zupo-vitz; and the last rabbi, R. Dov-Baer Snitzer.Natives: Yakov Barit and Bezalel Malkhi (Solnitzky)[artist].Additional reference:Simna is mentioned in Hope In Darkness by Aba Gefen(Veinstein), Jerusalem: The Jerusalem Publishing Co.,Inc. and Keter Publishing Co., Inc. It is a diary of whathappened to the author during the Holocaust (1941-44).He is ffom Simna and now lives in Jerusalem. (Hebrew)290LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSINTOVAL (SINTAUTAI) - Shaki District B3Sintoval is a town near Shaki (5 miles). Some Jews livedthere before the Holocaust.SKAISGIR (SKAISTGIRYS) C1Skaisgir was located near Zhager (6 miies). It had aJewish population at one time.SKAROLY (SKORULIAI) - Kovno District D2Skaroly was a village near Yanova (2 miles). It had aJewish community about a hundred years ago.SKOPISHOK (SKAPISKIS) - Rakishok District E2Skopishok is near Kupishok (9 miles), Ponidel (9),Rakishok (17) and Kamai (20). The Germans laid a narrow-gauge rail line during World War I, and it passed by Skopi-shok.During Russian rule under the Czars, the town was partof the District of Ezereni-Zarasai. During IndependentLithuania, it was attached to Rakishok District.In 1847, the Jewish population was 282, 85% of thegeneral population; in 1897, it was 1010. In World War I,many Jews were sent to Russia. Some settled there and didnot return to the town. During Independent Lithuania, thenumber of Jews declined, and at the outbreak of the Holo-caust, about 40 Jewish families lived there (215 people).The Jews engaged in trade, shopkeeping and peddling.The main trade was in flax. Before World War I, they hadtrade connections in Dvinsk and Ezereni. After the War, itwas with Kibart. A number of Jews did business in wood. In1937, there were 6 artisans, including 3 tailors, a shoemaker,a butcher and a carpenter.There were 2 beit midrashes, with one for the Hasidimand the other for the Mitnagdim.THE COMMUNITIES291From the rabbinate: R. Ezriel Gordon; R. Mendel; andthe last rabbi, R. Menachem Roplovitz’.SKUDVILL (SKAUDVILE) - Tavrig District B2Skudvill is near Kelme (22 miles), Nemoksht (9) andUpina (6). It is located on the road to Petersburg. The nearesttrain station was at Batok (4).The town bumed down in 1922, 1931 and 1937. It wasrebuilt in 1938-39.Skudvill began as the site of some roadside inns. Jewsffom the neighboring settlements found housing in the area.After several years, a small yeshiva began to draw people toit fforn the settlements. Some families would come to seekbridegrooms for their daughters from the yeshiva.In 1847, the Jewish population was 204, and in 1897, itwas 1012, 72% of the general population. In World War I,the Jews were not expelled from the town; however, aconsiderable number of them left for Russia anyway. Afterthe War many retumed. In 1923, about 200 Jewish familieslived there, and before the Holocaust there were 1017 Jews,50% of the general population.The Jews worked as small shopkeepers, tradesmen andpeddlers. They worked mainly in the trade of produce, largeanimals and poultry. Tuesday was market day. It was thoughtof as one of the largest markets in the Zhamot (northem)region. About 10 Jewish families were in farming and 20 incrafts. There was also a small candy factory.The Jewish Peoples Bank, administered by Meir Keram,had 180 members. Many Jews were supported by theirrelatives ffom abroad.Influenced by the govemment-backed cooperatives, themarket was moved from the center of the town to theoutskirts. The cooperatives deprived the Jews of their mainsource of livelihood.292LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESEighty percent of the youth were affiliated with Zionistorganizations. Many joined pioneer training and made aliyahto Eretz Yisrael. Others emigrated to the United States and toSouth Africa.There was a beit midrash, founded in 5626/1866, and asynagogue used in the summer months. Almost everymember of the community belonged to a society for Torahstudy, such as Mishnayot, Chayei Adam, Menorot Hamaor,Tiferot Bachurim, or Shas, led by Leibchik the clock maker,Yosef Yavetz and Binyamin Stein. There was also a "Daf"(daily page) for scholars, led by Hirsh Lifshitz, Moshe-Baruch Broide and Eliezer Fein.During Independent Lithuania, there was a small yeshivain the town. It was established by R. Eliahu-Bar Ratetz andR. Shaul Zakesh and was later renewed by R. Perlman.There was the yeshiva of R. Leib Yakov of the Musarmovement, a Tarbut School with 150 pupils, a Talmud Torahand a library.Charitable organizations included the Chevra Kadisha(burial society), Lechem Aniim and Bikur Holim.There were branches of the General Zionists, Maccabi,Mizrahi, Socialist Democrats and Agudat Yisrael.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe bar Eliezer Yaffe (5619-5649/1859-1889); R. Yissachar-Bar; R. Avraham-YitzhakPerlman fauthor of "Pnei Avraham"].Community workers: S. Becker, Moshe-Baruch Broide,Hillel Ziberg [head of the congregation and gabbai of the beitmidrash, Chevra Kadisha and Talmud Torah]; Haim Zinger]a leader of the local Zionists]; Moshe Yaffe; Haim-ZviLifshitz; Kalman Mendel; Moshe Yitzhak Segal [gabbai ofthe synagogue]; Eliezer Fine; and Professor Schmidt.Natives: R. Michael Shelfoversky Jhead of YeshivaTiferet Zvi in Jerusalem]; R. Yitzhak Katetz [head of a kollelin Petach Tikva]; Dr. Moshe Zilberg [judge of the HighTHE COMMUNITIES293Court in Jerusalem]; Shimon Fishman [agrículturalist]; andR. Haim Stein, [mashgiach at the Telz Yeshiva in Cleveland].SKUMIAN (SKIEMONYS) - Utian Distríct E2Skumian is near Utian and Aniksht. In 1921, the Jewishpopulation was 150. Most of the Jews worked in crafts; a fewworked in small-scale trade.There was a synagogue in the town built throughdonations sent by R. Yitzhak in the nearby village of Blato-shuva and with the help of a neighboring nobleman.At the outbreak of the Holocaust, 128 Jews lived inSkumian.Native: Dr. Mordechai Katz [joumalist and writer].SLOBODKA (VILIJAMPOLE) - Kovno District C3Slobodka on the Vilia River, although a suburb ofKovno, was not connected to Kovno, but was foundedindependently on land owned by the Radzivill family,noblemen from Keidan. The Jewish community of Slobodkais older than that of Kovno. Jews ffom Keidan formed themajority of the first Jewish community in Slobodka. TheJews of Keidan and Slobodka remained in close contact, andthe Jewish Council of Lithuania placed them together in thenorthem circuit for matters of religious regulations and taxes.Kovno was in the Grodno circuit.The early Jews of Kovno suffered greatly from persecu-tion, and at times they had to leave the city and flee toSlobodka. An example of this was in 1492 when AlexanderI expelled the Jews from Kovno.In the great plague of 1464 in Vilna and Grodno, manyJews firom those cities found refuge in Slobodka.In 1495, an order of banishment was decreed on allJews, including the Slobodka community. The districtgovemor, Avraham Yosipovitz, a converted Jew, helped theJews in their efforts to retum to their homes. When the294LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESexpulsion order was finally cancelled in 1503, Jews wereallowed to retum to Slobodka. When Sigmund the Elder roseto the throne, conditions were somewhat eased for Jews, butnot for those of Kovno. Even he was unable to overtum theinsistence of the municipal leaders of Kovno that Jews bebanned from the city. So, the majority of the Kovno Jewishcommunity settled in Slobodka.Jews were once again ordered out of Kovno in 16S2,1753 and 1761, and the majority went to Slobodka.In 1847, the Jewish population in Slobodka was 2973.For many years, the Jews of Kovno depended on theSlobodka community for religious services. The head of theBeit Din was in Slobodka. At the end of the eighteenthcentury, Kovno did not have a rabbi. They used the Slobodkacemetery until 1862. Whenever the Vilia River flooded andKovno was cut off firom them, they would have to waitseveral days before they could perform the burial.In the 1880’s, there was a controversy between R.Yitzhak-Elhanan Spektor, the Kovner Rav, and R. YisraelSalanter, leader of the Musar Movement. R. Salanter movedffom Kovno to Slobodka, and in 1881, he and R. Natan-ZviFinkel (the "Grandfather of Slobodka") founded a yeshiva.The yeshiva was later named ÍCnesset Yisrael after R. YisraelSalanter.Ten years later, a second yeshiva was founded inSlobodka by R. Baruch-Bar Leibovitz. Knesset Beit-YitzhakYeshiva, named for R. Spektor, was intended to weaken theMusar Movement.During World War I, both of the Slobodka yeshivas weremoved to the interior of Russia. Knesset Beit-Yit2hak Yeshivastayed in Kamienitz-Litovsk after the War. Knesset-YisraelYeshiva retumed to Slobodka and reopened in the Fall of1915 with the help of the German authorities. It was movedto Hebron, Eretz Yisrael in 1925.THE COMMUNITIES295From the rabbinate: R. Uri Zakesh; R. Eliahu firomRagula; R. Yakov-Eliahu Segel; R. Gavriel Fineberg; R.Moshe bar Meir Denishovsky; R. Moshe-Mordechai Epstein;R. Shlomo-Zalman Usovsky; R. Yosef Zusmanovitz (nHayer-ushalmi"]; and R. Moshe Shkarota, R. Moshe Soloveichik;R. Natan Zvi Finkel; R. Zvi Levitan; R. Isser ZalmanMeltzer.Additional references:Esther Lurie, The Living Witness: Kovno Ghetto, Scenes andTypes, Tel Aviv, Dvir Publishing Co. with Yad Vashem,1958. Includes 30 scenes firom the ghetto. (In English)Gedalyahu Alon, ”The Lithuanian Yeshivas," in The JewishExpression, ed. by Judah Goldin, New Haven andLondon: Yale University Press, 1976.M. Gerz (pen name of Gerson Movshovich), "The Old Manof Slobodka,” in The Golden Tradition by Lucy S.Dawidowicz, 1967. About Nathan (Nota) Zvi HirshFinkel (1849-1928), who headed the Musar yeshiva inSlobodka for 50 years. This is an essay from his memo-ries of the Slobodka yeshiva.SMILG (SMILGIAI) - Ponevezh District D2Smilg was located near Rozalia (9 miles). It had a Jewishpopulation before World War I.SOFIANIRJ E3Sofianiki is a suburb of Vilna where Jews were livingbefore the Holocaust.Additional reference:In Jerusalem ofUthuania by Leyzer Ran, New York: VilnerParlag, 1974, there is a photo of Sofianilri.296LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSOLOMINKA C3Solominka was once a village that was later absorbed bythe town of Raudondvaris.SREDNIK (SEREDZHIUS) - Kovno District C2Srednik is near Vilki (8 miles), Vilon (6), Yurburg (24)and Kovno (24), between the Nieman and Dubisa Rivers.One road about a mile long constituted the whole town.In 1847, the Jewish population was 1090; in 1897, it was1174; and in 1914 - about 800 (160 families), 90% of thegeneral population. The decline of the Jewish populationresulted íirom emigration to the United States and SouthAfrica from the end of the nineteenth century until 1914.Before the Holocaust (1939), the Jewish community had 600people.In 1915, the Jews were expelled. Those remaining inVilna retumed when the town was captured by the Germans.They found it plundered and bumed. After the War, the Jewsrebuilt the community, including the synagogue, the schooland other public institutions.The Jews engaged principally in the wood trade, shop-keeping, crafts and agriculture. They depended primarily onthe weekly market day and the monthly fairs. Some ran boatsand rafts on the Nieman and Dubisa Rivers to Germany. Thelocal association of artisans and cartsmen had dozens ofmembers. However, when the Kovno-Yurburg Road waspaved, opening traffic to automobiles, Jewish cartsmen wereleft without work. A small liquor factory was owned byJews.The Jewish Peoples Bank founded in 1924 had 143members.There were 2 beit midrashes and an Hasidic shtibl builtat the end of the last century by Jews from White Russia whocame because of the wood trade. In time, the HasidimTHE COMMUNITIES297assimilated with the Mitnagdim. During World War I, theshtibl and the 2 beit midrashes burned down.During Independent Lithuania, the town had 2 cheders,a Tarbut School with 150 pupils, and a library. There werechapters of Young Zionists, Hashomer Hatzair, Hechalutzand Maccabi. Charitable institutions included Linat Hazedekand Gemach (loan fund).From the rabbinate: R. Haim Lifshitz; his son, R.Zev-Dov Lifshitz [R. Baerle Sredniker; author of "Me’ayanHaim" and "Ruach Haim"]; R. Yisrael Kaplan [the first armyrabbi in Lithuania]; R. Moshe-Yonah Katz [died 5696/1936];and the last rabbi, R. Zalman Kravoz’.Natives: R. Dov-Arye Leventhal and the parents ofsinger A1 Jolsen [Yoelson; his father was a cantor. Hisparents left the town at the end of the last century and wentto Petersburg and firom there emigrated with their son to theUnited States].STATZIONY (STACIUNAI) - Shavli District C2Statziony is a village near Shavli (13 miles), Radvilishok(10) and Ligum (6). A few Jews were living there before theHolocaust.Additional reference:It is mentioned in the book Pinhas Shavli by Eliezer Yeru-shalmi, 1958.STOKLISHOK (STAKLISKES) - Alyta District D3Stoklishok is neaf Alyta (17 miles), Visokidbor (10),Butrimantz (7), and Yezna (6), in an area of forests andlakes. The nearest train station was in Alyta.Before World War I, there was a Jewish settlement in thevillage of Ziglatz (4 miles).In 1847, the Jewish population was 443; in 1897 - 808,out of a general population of 2200, and in 1913 - about 700298LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES(130 families). During Independent Lithuania, there wereabout 300 Jews (80 families). Many Jews emigrated toAmerica and some went to Palestine. Before the Holocaust,about 70 Jewish families lived there.In 1922, a large fire bumed down half of the homes.The Jews were engaged mainly in fishing and in trade oflumber and farm products. Most had small shops. There werealso a few cartsmen. Jews owned the local beer factory.Wednesday was market day. Six fairs were held eachyear. There was a Jewish Peoples Bank.There was one beit midrash and a Tarbut school with 50students. The principals were Benjamin Pitlok and ShmuelLakzinsky.There were branches of Hechalutz (Pioneers), Gordonia,Shomer Hatzair, Netzach, Sirkin Association and PalestineWorkers Fund. The youth group Hatechia established alibrary and put out its own bulletin. When such partyactivities were forbidden by the State, they carried out theirZionist and cultural activities under the flag of the associationof Jewish firemen. Many of the youth trained for pioneeringat local farms and then went to Palestine.From the rabbinate: R. Shlomo-Reuven Shapiro [5632/1872J; R. Yeshayahu-Zelig Halperin [author of "MosadeiYeshayuhu"[; his son R. Hanania; and the last rabbi, R.David Bergman*.Native: Yisrael-Zev Kreiyer [writerj.SUBOTSH (SUBACIUS) - Ponevezh District D2Subotsh is near Vishinta (7 miles), Kupishok (10),Vabolnik (17), Rogova (17) and Trashkun (11). In theneighboring villages of Gelez (6), Zvilon (2), Romanova (4)and Zudgala (3), there were Jewish settlements before WorldWar I.Initially, the railway station was 2 miles firom town. Atthe station, a new section developed also called Subotsh. AllTHE COMMUNITIES299the businesses were concentrated there. In time, Old Subotshdeclined and the new area became prominent in trade. Aftera while, the regional offices, the post office, the police, thecourt, the pharmacy and doctors moved from the old area tothe new section. The rabbi also moved his residence, but onlyafter a battle between the community heads of the 2 settle-ments. The old section had the old beit midrash, ark coverand Torah crown, the old cemetery and its pinkas (recordbook).Before World War I, about 100 Jewish families livedthere. During the War, they remained, but in the summer of1915, Cossaclcs entered the town. They hid in the forests andin nearby communities.In 1921, the Jewish population was 250. Before theHolocaust, there were less than 50 (about 20 families). Thosewho emigrated went to South Affica or Palestine.There was no market day, but there were 4 annual fairs.In 1932, the town was damaged by a fire and the beitmidrash bumed down.From the rabbinate: R. M. Milstein and the last rabbi, R.Haim Blitzstein'.From the town: Orbach [the shochet]; Sender Boskevitz[shopkeeper]; the Schneider family [department store own-ers].Native: Ephraim Frisch.SUDARG (SUDARGAS) - Shaki District B2Sudarg is near Jurburg (7 miles), Shaki (15) and Smolen-inken (3). The nearest train station was at Virbaln.In 1856, the Jewish population was 627. After WorldWar I, about 400 Jews hved there. Almost all Jews workedin small trade. At the outbreak of the Holocaust, about 20Jewish families lived there.The town had a synagogue, a beit midrash and anelementary school. There was a Gemach (loan fund).300LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESFrom the rabbinate: R. Zvi Rom [5604-5646/1844-1886), author of "Eretz Zvi"]; R. Sender; and R. Regensberg[in 1922 he went to New York; he was not replaced].SUGINT (SUGINCIAI) - Utian District E2Sugint is near Maliat (9 miles), Utian (12) and Labanor(14). It is on the main road from Utian to Vilna. It had aJewish community before the Holocaust.Native: Elijah ben Jacob [talmudist].SURVILISHUR (SURVILISRIS) - Reidan District C2Survilishuk is near Keidan (10 miles), Krakinova (12)and Krok (6).From the rabbinate: R. Yakov-Gershon Rabinovitz [headof the beit din].SUVIANISHOK (SUVAINISKIS) E1- Rakishok DistrictSuvianishok is near Ponidel (12 miles), Rakishok (19),Birzh (24), and Anishok (13) on the Narta River, which isthe Lithuanian-Latvian border.In the center of town was the marketplace. From itbranched oíf the 4 streets of the town.In 1897, the Jewish population was 684, 11% of thegeneral population. During World War 1, the Jews wereexpelled. When they returned they found their homes in ruinsand their property pillaged. With the help of the Joint (JDC),the Jewish community was reestablished. In 1921, 250 Jews(60 families) lived there. In 1939, there were 200 (50families).Before World War I, Jews made their living from tradein grain, wood, large work animals and cows. A roadconnected the town to Riga, which served as a major marketfor their products. The merchants and peddlers also went tothe marketplace in Narta (Latvia).THE COMMUNITIES301During Independent Lithuania, entry to Riga and Nartawas closed. Going to Latvia involved many formal difficul-ties.The Jews depended on the local market on Thursday, butthat continued to diminish. Many emigrated to America andSouth Aírica. A few went to Palestine. The remaining Jewsmaintained themselves on small trade of farm products andhorses, and even smuggling.Jews owned factories for fabrics and weaving, a flourmill and a sawmill.Before World War 1, there were several cheders in thetown. During Independent Lithuania, there was a TarbutSchool with 40 pupils. Teachers included David Sodavskyand Gafnovitz. Fifteen boys studied at the cheder. A numberof children continued their studies in the yeshiva and somecontinued their studies at the Lithuanian high school inRakishok.There was a library, a Bikur Holim society and acharitable loan fund.From the rabbinate: R. Yehoshua Hacohen Kaplan[5680/1920]; and the last rabbi, R. Avraham-Michel Viener'.Additional reference:Mentioned in the Yizkor-book ofRakishok and Environs, ed.M. Bakalczuk-Felin, South Africa, Johannesburg, TheRakishker Landsmanschaíit, 1952 (Yiddish).SVENTZION (SVENCIONYS) F2Sventzion is southeast of Utian (31 miles) and Lingmian(11). It had a Jewish community up to the time of theHolocaust.Natives: Avraham Solomiek [1863-1943; in Bilu Move-ment, pioneering in Palestine]; Mordecai-Menahem Kaplan[rabbi; founder of Reconstructionist Movement of Judaism];Aaron (Arkady) Kramer [1865-1935; Bund figure].302LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAdditíonal references:There is a memorial book for the Sventzion region calledSefer ziharon le-esrim v-shalosh hehillot she-nehregube-ezor Svintzion (Svintzion Region: Memorial Book of23 Jewish Communitíes). It was edited by Sh. Kane andpublished in Tel Aviv by Former Residents of theSvintzian District in Israel, 1965. (Hebrew and Yiddish).Most of the 23 Jewish communitíes included in thismemorial book are outside of the boundaries of Lithua-nia. They are as follows:1. Sventzion (Svencionys, Swieciany, Sventzian)2. Nei-Sventzion (Svencioneliai, Nowe Swiecia-ny, Nei-Sventzian)3. Aignalina4. Meligan5. Dugilishek6. Novoventzian7. Duksht8. Styatzishek9. Hydutzishek10. Podbrodz11. Lingmian (Linkmenys, Lyngmianys)12. Kaltinian13. Lintup14. Kamelishek15. Old and New Dogakishak (Alt un Nei-Dogeli-shak)16. Vidz17. Tzaikin18. Kazian19. Roksht20. Kabilnik21. Pastau22. ParbrarzTHE COMMUNTTIES30323. Niementshin (Nemencine, Niemenczyn)Weisser, Michael R., A Brotherhood of Memory: JewishLandsmanshaftn in the New Woríd, New York: BasicBooks, Inc., 1985.SVIADOSHITZ (SVEDASAI) - Utian District E2Sviadoshitz is near Vizhon (7 miles), Ushpole (9), Kamai(11), Dabeik (7), Aniksht (16), Utian (15), and Rakishok(22). The nearest railway station was in Panimunik (18).The town originally belonged to a Polish squire. Over theyears, the Jews redeemed their land, which consisted of plotsfor private ownership.Before World War I, 700 Jews lived there. During theWar, many fled to Russia, although some remained. BeforeWorld War II, about 65 Jewish families lived there.Their relationship with the gentiles was very good.Almost all the Jewish homes abandoned during World War Iremained standing and were not vandalized. The local priestcontinued to foster good relations after the War.During Independent Lithuania, about 100 Jewish fami-lies, or about 500 individuals, lived there, making up 70% ofthe population. More than 30 families were shopkeepers. Therest were merchants in flax and lumber or were cartsmen,peddlers or craftsmen. There were 15 craftsmen, including 3tailors, 3 shoemakers, 5 butchers, a baker, 2 metalworkers.The men all belonged to societies within the prayerhouses. They were in Shas, Ein Yakov, Mishnayot or MagdaiTehilim. Some were Chabad Hasidim and some wereMitnagdim. The Chabad children would study with locallamdanim and then be sent to study at Liubovitz. Other boysstudied in cheders and later in yeshivas. Before World WarI, a few of the Jewish children, mainly girls, went to theRussian elementary school.304LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThere were 2 beit midrashes in the town, one for theHasidim and one for the Mitnagdim. There was one rabbi andone shochet for the entire Jewish community.During Independent Lithuania, there was a Tarbut Schoolwith 60 pupils. Many of them went on to study at theHebrew high school in Utian and Ponevezh. There was alibrary and a drama club next to the school.There were active chapters of various Zionist parties,including General Zionists, the Revisionists, Socialist Zionistsand a chapter of Young Pioneers.When anti-Semitism increased in Lithuania, some of theyouth went to pioneer training camps and later emigrated toPalestine. Some emigrated to South Afirica.Among the first to go to Palestine were Zalman Barazon,Haviva Finkel, Yosef Gafni and Moshe Stolov. Among theZionist figures were the pharmacist Yakov Stolov and ShmuelGafnovitz.From the rabbinate: R. Shmuel bar Haim [later in Utianand Kupishok; he died around 5582/1822]; R. Yehoshua-Her-shel bar Isser; R. Yehoshua-Mordechai Klatzkin; R. AbbaShlomovitz [5663/1903]; R. Moshe-Yitzhak Vaichik‘; and thelast rabbi, R. Yosef Shechnovitz*.Additional reference:Chapter on Sviadoshz (Sviodoshitz) in Yizkor-Book of Raki-shok and Environs, Johannesburg, South Africa: TheRakishker Landsmanschaft, ed. M. Bakalczuk-Felin,1952 (Yiddish).TALON - Ponevezh District D2Talon is a village near Ponevezh. Jewish residentsengaged in small-scale farming and peddling.Natives: R. Yehoshua-Mordechai Klatzkin ben Yisrael-Isser [1862-1925].THE COMMUNITIES305TARGIN (TAURAGNAI) - Utían District E2Targin near Utian (9 miles), Salok (17) and Saldutishok(6), on Lake Targin.Before World War I, there were also Jewish settlementsin Koktishka (6) and Mintza (7).Under Russian rule, it was in Novo-Alexandrovsk(Ezhereni-Zarasai) District. During Independent Lithuania, itwas in Utian District.Virtually the entire town burned down in 1895.In 1897, 596 Jews lived there, 56% of the generalpopulation. Before World War I, 120 families Iived there. In1923, 477 Jews lived there, out of a general population of1047. During Independent Lithuania, there were only 80families. Many emigrated to South Affica, America, orPalestine. At the outbreak of the Holocaust, the Jewishpopulation was about 200,The Jews were engaged in small businesses, agricultureor crafts, including 5 needleworkers, 2 butchers, and a baker.Market day was Tuesday.There was a beit midrash, a kloiz, a Yavneh School with55 pupils and a cheder with 25 pupils.From the rabbinate: R. Yosef-Yehoshua bar Baer Utianer[died ca. 5634/1874]; R. Eliezer-Zvi Pines [author of "MadatMishneh" on the Mishnayot]; and his son R. Yakov Pines',the last rabbi.Additional reference:Mentioned in memorial book of Utian and the SurroundingArea, 1979.TAUVIAN (TAUYENAI) - Vilkomir District D2Tauvian is near Vilkomir (9 miles), on the Vilkomir-Ponevezh road.306LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESIn 1912, 95 Jews, about 20 Jewish families lived there.In 1923, there were 91 Jews, out of a general population of250. Before the Holocaust, only a few dozen Jews remained.The youth left and eventually only the elderly and sickremained.Native of the town: Dov Liebovitz (Ariel) [ffom theBilu J.TAVRIG (TAURAGE) - District Capital B2Tavrig is near Vainuta (18 miles), Jurburg (23) andShilel (17), on the Yura (Jura) River and 5 miles from thePrussian border. A road and a railway between Tilsit andRiga passed the town.According to various historical sources, the town wasfounded in 1507. It passed firom Prince Yohan Shmiota to thePrussian Consular Christop Ropp, then to Fredich, Prince ofBrandenburg, and later to the Radzivill Family. Afterward,it was retumed to Prassia. By agreement in 1793, the townwas retumed to Russia, and by the time of the Third Partitionof Poland in 1795, it was part of Kovno Region.During the War of 1812, the town was damaged by theretreating French Army. An agreement was signed fixing theneutrality of the Tilsit-Memel region there.In 1846, Nicholas I gave Tavrig to Prince Vasilchikov.In 1858, the Tilsit-Tavrig-Petersburg Road was completed,the shortest route firom the Russian capital to Prussia. TheCustoms Station in Tavrig was most profitable.The economy of the town was connected to import-exporttrade with Prussia, both legal and illegal.In 1847, 410 Jews lived there; in 1897 - 3364, 54.6% ofthe general population. Before World War I, the Jewishpopulation remained around 3000. During the War, the cityand its environs became a battlefield and was destroyed. TheJews were expelled.THE COMMUNITIES307Many of the Jews did not retum after the War. In 1921,the Jewish population was 1480. In 1923, it was still under2000. Prior to the Holocaust, there were approximately 3000Jews.During Independent Lithuania, the town was somewhatrestored, but the severing of Lithuania from the Russianmarket reduced business. The Jews began to establishindustries. Four large flour mills owned by Gitkin-Beikovitz,Yehoshua Cohen, Leib Hirsh and Berlovitz; a candy factory;and a sawmill owned by Sharshavsky were opened.The majority of Jews were in trade, especially inimporting industríal products and exporting wood andagrícultural products. Some were involved in crafts.In 1929, the Jewish Peoples Bank had 345 members.There was also a commercial bank administered by Dr.Varta.There was a local yeshiva which combined secular andreligious studies. During Independent Lithuania, there was aTarbut School with 400 pupils. Among its teachers wereForman and Lazovsky. There was a pro-gymnasia and aHebrew high school with 200 pupils, whose last principal wasMariampolsky; a Talmud Torah with 160 boys, whoseprincipal was Liss; a large library founded by Dov Gurvitz;Tiferet Bachurim, administered by Eliezer Kopstein; LinatHazedek, a women’s association; and an interest-free loansociety named for Byiakovitz.Religious life was centered around 3 beit midrashes anda kloiz of the "Rafons/Rapons" in the old city. All the Zionistparties as well as youth and sports groups were represented.From the rabbinate: R. Arye-Leib; R. Shimon Zarachi[also a rabbi in Birzh]; R. Moshe-Yitzhak Halevy (Segal)[from 5614/1854]; R. Gershon-Mendel Ziv [until 5662/1902]; R. Yitzhak-Zev Olshvenger [from 5638/1878, therabbi of Petersburg]; R. Avraham Aaron Burstein [5662-308LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES5685/1902-1925]; R. Yitzhak-Isaac Friedman; the last rabbiR. Levi Spitz'; R. Baruch-Natanel Naividel [a Zionist, heattended the Zionist Congress in 1898]; R. David-ShlomoEpstein; R. Haim-Yitzhak Bialostotzky.Natives: David-Tavli Katzenellenbogen [rabbi in Peters-burg]; Haim-Fishel Epstein {maggidj; Natan Friedland; RabbiPogramansky ("the prodigy of Tavrig"); S.P. Rabinovitz[writer]; Yakov Epstein [philanthropist]; Isser-Bar Wolf[businessmanj; Dr. Abba Lapin; Dr. Y.L. Baruch [poet];Moshe Gotsov; and Dr. Tudorus Meirovitz.TELZ (TELSIAI) - District Capital B1Telz is near Plungian (16 miles), Alsiad (8) and Trishik(14), on Lake Mastis and surrounded by hills. It was far ffomthe railway. Only in the 1920’s was it linked to Shavli andMemel by rail.It is one of the oldest cities in Lithuania. It was namedafter its founder Dzhogas Tel. In the minutes of a Germanorder conceming an invasion into Zhamot in 1317, the cityof Telshan is mentioned.In the fifteenth century, Telz was included in a list ofgovemment estates of the ''united country." At the beginningof the eighteenth century, Prince Sapiegha administered theestate. In 1710, it suffered ffom the Swedish invasion andffom plagues.In 1795, it became a District Capital. In 1802, it wasincluded in the Vilna Region. In 1873, it was transferred toKovno Region.Damage resulted ffom the 2 Polish revolutions, 1831 and1863, and 2 large fires - 1905 and 1909. It was conquered bythe Germans in World War I, and was occupied until 1918.The Red Army occupied the city for several weeks.During Independent Lithuania, it became a city. In 1931,it become a city of the first order.THE COMMUNITIES309The Jewish population in Telz in 1847 was 2248 and in1897 - 3088, 51% of the general population. During WorldWar I, the Jews were expelled. In 1923, the communitynumbered 1545, 33% of the general population of 4691, andin 1939 there were 2800, out of a general population of8000.Many Jews were involved in trade of produce and woodand in crafts. A major source of income was the greatyeshiva and other centers for intensive studies.In the vicinity of Telz, 8 to 10 Jewish families were inthe dairy business. Jews produced their own dairy productsin order to ensure their kashrut. However, during Indepen-dent Lithuania when the system of cooperatives developed,the Jews were put out of business. They then moved to thecity.There were 4 large beit midrashes in the city: the GreatBeit Midrash whose gabbais were Hirsh Broida and Morde-chai Levine; the Beit Midrash of the Tailors (MordechaiKopel); the Beit Midrash of the Soldiers - the YevenishehKloiz" (Avraham Kopel); and the Beit Midrash of theButchers.The Telz Yeshiva (1875-1941) was among the largest andmost famous of the last generation, establishing the city as acenter of Torah. Next to the yeshiva was a mechinah (a smallyeshiva) and a school for young children. There was also arabbinical kollel for yeshiva students with smicha. DuringIndependent Lithuania, there were 2 beit midrashes of"Yavneh" for teachers - one for women and one for men, anda girls Yavneh high school. The religious youth belonged to"Tiferet Bachurim," directed by Yitzhak Blod.The local Torah educational institutions set the standardof the community as a fortress for haredi Judaism against theHaskalah (enlightenment) Movement.310LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESIn the 1880’s, a Russían-Jewish school was established,administered by the poet Yehuda Leib Gordon. Gordon livedin the city for 6 years and was in constant battle with theharedim. He described the town in his writings.Following World War I and the expulsion of the Jews,which undermined the Telz community, came a recovery.The city again became a center for traditional Judaism andespecially the Aguda Movement, including Yavneh, AgudatYisrael and Young Agudat Yisrael. The Yavneh school washeaded by Yitzhak Raphael Holzberg-Etzion.During Independent Lithuania, the Zionist parties andorganizations as well as the "Bund" made advances. Theparties included Mizrahi (headed by Yisrael Chitz), theRevisionists (Yitzhak Bloch), Socialist Zionists (Grinker,Baal-Shem, and Abramovitz) and Maccabi and YoungZionists (Meir Leich, Yisrael Talpiot, Yitzhak Zacks). Abranch of the "Bund," headed by Rifka Yaífe and MotelMyler, existed until September 1920. Its members then joinedthe communists under the name "Kultur League," headed bythe Chiatin brothers.Charitable institutions included Chevra Radisha (burialsociety), Bikur Holim, Linat Hazedek Hospital (administeredby Dr. Menuhin), a loan society, public kitchen, an EzaClinic, special summer camps (administered by the rabbinate,Rashel Bloch and Sonia Rostovsky), and a women’s associa-tion for support of the sick and poor. Two newspapers,"Neeman" and "Dar Idisher Laben," were published by theAguda movement.In 1940, after the Soviets captured Lithuania, the yeshivaand all religious schools were closed. The heads of theyeshiva transferred students to neighboring towns. After ashort time, it was decided to transfer the yeshiva out of thecountry. Two administrators of the yeshiva established a newTHE COMMUNITIES311yeshiva in Cleveland, Ohio (USA) and continued the traditionof the Telz Yeshiva.From the rabbinate: R. Yehezkiel |a rabbi in Telz andthe district of ZhamotJ; R. Yehudah-Leib ben Ezriel Ziv [sonof the first rabbi of Kovno; also a rabbi in Plungian]; R.Moshe of Telz; R. Avraham Shapiro; [son of R. Leib]; R.Shmuel Shapiro [author of "Me’il Shmuel"]; R. Shaul-Tuviason of Mordechai, [firom 5597/1837 (a student of R. Zev-Wolf Lipkin); also a rabbi in Ponevezh]; R. Zev-Wolf Lipkin[head of the court of justice of Telz]; R. Yosef Rasin [until5634/1874; afterward in Slonim]; R. Yehoshua Heller[5636-5640/1876-1880]; R. Abba Vemer [afterwards rabbi of"Machzikay Hadat" in London]; R. Eliezer Gordon [5643-5670/1883-1910]; R. Yosef-Leib Bloch [5670-5690/1910-1930]; and the last rabbi, R. Avraham-Yitzhak Bloch’[5690-5701/1930-1941; native of Telz].Natives: R. Abraham-Abba Vemer [died in 5677/1917);R. Heshel Margalit [rabbi in Vishneva]; R. Yitzhak-IsaacKantor [rabbi in Riga]; Gershon-Zev ben Yitzhak-IsaacBrouida [rabbi in Roclcford, USA]; Aaron-Yitzhak Blum;Moshe Helfen; Ezriel ben Haim Rabinovitz [son of one of thefirst leaders of the Yeshiva]; Avraham-Yitzhak, Zalman andEliahu-Meir Bloch; and Avraham-Yitzhak Perlman.Additional reference:Telz memorial book. Telsiai Book, edited by Yitzhak Alpro-vitz, published by the Association of Israelis firom Telz,Tel-Aviv, 1984. Contains a list of victims of the Holo-caust, also a memorial for those who died after theHolocaust and those who served in an army in WorldWar II. At end of book are numerous pictures of indivi-duals and their families and listings of family members.Sefer HaZHchronot by A.E. Friedman, 1962.Sefer HaYovel by Sklop, 1936;312LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESMeVolozhin ad Yerushalaim by M. Berlin, 1939.Bayeri u-Vamistorim (In Shooting and in Hiding) by SarahElitzur (Ritou). Published by the author, 5 Balfour,Jerusalem.TENANIS (TENENIAI) - Tavrig District A2Tenanis was a village near Payura (5 miles) where Jewslived before World War I.TIRXSHLA (TIRXSLIAI) - Mazhaik District B1Tirkshla is near Siad (11 miles) and Mazhaik (4), not farfrom the Shventa River. It was a summer and health resort,in an area of pine forests. The train station was in Mazhaik.In 1892, 242 Jews lived there, 20% of the generalpopulation, and in 1913 - about 100. In 1915, the Jews wereexpelled and their property taken. After the War, part of theJewish community retumed. In 1921, the Jewish populationwas 82. They eamed a living mainly from small businesses,crafts and agriculture.TOMSHA D3Tomsha was a village near Visolcidbor (2 miles), wherea few Jewish families lived before World War I. (SeeVisokidbor for additional information on Tomsha.)TRAIP (TRAUPIS) - Vilkomir District D2Traip is near Trashkun (6 miles) and Rogova (6).In 1925, ten Jewish families lived there. There was alarge, beautiful synagogue. One by one the Jews left. WhenWorld War II broke out, no Jews remained.Natives: Samuel James Meltzer [1851-1920; physiolo-gistj.THE COMMUNITIES313TRASHKUN (TROSKUNAI) - Ponevezh Distríct D2Trashlcun is near Aniksht (12 miles), Rogova (9),Subotsh (12), and Ponevezh (21), on the Ponevezh Road. Thetrain station was a little over a mile away.Before World War I, the town was in Vilkomir District.In 1897, 779 Jews lived there, 78% of the general popula-tion. In 1913, there were 120 families.In the summer of 1915, they were expelled - theirproperty stolen and their houses destroyed. Most of the Jewsretumed after the War and rebuilt the Jewish settlement.Before World War II, the Jewish population was 424.They engaged in trade, crafts and gardening. A wineprocessor was owned by a Jew. Thursday was market day.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 96 members in 1929. Formany years, the local rabbi, R. Moshe-Yakov Schmukler,administered the bank.There were 2 synagogues, one for Mitnagdim and onefor Hasidim. During Independent Lithuania, there was aschool and a library. The youth joined the Pioneers andSocialist Zionists.A special personality was Shneor Reznikovitz - a leamedand pious man, known in the neighboring villages as "theholy one."From the rabbinate: R. Moshe-Yakov Schrmdder' [up to5697/1937 in Trashkun and later in Shantzy, a suburb ofKovno[; and the last rabbi, R. Eliezer Sheinlcman'.TRASKOVA (TRUSKAVA) D2Traskova was a village near Shatt (9 miles). A Jewishcommunity existed before World War I.314LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESTRISHIK (TRYSKIAI) - Shavli Distríct B1Trishik is near Popilan (12 miles), Luknik (13), Telz(15) and Veckshna (14), on the Virvinta River. It is 6 milesírom a train station.The town bumed down in 1889 and again in 1910. Partswere rebuilt.In 1897, 681 Jews lived there, 35% of the generalpopulation. In 1923, the population was 390 (70 families).Before World War II, 300-350 Jews lived there.Fifteen families eamed a living in crafts, especiallytanning, 5 families were in agriculture and the rest in trade.They depended heavily on market day, every Wednesday andon monthly fairs. Two flour mills on the Virvita River wereowned by Regenton and Cohen. The sawmill was also ownedby a Jew. From 1929, Kagenton’s flour mill suppliedelectricity to the town.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 96 members.There was a beit midrash founded in 1899. The childrenstudied in the cheder. During Independent Lithuania, therewas a Tarbut School with 30 pupils. The local library hadabout 400 books. Some of the youth continued studies at theYeshiva in Telz or in the gymnasias of Telz and Shavli.There were chapters of Mizrahi, Betar, Socialist Zionists,and Maccabi as well as local councils of Keren Kayemet andKeren Hayesod.From the rabbinate: R. Levy bar Arye-Leib Shapira fromKovno ("the prodigy (ha’ilui) from Duksht," ffom 5634/1874was a rabbi in Ezhereni-Zarasi; died in 5640/1884]; R.Mordechai-Shraiga Rabinsohn [5643/1883]; R. Haim Fohan/Pohan [from 5651/1891]. R. Yisrael-Yehoshua Segal [son ofHaim Fohan/Pohan]; and R. Eliahu Benzion*, the last rabbi.Natives: Zev Kaplan [poet]; Yehoshua Greenberg[educator and writer] Yakal Greenberg; Shlomo-ZalmanZuckerman; Gedaliah Kegenton Aaron Greenberg; HaimTHE COMMUNITIES315Nechemiah Alishvitz; Zinah Greenberg; and Haim-LeibKravitz.TROKI (TRAKAI) - District Capital D3Troki is 15 miles frorn Vilna, in an area of lakes andforests. It was the capital of Lithuania in the fourteenthcentury. A group of about 300 Karaite families settled therein the 1300’s. For many years, rabbinate Jews were notpermitted to settle there.Yehadut Lita does not have a separate article on thetown. However, there is a memorial book for Troki (Troki,1954) which discusses its Jewish residents. At the end of thebook is a list of victims of the Holocaust.The population of approximately 3000 had a differentmakeup ffom that of other towns, which were gentile andJews.In the fourteenth century, Karaite Jews were brought toTroki by the Lithuanian Grand Duke Vitold. They engagedin farming and in trade. But they experienced pogroms andblood libels just like other Jews. Then in the seventeenthcentury, after war and plague, only 3 families remained.Nevertheless, their spiritual life developed.When Poland was divided and the north went to Russiaat the end of the eighteenth century, there began a new periodin the lives of the Karaites. Although the Polish-Lithuaniangovernment did not prefer the Karaites over the Jews, theygave them equal rights. They then convinced the governmentto give them further rights, and this was granted. It broughtthem even more rights than the Catholics, and they began toclimb the social ladder. The Karaites adopted the Russianlanguage, even for synagogue meetings and for their languageof study. They had been using the Tartar language but thislessened until it was only used in their marriage rites. Theirketubahs (marriage contracts) were written in it (Jews write316LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESit in Aramaic). Each generation fewer and fewer understoodHebrew prayers.Their work in trade fell off, and they worked mainly ongrowing vegetables.In 1897, there were 818 rabbinate Jews and 424 KaraiteJews in Troki, out of a total population of 2390. The Kara-ites, who enjoyed full civic rights, were as a rule friendly totheir rabbinate neighbors, but lived separately.From the rabbinate: R. Zvi Hirsh; R. Binyamin Fried-man (at age 26 became rabbi in Troki, served there 1865-1870; later rabbi in Antokol).Additional reference:Medonis, Arolfas, Trakai, Vilnius: Mintis Publishers, 1976.Mentions the Karaites, a people of Turkic language whowere brought there from the Crimea. The Karaites servedas guards in the Trakai (Troki) castle. Their "kineseB(house of worship), still standing today on MaryteMelnikaite Street, was built after the War of 1812 toreplace an older structure which dated from the fifteenthcentury. Lake Galve beside Troki has an island callediCaraite Island.TSHABISKY (CIOBISKIS) D3Tshabisky was a village near Kushidar (11 miles), whereJews lived before World War I.TURMONT (TURMANTAS) - Ezhereni District F2Turmont is near Ezhereni (9 miles), on the Latvianborder. In 1941, there were only a few Jewish families there.TUVIN (TUVINAI) - Tavrig District B2Tuvin was a village near Shilel (4 miles). Several Jewishfamilies lived there about 300 years ago.THE COMMUNITIES317TVER (TVERAI) - Telz District B2Tver is near Vorna (6 miles), Ritova (6) and Telz (12).In 1897, 173 Jews lived there, 21% of the general popula-tion; in 1921 - 160; and in 1923 - 102. At the outbrealc ofthe Holocaust, about 10-15 Jewish families lived there.They were in small businesses and trade.From the rabbinate: the last rabbi was R. Baruch Yaffe*.TZITOVIAN (TYTUVENAI) - Rasin District C2Tzitovian is near Shidlova (4 miles), Rasin (17), Shavli(25) and Kelme (12), on the Dubisa River. Before WorldWar I, there were Jewish communities in the nearby villagesof Padovisa and Lidovian.The town was in a forested area and was a vacation spot.Dr. Shapiro is credited with making the town a health resort.Before World War I, 60 Jewish families lived there,nearly all engaged in agriculture. Some worked at extractingpitch from trees.ln 1915, the Jews were expelled, but retumed the sameyear. Many emigrated to South Africa and the United States.A few went to Palestine. Just before the Holocaust 50 Jewishfamilies lived there, 17% of the general population.During Independent Lithuania, 70% of the Jews workedin agriculture. The rest were in small-scale trade as shopkeep-ers or peddlers and in crafts. The vacation season was animportant source of income.The Jewish Peoples Bank founded in 1922 was adminis-tered by Eliezer Dagan, who also directed Jewish publicmatters.The town had a synagogue and a beit midrash. The boysstudied in a cheder and would continue their studies in thenearby yeshivas. The girls went to a Yavneh School in thearea. There was a library and a women’s * Agudas-Ezra*Society. There was no cemetery, and the dead were buried inShidlova.318LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESA noted and respected rabbi of the town was R. LeibTzigler ífom Kelme (R. "Leib Hasid"). It is said that at hisfuneral were twelve rabbis and 4000 people.From the rabbinate: R. Zvi-Yakov Qppenheim [5641-2/1881-2; later went to KelmeJ; R. Avraham-Aaron HacohenBurstein [later went to Ritova]; R. Shlomo-Yakov Shein [astudent of R. Yakov-Yosef of Vilon; author of"Avnei Shyshand other works[; R. Eliezer-Yakov Levin [later went toJerusalem]; R. Yosef Ziff [until 5673/1913]; R. YakovKaminsky [later went to Toronto]; R. Yisrael-YehoshuaSegal; R. Shlomo-Eífaim Kravitzky”; and R. Avraham-EzrielMadin*.Natives: R. Moshe-Shimon Zivitz and Zerach Barnett[pioneer in the settlement of Israel].ULINOVA - Kovno District C3Ulinova is near Gudleva (3 miles). Yosef Shvartz had alarge estate in Ulinova.UNGARINA (UNGARYN) - Mariampole District C3Ungarina is south of Mariampole (2 miles). In the1930’s, there was at least one Jewish farmer there.During Independent Lithuania, the Ungarina estate of theSkerisky brothers was used as a training place for pioneers(halutzim) who would be going to Palestine.Additional reference:Mentioned in Jacob Oleislci, A Man’s Work, edited by I.Posner, Tel Aviv: The Association of Lithuanian Jews inIsrael, 1986, p. 34.UPINA (UPYNAS) - Tavrig District B2Upina is situated on the River Upinah, near Skudvill (6miles), Nemoksht (7), Shilel (9), Kelme (12), Tavrig (24).THE COMMUNITIES319Before World War I, there were 30-40 Jewish familiesliving there. They made their living firom small businesses.They had one prayer house.From the rabbinate: R. Sholom-Elhanan Yaffe; R.Nahum-Baruch Ginzburg; R. Shraga Govran; and its lastrabbi, R. Yitzhak Yaffe*.Natives: R. Eliezer-Reuven Moshkin [1889-1950; waseducated in Slobodka; a rabbi in Chicago from 1912. Heassisted R. Berlin in founding Hamizrahi in the UnitedStates]; Zvi-Yehuda Gitidn [grandson of R. Zvi-YehudaBrouida firom SalantJ; Abraham-Abba Heller ["Ab cha fromUpina"], and his son Dov [public figure]; Nehemia benGerson Zakash 11838-1903; publisher and writer].USHPOLE (UZPALIAI) - Utian Distríct E2Ushpole is located on the banks of the Shventa. It is nearVizhon, Utian (9 miles), and Sviadoshitz.Head-tax records showed a Jewish population of 109 in1765. In 1847, there were 515 Jews, in 1897 - 691 (out of ageneral population of 740), and in 1921, according to thedata of "Vaad Haaretz", 514.In 1932, a large section of the town bumed, includingthe beit midrash and the large "minyan" with an attachedlibrary.The Jews engaged in small businesses, crafts and agricul-ture. There were 22 artisans, including 6 needleworkers, 4butchers, 4 bakers, a metal-worker, a carpenter, and 6 others.The children studied in the cheder or at the school in Utian,which was the cultural and social center of the area.From the rabbinate: R. Yakov [mentioned in the responsa"Amudei Shesh"]; R. Naftali-Harats Klatzkin; R. Yisrael-Moshe Halberstat [who served as rabbi in Dubna and after-ward in Ushpole. He died in 1872. He was a Torah scholaras well as being versed in the ways of the world].320LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESNatives: R. Eliahu and R. Yisrael-Isser, the sons of R.Naftali-Harats Klatzkin.Additional reference:Chapter on Ushpole by Zvi Takar of Nes Ziona, Israel, inthe memorial book Utian un Umghengnt (Utian andSurrounding Areas), Tel Aviv: Committee for Remem-brance of Jews from Utian and Surrounding Areas, 1979(in Yiddish).UTIAN (UTENE) - Distríct Capital E2Utian lies between 2 lakes. It is located 36 miles fromVilkomir. It served as a center for the towns and villagessurrounding it, including Merogin (6 miles), Vizhon (7),Ushpole (10), Maliat (21), Salok (26), Daugel (10) andothers. Under the rule of the Czars, the town was part ofVilkomir District, but in Independent Lithuania it was madea District Capital.The town was built in the days of the Grand DukeMindaug, who united the Lithuanians and established thecountry of Lithuania in the years 1226-1239. The present cityof Utian is located some distance from the original town site;no information remains conceming the change in location.The town was divided by a river; the parts were connected by4 bridges. The old part was established 800 years ago and thenew part - 750 years ago.Long ago "Utina" enjoyed the Rights of Magdeburg.From the beginning of the sixteenth century, it had commer-cial connections with a number of cities. The town sufferedduring the war with Sweden (1700-1721). From that time,development declined. In 1835, the Russians built thePetersburg-Warsaw road through Utian. In 1899, a narrow-gauge Ponevezh-Utian-Sventzion rail line was constructed.The Jewish community of Utian was among the first inLithuania. Tombstones found in the old cemetery date backTHE COMMUNITIES321to the sixteenth century. In the days of the "LithuanianCouncil," the town was part of the Council district ofVizhon.Twice in the latter part of the nineteenth century largefires ravaged the town. In the year 5640/1880, the entire citybumed down, and 2 Jews lost their lives. In 5650/1890, halfof the town bumed down. It was quickly rebuilt and the townexpanded. Old-time residents used to number the years by thedates of the fires.According to the head-tax lists, there were 341 Jewsliving there in 1767. In 1847, there were 1416 and in 1897- 2405 (75% of the general population). After World War I,the town began to grow, with many Jews coming from thesurrounding areas. In 1919, the Jewish population was 2485,and by 1935, there were 5000 (33% of the general popula-tion).The Jews made their living as merchants and artisans.Commerce was mainly in flax, leather, firuits, eggs and boarbristles, which they purchased from farmers in the neighbor-ing towns and villages on market days and exported by wayof Dvinsk and Ponevezh. The export trade was handledtotally by Jewish merchants.With the rise of the Lithuanian cooperative organization,the "Verslaninki," during Independent Lithuania, commercewas taken from Jewish merchants and placed in the hands ofthe govemment or Lithuanian merchants - either in a coopera-tive arrangement or privately.In 1937, the number of Jewish craftsmen rose to 151 (ofthis number were 19 needleworkers, 31 shoemakers andstitchers, 18 butchers, 13 bakers, 17 metalworkers, 10carpenters, 5 clock makers, 1 jeweler, 37 others.) Except for2 small candy factories, there was no industry in the town.The Peoples Bank for Jews had 600 members. Theeconomic crisis spurred emigration to South Africa, the322LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESUnited States, Cuba, and Argentina. Those who emigratedsupported relatives who remained in Utian.The town had 6 houses of worship and Shas, Ein-Yakov,Mishna and Tihilim societies. Charitable institutions includedLehem Aniim, Linat Hazedek, Bikur Holim, an interest-freeloan fund and Hachnasat Kallah.Before World War I, the children studied in cheders andTalmud Torahs, including a cheder-metukan. In IndependentLithuania, there was a Tarbut school with 280 students, aYiddish school with 120 pupils and a Hebrew High Schoolwith 50. The Zionists had a significant influence on the livesof the community. There were branches of the Histadrut,Communists, numerous organizations and Jewish sportsgroups.After World War I, a Jew, Abraham Zhorat, became thehead of the City Council. A Jewish judge named Berman wasalso an office-holder.From the rabbinate: R. Abraham-Zvi-Hirsh Eisenstat[author of "Pitchay Tshuvah"]; his son R. Binyamin; hisgrandson R. Abraham-Zvi; and the last rabbi of the town, R.Nachman Hirshovitz'.Among the main public figures in the Zionist movementwere Gold, Boruch Gilinsky, Shalom Heshil, S. Hyman,Abraham Zhorat, Leich Zar, Nissan Latz, Abraham Zavion,Getzel Zinn, Dov Rubinstein, Aaron Shapiro.Natives: R. Mordechai-Gimpel Yaffe, Joseph Mazal[writerj, Rubin Rubinstein, [editor of the "Itidiye Shtayma"J,the brothers Philip Nissan and Yakov-Zalman Letz-Lown[public figures of the Zionist and Hebrew movements in theU.S.[.Additional references:Utian memorial book: Utian un Umghegnt (Utian andSurrounding Areas), Tel Aviv: Committee for Remem-THE COMMUNITIES323brance of Jews ffom Utian and Surrounding Areas, 1979(in Yiddish).Photo taken in Utian of Jewish soldiers at seder, Encyclope-dia Judaica, vol. 11, p. 372. Also photo of training farmfor halutzim going to Palestine.Family history book called From Generation to Generationby Virginia Freeman about the Lyon family of Utena,1989.UZHVENT (UZVENTIS) - Shavli District B2Uzhvent is located on the Venta River, about 30 milesfirom Shavli. Nearby towns include: Shukian, Voma, Vaigo-va, Kelme and Lulmik. The nearest rail line was in Shavli.Prior to 1795, the town was a district center.The Jewish population in 1897 was 300, 35% of thegeneral population. In 1923, it was 173.Early in 1939, a fire broke out in the town and most ofthe houses were destroyed. It was thought that Nazis had ahand in this. In 1941, about 30 Jewish families lived in thetown.From the rabbinate: R. Yakov-Mordechai Dizensohnfbom in Shklov in 5600/1840; was a student of R. Yosef-Dov Soloveichik and R. Eliahu Schick; served as rabbi ofGauvary and Uzhvent 5633-5647/1873-1887. He later wentto Libau where he replaced R. Meir Atlas. He wrote the book"She’arit Yakov." When he died, the community remainedwithout a rabbi for a number of yearsj; R. Shlomo-NatanKotler [rabbi until 5659/1899]; R. David-Gershon Rubinstein;R. Natanel-Yosef Gerez jeducated at the Slobodka Yeshiva;was the rabbi firom 5659-5686/1899-1926]; R. Yakov Velfa[son-in-law of R. Yisrael-Bendet Feivelsonj.Native: Benjamin Gittlesohn.324LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESUZVINTZ (UZVINCIY) - Ezhereni-Zarasi Distríct F2Uzvintz is a town near Salok (7 miles). Before WorldWar I, some Jews lived there.VABOLNIK (VABALNINKAS) - Birzh District D1Vabolnik is near Pumpian (15 miles), Posvol (15), Birzh(15), Kupishok (12). The train station was in Shaduva. Aroad connected it to Pumpian.In 1915, the Jews were exiled into Russia, the town wasdestroyed and the property of the Jews was stolen. After theWar, some retumed.In 1921, 180 Jews lived there. Before the Holocaust, 120Jewish families lived there.They engaged in small-scale trade and crafts and some inagriculture. In 1937, there were 16 Jewish artisans, including3 needleworkers, 3 shoemakers, a stitcher, 2 butchers, 2bakers, 2 metalworkers, and a clock maker.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 119 members.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe Harif [5541-5634/1781-1874]; R. Yitzhak; R. Sholom-Elhanan bar Shimon Yaffe [anative]; R. Yehuda-Leib bar Avraham Parar/Farrer [in 5667(1907)].Natives: Shlomo Bastomsky [teacher and writer]; ShmuelYetzken feditor and publisher]; Benjamin Kramer [educatorand writer]; and Pinchas Shuldan [leader in Hovevei Zion].VAGOFIA C2Vagofia is near Ayragula (2 miles) and Betigola. Beforethe Holocaust, Shlomo Vinik and Aharon Smolkensky had anestate there.VAIGOVA (VAIGUVA) - Shavli District B2Vaigova is near Kelme (8 miles) and Uzhvent (7), on theVaigova River.THE COMMUNITÍES325There were 2 streets, one to Kelme and the other toUzhvent. The center of town contained the market square,surrounded by Jewish homes and shops.In 1897, 193 Jews lived there, out of a general popula-tion of 530. Prior to World I, there were 150 families, about600 people. After World War I, in 1921, there were 70families, 250 people, and before the Holocaust, about 50families. Most engaged in trade and a few in crafts. Jewishtailors worked in the villages and returned home on erevShabbat.There was a synagogue built from donations by BaruchFeivelson, a wealthy estate owner. Two students firom thecheder in Vaigova who later became well-known figures wereHershel from Erzhvilky [later was known as ProfessorZvi-Herman Shapiro, a leader in Keren Kayemet L’Yisrael)and Neta-Zvi Finkel.From the rabbinate: R. Haim-Hirsh Shulvitz from Lomza[son of R. Eliezer, founder of the Lomza Yeshiva]; R.Yeshayahu Mamush; R. Efraim Dov Berzhinsky [from5662/1902; author of the book "Pliti Efraim"]; and the lastrabbi, R. Moshe Lurie*.Natives: R. Eliahu-Meir; R. Shmuel-Avigdor; R.Yisrael-Binyamin-Bendt [sonof R. Baruch Feivelson]; andR.Haim Rose'.VAINUTA (VAINUTAS) - Tavrig District A2Vainuta is near Tavrig (19 miles), Naishtut-Tavrig (9)and Chaviadan (17). It was on the Prussian border.Before World War I, 80 Jewish families lived in Vainuta.After the War, the number dropped to 65. At the outbreak ofthe Holocaust, about 50 Jewish families (348 people) livedthere.The Jews in the town worked in trade, crafts, andfarming. There were also some well-to-do Jewish lumbermerchants. Market day was held every Monday.326LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe Jewish Peoples Bank in Tavrig also served Vainuta.They had a Tarbut School, a library, cheder, Bikur Holim,interest-free loan (gemach) fund, and a beit midrash with ashtibl next door.From the rabbinate: R. Shmuel bar Eliezer fdied in5626/1866]; R. Binyamin Lifshitz |died in 5631/1871]; R.Binyamin Farber; R. Zvi-Zev Shor [who later served as rabbiin Kretinga; he died 5689/1929]; R. Ezra Altschuler; R.Yosef-Yakov Shor* [appointed a rabbi in 5696/1936; he wasbom in the town].VAIYVER (VEIVERIAI) - Mariampole District C3Vaiyver is in southwest Lithuania near Pren (12 miles)and Mariampole (20). In 1923, there were 137 Jews. At thetíme of the Holocaust, only a few Jewish families remained.VARZHAN (VEIVIRZENAI) - Rretinga District A2Varzhan is situated on the Vaivirzla River, near Shvek-shna (4 miles), Gorzhd (7), and Memel (18), and near theRussian-German border.The Jews made their living through agriculture and smallshops. There was a synagogue and a beit midrash.Before the Holocaust, the Jewish populatíon was about250.From the rabbinate: R. Avraham-Abba; R. AbrahamSchnitzer; R. Yosef-Avigdor Kessler; R. Shmuel Funidler[afterward in Ritova]; and the last rabbi R. Natanal-YosefGraz’.Natives: Benjamin Aaronovitz and the joumalist RachelLuria [1886-1929; joumalist].VASHKI (VASKAI) - Birzh District D1Vashki is near Posvol (11 miles), Linkova (11), Zhaimel(12), Salat (10), and the Latvian border.THE COMMUNTTIES327Before World War I, there were 110 Jewish families inVashki. They were expelled and exiled during the War.Afterward, some returned. Just prior to the Holocaust, around200 Jews remained.Before the War, Jews there engaged in trade and crafts.An important part of the trade was exporting flax to England.During the years of Independent Lithuania, trade in flaxdropped due to competition from Soviet Russia in the Englishmarket. Competition from the Lithuanian cooperatives andLithuanian craftsmen also caused a worsening of the Jewisheconomic position. Many families emigrated to South Africaand the U.S.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 78 members in 1929.There was a beit midrash in the town and a YavnehSchool with 38 pupils.From the rabbinate: R. Yehuda-Leib Harif; R. AbrahamHoffenberg [served as rabbi for 48 years in Vashki and taughtnumerous students, many of whom were rabbis in EretzYisrael and the U.S. He died in 5689/1929; his son-in-lawwas R. Eliezer Levine who later served as rabbi in Detroit];and the last rabbi R. Zvi-Yakov Yankilov* jwhen the Sovietsclosed the local school, he gathered the children together andtaught them Torah in his house despite the constant dangerthat he would be sent into exile].Native: Dr. B. Hoffman [writer and joumalist}.VECKSHNA (VIEKSNIAI) - Mazhaik District B1Vecfcshna is a village near Siad (15 miles), Mazhaik (8),Layazhova (15), Trishik (14) and Tirkshla (8), on the VentaRiver.Gravestones indicate that Jews lived there for more than300 years. In 1766, there were 274 Jews; in 1847 - 1120.According to the 1897 census, there were 1646 Jews, about56% of the total population of 2951.328LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESDuring World War I, the Jews were expelled. After theWar, some retumed. In 1921, there were 300 Jews. Prior tothe Holocaust, there were about 500.The market was in the center of the village and provideda livelihood for most of the Jews. A few also worked inagriculture, but most were involved in commerce andmanufacturing. Small industries developed. There were thetanneries of Israel Klaberiski, Erik Yanka, Zelig Shuster andChana Reiff, flour mills, an electricity station, a spinningmill owned by Joseph Leshem and a ceramic jug factory ofJoshua Michael and David Gindon. Some Jews were timbermerchants, including the brothers Michael and ShimonWachs; wholesale produce merchants, including Alte Yors,the Berezinski brother, Zelig Lauph and the brothers Meirand Joseph Shein.The National Jewish Bank had 31 members in 1929.There were two synagogues - one for winter and theother for summer. There was a "Linat Hazedek" charity.Before World War I, there were a few cheders and ayeshivah. After the War, a Tarbut School was foundedtogether with a library, a drama group and youth movements.From the rabbinate; R. Shabtai Yaffe [until 5600/1840];R. Yekutial Zalman [died in 5608/1848]; R. Moshe Shapira;R. Joseph Shluper [later rabbi of Slonin]; R. Abba-YakovBorochov; R. Boruch Levinberg; R. Arye-Leib Lipkin; R.Yekutiel Zalman Levitas; R. Eliahu-Baruch Kamei; R. ZeevKronitz; R. Shlomo Finezilber; R. Moshe Rabinowitz; R.Shlomo-Ephraim Krawitzki; and the last rabbi, R. KalmanMaggid.Natives: R. Yakov-David Gordon; R. Shabtai-ChaimShochat |rabbi in Shimantzi and Abel]; R. Chaim-Tuvia BaalBar Chaim; R. Benzion Shalz; R. Abraham-David Edelson[joumalist and Zionist leader]; R. Yehuda Leib Efal [Zionistcommunal worker]; R. Miriam Shach [secretary to TheodorTHE COMMUNITIES329Herzl], and her brother Fabius Shach [writer]; YisraelEphroddn [writer]; Aaron-Yitzhak Grodonski [joumalist].Additional reference in:The Family (in English) by Josef Lavee/Leibowitch, 36 BeeriSt., Tel-Aviv, Israel 64233. Mentions Wekshniai.VEFERVefer was a village 6 miles firom Bogoslavishuk [D2],where a Jewish community existed before World War I.Native: Moshe Gutman [1883-1939; revolutionary].VEGER (VEGERIAI) - Mazhaik District B1Veger was a small town near Akmian (13 miles) andShavli (34), on the Akmena River and near the Latvianborder.Before the Holocaust, 50 Jews lived there. They eamedtheir living from agriculture and small-scale trade and asinnkeepers and peddlers. There was a synagogue and a beitmidrash.From the rabbinate: R. Nahum Shapira ["Ha’ilui fromDukshitz"]; R. Sholom-Dov Meirovitz [writer of commen-tary]; R. Gerson bar Yitzhak [5656/1896; related by marriageto R. Menahem-Mendel Zak, rabbi of Riga]; and R. Abra-ham bar Zir Begin [from 5663/1903].Native: Baruch Hume [writer].VENDZHIGOLA (VANDZIOGALA) - D2Kovno DistrictVendzhigola is near Kovno (15 miles), Keidan (12),Yanova (12), Yosvine (18) and Bobt (6). The nearest trainstation was 12 miles away.Jewish settlement dated from the seventeenth century, butvery few details are available about its histoiy.330LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBefore World War I, the Jewish population made up95% of the town. In 1915, the Jews were expelled firom thetown by the Russians. Most resettled in the Vilna area. WhenVilna was captured by the Germans, the Jews from Vendzhi-gola began returning.In 1921, there were 252 Jews. Estimates of Jewishpopulation before the Holocaust range from 350-500. TheChristian population had increased in the meantime and werein the majority. The Jews of the town were engaged in trade(40%) and crafts (45%). The rest worked at temporary jobs.There were no Jews in farming, but nearly every family hada green garden of a few hectares in size beside the house, andthat supplied vegetables for the family for the whole year.In nearby villages, many Jews lived among the Gentiles.Although the Jews were called "townsmen” or "villagers,"they were really farmers. They were considered a part of thetown in all matters.Wednesday was market day. In addition, there were 4fairs per year. Farmers would bring in produce, animals andfruits to sell. Merchants and peddlers would bring their waresfirom neighboring towns. On market and fair days, trade wasactive and a lively spirit permeated the town. Otherwise, thetown had a sleepy atmosphere.The town had some small factories. There was a sawmillowned by Meir Labnovsky, 2 tanneries, owned by NahumYona Kom, 2 workshops making felt boots, owned byYisrael Press, and 2 dye works for wool and materials, whichemployed 12 workers.Emigration to America began in the 1880’s and continuedup to World War I. During Independent Lithuania, a newwave of emigration began when the cooperatives beganadversely affecting Jewish tradesmen and merchants. Manywent to Palestine.The town had a synagogue and a beit midrash. In 1921,a new synagogue was built to replace 2 that were destroyedTHE COMMUNITIES331duríng World War I. There were also cheders. In Indepen-dent Lithuania, a Tarbut School was founded and had 30pupils. A number of children went to the cheder. The betterstudents later went to yeshivas in Kovno and in Slobodka, orto the Hebrew high school in Kovno.From the rabbinate: Zemach Zakesh [firom Keidan wholater was to become head of the Beit Din in New Zhager];Binyamin Bynosh; Yehoshua-Zvi Rabinovitz [in his old agehe went to Palestine and died in Jerusalem. His sons, nativesof the town, were R. Meir Rabinovitz (Head of the Beit Dinof Krok and Radoshkvitz; his son was the writer Dr. Morde-chai Robinson); Rabbi Yakov-Gershon Rabinovitz (Head ofthe Beit Din of Survilishok; his son was the writer andbookseller Michel Rabinovitz of Jerusalem); and KalmanRabin (rabbi in Kalvaria)[. Aaron Zeltzer [son-in-law ofYisrael Izeralit of Grodno. He gave up the rabbinate andbecame a store owner]; Nissan-Obadaiah Rozenson [a nativeof Krakinova. He was a student in Vilkomir, where hestudied with Moshe Leib Lilienblum, a Hebrew writer andpublicist who was also related on Lilienblum’s wife’s side ofthe family. He was granted smicha firom R. Yitzhak-ElhananSpector and the Gaon R. Bezalel Hacohen of Vilna. He diedin 5684/1924]; Yisrael Rozenson; and the last rabbi Haim barNahum-Yehuda Klivanov’ [was 85 when killed in the Holo-caust].Natives: Sholom Shachna (Epstein), [cantor in Novo-gorod]; Yitzhak-Isaac Benjamin [ritual slaughterer for theJewish community of Montreal, Canada]; Louis Ozer-LeibMinsky, son of Aaron Zelzer’j.VEVIYA (VIEVIS) - Troki District D3Veviya (Vuya) is near Landvarova (15 miles) and Zhusli(12), on the Kovno-Vilna rail line.332LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe town had 2 long streets and 3 side streets, with themarket place in the center, bordered by fields and wilderness.Wednesdays and Fridays were market days.Before World War I, about 700 Jews lived there, 90% ofthe general population. They mainly traded in agriculturalproduce, vegetables, ífuits, dairy products, chickens and eggswhich they supplied to Vilna.During World War I, Cossacks set the town on fire andcaused the Jews to leave. After the War, only a portionreturned. With great difficulty, they rebuilt the town. Thepopulation dwindled following its severance from the sur-rounding areas, especially Vilna, and the systematic economicdiscrimination by the Lithuanians.During Independent Lithuania, there was a Tarbut Schoolheaded by Hanina Yudelovitz, a library and a beit midrash.The youth belonged to various Zionist organizations, inparticular "Zionist Youth" and "Pioneer." Many learnedHebrew and farming in the District of Memel in preparationfor aliyah.From the rabbinate: R. Yehuda-Meshel Hacohen, and thelast rabbi R. Nehemiya Feine*.VIDISHOK (VIDISKIAI) - Vilkomir District D2Vidishok is near Vilkomir (6 miles), on the ShventaRiver along the Vilkomir-Utian Road. It is 5 miles from anarrow-gauge railway.Before the Holocaust, 15 Jewish families, about 50people out of a general population of 200, lived there. ' heywere storekeepers and small business merchants. Prior toWorld War I, the Jewish community was much larger. Theywere expelled during the War. Few retumed. Many remainedin other cities in Lithuania, while some emigrated to the U.S.The Jewish prayer house was bumed down by localLithuanians. With great effort, the Jews managed to rebuildTHE COMMUNITIES333it. As there was no local rabbi, a rabbi from Vilkomir servedthe town.The new prayer house was built in the center of thetown. Public worship was only held on Shabbat and holidays,as most Jews worked outside the town.In both commercial and cultural life, the Jews of Vidi-shuk were connected with Vilkomir.There was a cheder in Vidishok. The children continuedtheir studies in a yeshiva or a school in Vilkomir. Upongraduation, the youth would emigrate to South Afirica or theU.S. A few families went to Palestine.VIDNISHOK (VIDNISKIAI) - Vilkomir District E2Vidnishok was a village near Maliat (4 miles). BeforeWorld War I, the town was liquidated, following the expul-sion of Jews from villages by order of the Czarist authorities.VIDUKLA (VIDUKLE) - Rasin District B2Vidukla is near Rasin (9 miles), Krozh (24), Nemoksht(4), and Slcudvill (12), on the road and rail lines connectingKovno with Memel.The Jewish community began in the seventeenth century.In 184"7, 2281 Jews lived there; in 1897 - 4380, 68% of thegeneral population.During World War I, the Russian authorities failed toexpel the Jews because the Germans arrived first and con-quered the town one week before the expulsion declaration(May 5, 1915).During Independent Lithuania (1921), the Jewishpopulation was about 300 (60 families). Before World WarII, about 50 Jewish families lived there.The Jews were mainly involved in trade, crafts andagriculture. There were a number of prosperous Jewish wooddealers and wholesale merchants. The flour mill belonged to334LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESa Jew. There were 15 crafitsmen in 1937, including 3 tailors,2 butchers and 2 bakers.There was one large beit midrash, a Tarbut School anda cheder. Children continued their studies at the yeshivas ofKelme and Telz. There was a Hebrew library. Charitableorganizations included Bikur Holim and a Gemach interest-free loan fund.From the rabbinate: R. Yehezkel Rabinovitz [5639-5662/1879-1902); R. Moshe-Avraham-Shmuel ben YehezkelRabinovitz [ffom 5662/1902; he authored the book "ZichronYehezkel," Warsaw, 5672/1912); R. Yedidiah Gorvinsky;and the last rabbi, R. Yehoshua Hacohen Kaplan* [author of"Shaare HaKodesh," "Mei-inei HaYeshuah" and others).VILKI (VILKIJA) - Kovno District C2Vilki is located 18 miles ffom Kovno, on the NiemanRiver, by which it was connected with Kovno, Yurburg andMemel. The Kovno~Memel road, which went by the town,was not paved until 1938.It appeared ffom the tombstones in the cemetery that theJewish community of this town dated back to the eighteenthcentury.In 1915, the Jews were expelled ffom the town. Only afew retumed. In 1921, the Jewish population was about 800,80% of the overall population. Before the Holocaust, theJewish population had declined to 250 Jewish families, orabout 400 Jews, 48% of the general population.The export trade in lumber to Germany was a majorsource of income. Timber, originating from the Vilna andKovno Districts, was transported down the Nieman River byway of Vilki. Merchants in the town hired Jewish workers toman barges for this transport to East Prussia. This work wascalled "Konzhort", and the workers became known as"Konzhortniks." This work required a knowledge of waterdepths along the entire length of the river.THE COMMUNITIES335When the Vilna area was cut off írom Lithuania, thisexport trade diminished, adversely affecting the livelihood ofthe residents. Merchants and worícers left the town for Kovnoor moved overseas.A number of Jews also worked at small trade, crafts andgardening.In 1937, a large fire broke out in the town, causing afiuther decline in the community.Before World War I, there were a few cheders and ayeshiva. After the War, a Tarbut School was set up. It had anenrollment of 150.There were 2 prayer houses in the town. The kloiz builtof wood was where the "Konzhortniks" and the timbermerchants prayed. The "Shul," a block building, was wherethe rabbi and the important community leaders (baale-batim)prayed.Almost all of the youth participated in the Zionist organi-zations - Hashomer Hatzair; Pioneers (Hechalutz); andMaccabi. In the last years before the Holocaust, almost allthe young people left. Some went to Kovno and some wentto Eretz Yisrael or emigrated overseas.From the rabbinate: R. Yehoshua-Heshil Eliashsohn; R.Gavriel Feinberg [later a rabbi in Salant and in MemelJ; R.Chanoch-Zondel Rappaport (5632/1872); R. Arye-LeibVelpert (lirom 5633/1873); R. Hillel-David Hacohen Trivash(5635/1875); R. Abba Rozin [later rabbi in Zaritzin[; R.Friedman [delegate to the meeting of the community inKovno in 1920]; and the last rabbi, R. Shmuel-Yosef Sho-ham*.VILKOMIR (UKMERGE) - District Capital D2Vilkomir is 43 miles north of Vilna and 30 miles east ofKeidan, on the Shventa River, a tributary of the Nieman. Theriver divides the city into the new city and the poorer section"across the river." A bridge connected the two.336LTTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe city was called WiUcomierz by the Poles, Vilakomirby the Russians and Vilkmerge, later Ukmerge by theLithuanians. The name appears to be associated with wolves,"vilkas," found in the forest of that area.The city dates firom the thirteenth century, when it wasa hilltop fortress to guard the river transportation routes toVilna and Riga against western invaders. Here in 1233, theGerman Crusaders were prevented firom moving eastward. In1365, German invaders destroyed the fortress. Afiter the deathof Prince Kaistutis in 1382, the struggle for successionbetween Jagello and Vytautas resulted in the destruction ofthe Fortress in 1391 by Vytautas. Afiter Vytautas’ death, abattle incurred near Vilkomir in 1435, in which 10,000 died.The victor, Zigmund Casimir, named the nearby riverVictoria. A new settlement was set up called Paboisk (6 milesfirom Vilkomir) meaning in Polish "battlefield."In 1387, with the entry of Christianity into Lithuania,King Jagello of Poland built a large church in Vilkomirnamed for Peter and Paul. This church was burned downseveral times, but was rebuilt and expanded. King StevenBathory and others assigned vast areas of land as churchproperty. In large part, Vilkomir was built on this land.Prince Zigmund (1505-48) granted the city MagdeburgRights, established 2 market days, Thursday and Saturday,and a large fair on the 29th of June, the holiday of Peter andPaul.The town benefitted firom its geographical location on acrossroads and also on the Shventa River. In the early days,the river was open to navigation, as evidenced by the"navigation regulations" of 1589-1792 and the remains ofwarehouses on the river.By the nineteenth century, sandbars blocked the river toall but rafits. The city developed into an important trade andadministrative center, which continued until the Northern WarTHE COMMUNJTIES337of 1700-1701, when it was captured and plundered by theSwedes.With the Third Partition of Poland in 1795, Vilkomirpassed to Russia and was attached to the Vilna Region(Gubemia). Two years later, it became a District City in the"Region of Lithuania." In 1802, Vilkomir became a DistrictCity in Vilna Region. From 1842, it was included in KovnoRegion.Vilkomir was hit by plagues, famine and fires. The 1878fire broke out on market day and destroyed the entire city.Jewish communities in Kovno and Memel collected over25,000 mbles to aid the injured. Among contributors Ifomabroad were the Rothschild and Montefiore Families ofEngland. After the conflagration, the city was rebuilt. Therewere also fires in 1895 and 1904.The city’s importance as a trade center was hurt by thelaying of the Libau-Rumanian rail line, which diverted tradetraffic.Jewish settlement began in Vilkomir in the seventeenthcentury or late sixteenth century. A document from 1665from the principality of Zhamot gives the Jewish populationas 622. The Jews then were permitted to build a synagogue"across the river" and were given a plot for a cemetery. Thelocal chevra kadish kept the old tombstones in good repair,even some that were 300 years old. Their record book was asold.The Jews concentrated "across the river” and on streetsnear the river. The Christians lived in other parts of the city.In 1766, 716 Jews lived there. In 1797, all of VilkomirDistrict had 6088 Jews. In 1864, the Jewish population of thecity was 4561; there were 2 synagogues and 12 minyans. The1897 census shows 7287 Jews lived there, 53% of the generalpopulation. In 1914, the Jewish population reached 10,000.During World War 1, the Russians expelled the Jews.One Jew - Dr. Katzenellenbogen, an army doctor - was given338LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESpermission to remain, but he refused and left the city. SomeJews were exiled to Russia while others found temporaryrefuge in the Vilna area. Under German occupation, Jewsfrom the Vilna area and Jews from nearby towns and settle-ments destroyed during the War began to settle in Vilkomir.In 1918, with the German evacuation, units of the Red Armyand Poles approached the city. The Jews, fearful of a Polishconquest because of what had been perpetrated elsewhere,sent a delegation to the Soviets requesting them to capture thecity.In January 1918, the Red Army entered the city andremained for half a year. Many Jews escaped to Gelvan inneutral territory. Under pressure ffom Lithuanian rebels, theBolsheviks were forced to leave. The Jews, disappointed bythe rule of the Bolsheviks, welcomed the Lithuanians, whoproclaimed equal rights for Jews and promised an improve-ment in their situation. Within days, pogroms broke out. Ata gathering of Jews to celebrate the Balfour Declaration,shots were fired. The son of Zvi Zaldov was killed. Lithuani-an rioters injured dozens of people. Hundreds were arrested.Two Jewish youths, the sons of Baruch Bina and LeibMetavian, were executed for sympathizing with the Commu-nists and were buried in the town of Shatt. Three hours aftertheir burial, a notice of amnesty was received from thePresident of Lithuania, Antanas Smetona. The victims wereexhumed and given a Jewish burial. Those arrested werereleased and the commandant, of Polish origin, was dis-missed.Life retumed somewhat to normal. Jews retumed fromexile in Russia. When Vilna was captured by Poland,thousands of refugees came from there to Vilkomir. LocalJews, along with the Joint (JDC) assisted them. The commu-nity council was authorized to issue the refugees temporaryidentity cards. Hundreds of Jews from Vilkomir volunteeredfor the Lithuanian Army. Minister for Jewish Affairs Dr. M.THE COMMUNITIES339(Solieli) Soloveichik visited the city. At that time, a Polishplane strafed the city. Dozens of people were killed orinjured, including the engineer Chesley from Vilna, arepresentative of the Joint (JDC).In the municipal elections, Jews won a majority andBenZion Goldberg was elected Mayor. Many Jews wereemployed as clerks in the municipal govemment. They hada better command of the Lithuanian language than theLithuanians themselves.In the elections for the Jewish community council(kehilla), parties from the right and left participated. Thechairman of the community council was the Zionist RaphaelGmshkin. The community council was tom by a stmgglebetween the Zionists and their opponents from the right andthe left. The kehilla did not succeed in rebuilding institutionsof religion, education and welfare.Estimates of the Jewish population in the 1920’s rangefirom 3885 to 7000. In 1935, it was 8000, out of a generalpopulation of 15,000.The first Jews who settled in Vilkomir worked in cuttingdown trees, floating rafts and in trading produce and flax.Caravans of Jewish merchants passed through the city ontheir way to Vilna, Kovno, Petersburg and Warsaw. Theybuilt warehouses. Jews were involved in the export of treesand flax to Germany. Jewish merchants from Vilkomir wereestablished in the bourse (stock-exchange) of Koenigsberg,Danzig and Stetin. Jews owned flour mills.In the nineteenth century, there was a Jewish organiza-tion of flour millers. Tanneries, brick kilns and the potteryindustry were in the hands of Jews. Trade in textiles, grocerystores, and building materials was controlled by Jewishmerchants. Before World War I, there were about 900 Jewishfarmers in Vilkomir and its environs. Jews of the nearbysettlements were also engaged in crafts, and some wereinnkeepers. Among the Jewish tradesmen were builders.340LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESblacksmiths, metal-workers and tinsmiths. Jewish tailors hada broad market, including the Army which was camped there.Cartmen would set out at the end of Sabbath and retum homethe next Sabbath eve. In the 1920’s, they switched ffomhorses to trucks. Until the 1930’s, there was no piped-inwater supply; Jewish water-carriers delivered water from theriver or from wells.In 1935, Jews owned a number of industrial factories,including 3 sawmills, 2 flour mills owned by Krikum andOrbin, a leather factory owned by Zelig Gerev and Mishener,porcelain panels for stoves, 2 kilns, 2 wineries, a cartonfactory, a beverage factory, 2 bed-linen factories, 2 house-wares factories, and 6 tanneries.The Jewish Peoples Bank was founded in 1920. In 1929,it had 593 members. The manager was Yisrael Luss. Thetreasurer was Zvi Zladov, followed by Mesha Glezer. Eliahuand Aaron Yudelevitz and Yehuda Levitt owned privatebanks.There were 12 prayer houses and many minyanim,including the large synagogue built over 300 years ago andthe shtibl of the Chabad hasidim. Most of the prayer housesbelonged to craftsmen.For several hundred years, Vilkomir was an importantrabbinical seat in Lithuania, and the city was known for itsdistinguished talmudic scholars. Before World War I, therewere 150 residents certified as rabbis.Vilkomir was a stronghold of haredi Jews and had areputation for its zealots. From the 1860’s, after the death ofRabbi Aaharle, controversy ensued between the Mitnagdimand Hasidim. The Hasidim wanted their rabbi along side ofthe head of the beit din who was a Mitnagid. Likewise, therewas conflict with the Haskalah movement and the maskilim.Moshe (Moses)-Leib Lilienblum, a native of Keidan andrelated by marriage to Leib Delogets fforn Vilkomir, led thestruggle for Haskalah until he was forced to leave the city.THE COMMUNITIES341This struggle was reflected by Lilienblum in his articles andin his poem "Kahal Refaim." The public life of the kehillawas frequently punctuated by controversy. It had zealots onthe right and on the left, as well as Zionists. During Indepen-dent Lithuania, a struggle ensued between the Yiddishists andZionists conceming the local Hebrew Gymnasia.Before World War I, there were cheders, a large yeshiva,and a Talmud Torah. At the end of the nineteenth century,govemment schools opened, including a Jewish school, amunicipal school, a pro-gymnasia and later a gymnasia, inwhich Jews were accepted without limits. The language ofinstmction was Russian. In the gymnasia, the Bund had greatinfluence. From its graduates came many workers for theunderground.During the German occupation in World War I, theYiddishists set up a large library, a drama troupe, an orches-tra and a choir, all of which strengthened the Bund and theYiddishist movement. Among their workers was Sablinskyfrom Courland, a teacher, writer and author of the novel"Shmochlares."During Independent Lithuania, there were 2 gymnasias,Hebrew and Yiddish, which merged into 1 Hebrew gymnasiain 1934; a large yeshiva in the old beit midrash; a Yavnehschool, administered by Abba Glickman and later by YitzhakShemesh', with spiritual guidance of melamed Turitz'; aTarbut school administered by Zerach Vidokler; a tradeschool; a Tarbut kindergarten, administered by NechamaYaffe and later Yochabad Skob/Sakov; and 2 libraries.The kehilla set up institutions, including a hospital,administered by Dr. Eliezer Kling; an old-age home, foundedby Yisrael Levy; an orphanage with 90 children, supportedby a native, Sol Rosenblum, and headed by A. Zivotz; anda Talmud Torah, built by Haim Frankl. Also, the kehilía setup a public pharmacy whose proceeds were used for various342LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEScharitable needs. The poor in the Jewish community receivedfree medicine and in winter free wood for heating.All of the Zionist parties were represented, includingAgudat Yisrael, Communists, and Hehalutz. The youthorganizations included Hashomer Hatzair, Gordonia andsports associations such as Maccabi, Hapoel and Betar. Therewas an active women’s association.From the rabbinate: R. Raphael Hacohen ffrom 5507/1747]; R. Shlomo Segal [a student of the Vilna Gaon]; R.Haim of Vlozhin; R. Yehuda-Leib Zelkind [MR. Leib Batlan"]R. Aaron [R. Aaharle]; R. Alexander (Sender) HacohenKaplan [served as a dayan in Vilkomir at the time of R.Aaron. He wrote the book "Shlamai Nedarim on thetalmudic tractate nedarim/vows]; R. Binyamin Rabinovitz; R.Moshe bar Yehoshua-Isaac (Harif) Shapira; R. Shaul Padua[R. Shaul of Polotsk; he served in Vilna from 5644-5670/1884-1910]; R. Leib Rubin [5672-5696/1912-1936]; the lastrabbi, R. Yosef Zosmanovitz* [5696-5701/1936-1941]; andR. Yakov Reznik* [the last rabbi of the neighborhood "acrossthe river"].Among the students of the Vilkomir Yeshiva: Dr. IsserGinzburg; Zvi-Nissan Golomev [writer]; R. Simcha-YitzhakBroida [killed in Hebron in 5689/1929].Natives: Zvi-Hirsh Velk; Yakov Maskin; Yosef Yaff'e;Yisrael- Yakov Yaffe; Yehuda Halevy Lifshitz; Yehuda-LeibAnolik [author of "Orchot Mishpat" on "Hoshen Mishpat" inthe Shulchan Aruch]; Yoel-Zelig Zelkind Eliahu bar ShmuelVelk [author of the book "sedrei brachat hachama,’* 5657/1897; died in Jerusalem]; Yakov Halevy Lifshitz (haredicommunity leader]; Zvi-Hirsh son of Avraham-YitzhakRamm [author of the book "eretz ha-zvi"], Haim-YitzhakRappaport [the Maggid from Vilkomir; he lived in Jerusalemin the 1890’s and died there at the age of 101]; R. AaharleSlemhas/Shelmhas [scholar, community leader and philan-thropist; died in 5661/1901]; Shlomo Aaharles [correspondentTHE COMMUNITIES343for "Hamelitz" newspaper; active in "Hamizrahi," aliyah toEretz Yisrael in 5685/1925; died in 5697/1937]; MendelZilver (Silver); Yakov Gefen; Dov Liebovitz [member ofBilu].People in the Second Aliyah: Tuvia-Ziskind and hisbrother Yeshayahu Miller; and Shlomo Sedvitz (Ben-David)from Sheshik.From the Third Aliyah: Mordechai Veiss; AvrahamGeiger; Reuven Gordon; Moshe Zayert [journalist]; SorBarnett [chemist]; M. Goncher [publisher]; Reuven Maas[publisher], Shraga Feigenson [Sh’fan the writer], Kolchik[journalist and writer], Aaron Klitchko [community leader],Shabtai Bomstein [community leader], Haim Frankl findustri-alist and philanthropist], Shmuel Blum; Sol Rosenblum; ZviLevit [a contractor for the Russian Army; kehilla worker];Sender Zladov and Avraham Motnik [revolutionaries]; Begoz[secretary to Trotsky in 1917]; Hetzkel Fraker/Pracker [ayoung poet; he drowned at age 16; wrote "a bendle far-zohn"]; Cantor Alter [ran the choir in the Great Synagogue],Cantor Yonah Gefen [son of the bookbinder]; Cantor ZevStoblov [community leader in England]; Cantor Shlomo-David Peltz [London]; Cantor Friedman [in Germany and inEngland]; Baruch Rubik [leader in Young Zionists in Lithua-nia; later an attomey in South Africa]; Shmuel-Nahum Stem(S. Kochav) [poet; translated to Yiddish Dante’s "Infemo"];Yakov Levine [an early resident of Herziliya]; and HannahBohakov [a founder and early resident of Herziliya].Public figures of the last generation: Itzakovitz; Bishko;Elimelech and his wife Esther Burshtein [she was active inWIZO and the Women’s Association for Equal Rights, inEretz Yisrael; a delegate to intemational women’s commit-tees]; the brothers Yisrael and Shlomo Bokantz; Ben ZionGoldberg; R. Raphael Gmshkin; Zelig Grab/Gerev; D. Glez;Yitzhak Yanovsky; Yisrael London; Dr. S. Sapir; ZipporahDanin (Peltz/Pletz); Dr. A. Krilinsky and his wife; Bamch344LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESKling [engineer]; Dr. Eliezer Kling; Ezriel-Vehuda andNehama Levit; Dr. Rachmil [director of the local "Eza"clinic]; Dr. Nahum-Zev Broida.Additional reference:Encounters With the Jewish People (English) by ChaimRaphael, "The Raphaels of Vilkomir" [Pruss Family],N.Y.: Behrman House, Inc., 1979.Jacob Halevy Lipshitz, "In the Service of Isaac ElhananSpelctor," in Lucy S. Dawidowicz, The Golden Tradi-tion, 1967. Lipshitz was biographer and personal secre-tary for 26 years of Rabbi Isaac Elhanan Spelctor.Lipshitz tells briefly about his family and early years inVilkomir, his birthplace (1838).VILKOVISHK (VILKAVISKIS) - District Capital C3Vilkovishk is located in southem Lithuania, 10 milesfrom the border with East Pmssia. Nearby communitiesinclude Mariampole (13 miles), Pilvishuk (7), Naishtut-Shaki(10), Virbaln and Vishtinitz.According to legend, the town got its name from thelarge number of wolves in the nearby forests.The city was founded in the beginning of the fifteenthcentury. In 1660, it was given rights as a city. With theThird Partition of Poland, it passed to Pmssian mle (1795-1807). In 1807, it was included in the territory of thePrincipality of Warsaw. During the War of 1812, a largeFrench army concentrated there. Near the city, there is amilitary cemetery for soldiers who fell during that period.The Vienna Congress in 1815 passed control of the area toRussia.Vilkovishk was an important border point betweenGermany and Russia because of its location between Koenigs-berg and Kovno. It was a District City in Suwallci Province.Large warehouses were built. Most of the exports andTHE COMMUNITIES345imports between the interior of Russia and Germany went byway of Vilkovishk. The economic importance of the citycontinued during the entire nineteenth century. The townbenefitted firom the construction of a railroad through it androads connecting it to Mariampole, Virbaln and Kovno.In the twentieth century, the city began to decline,particularly after the Kazlova Ruda-Mariampole-Kalvaria trainline was inaugurated. Mariampole replaced it as the tradecenter of Suwalki Region.Vilkovishk had one of the earliest Jewish settlements inLithuania. Jews from Prussia settled there in the sixteenthcentury. The wife of King Sigmund-August donated the woodfor building the synagogue.At the time of Napoleon’s invasion into Russia in 1812,the French Army took over the prayer house and tumed itinto a stable. This occurred on Erev Tisha B’Av. A delega-tion of Jews went to Napoleon to request the retum of thesynagogue. The Emperor received the delegation cordiallyand immediately ordered the synagogue retumed. He furtherordered his men not to harm the Jews. He took this opportu-nity to tell the delegation that in 1798/9 he visited the Landof Israel and that it was his wish to rebuild the Kingdom ofIsrael. Before he left Vilkovishk, he promised its residentsthat if he won the War he would tum the town into a LittleParis.In the nineteenth century, most of the population of thetown was Jewish. The non-Jews were mainly govemmentworkers. In 1897, the Jewish population was 3480, 60% ofthe general popuíation. Before World War I, 850 Jewishfamilies lived tíiere. During lndependent Lithuania (1921),the Jewish population was 3206, and in 1939 - 3609, 45% ofthe general population.The Jews made their living in trade, crafts, agricultureand industry. Prior to World War I, the merchants of thetown, who were mainly Jewish, traded in wood, produce, and346LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESother agricultural products for export to Germany. Anindustry using boar hair developed; it was predominately aJewish-run industry. There were also factories to producetobacco and cigarettes, soap and cast iron.Three additional large factories owned by Sobolvitz,Rozin, and Vindsberg employed hundreds of Jewish workers.After World War I, there was a crisis in industry after thecity was cut off ffom the Russian market, which had been themain source of raw materials.Industrial workers organized by occupation and battledfor workers’ rights. They called strikes in order to obtain a10 hour workday.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 348 members in 1929 andbenefitted middle-class Jews.The Jewish community was proud of its old synagoguewhich had a beautiful holy ark. In addition, there were 4kloizes (a German kloiz, a French kloiz where Napoleon’stroops slept, a kloiz of the burial society, and a kloiz of R.Yakov-Yeshayahu), a beit midrash, and one shtibl. Thebristle factory workers had their own house of prayer whichwas called the boar’s-hair society.Before World War I, young Jewish pupils were taughtmainly by melameds. A significant number of the chederpupils continued their studies in local yeshivas or in neighbor-ing yeshivas. Among the better-known teachers at the end ofthe nineteenth century was R. Moshe Moistinitz (Sodersky).In Independent Lithuania, there was a small yeshiva inthe town, a Tarbut School, a Yiddish school, a Hebrew highschool and also a school for artisans. There were 2 libraries,one of the Sirkin Society and the second of the Yiddishists.The Hebrew high school was one of tíie first in Lithuania.Many students from nearby towns studied there.In local elections, the Jewish workers associations, thePoale-Zion and the Bund generally received a decidedmajority. The Zionist parties exercised an important influ-THE COMMUNITIES347ence. Most of the young people were in youth groups and theZionist sports associations, Maccabi and Hapoel.In the years of autonomy, the community councilrestored the public institutions, which had been destroyed inWorld War I, and broadened social assistance to the poor.Among the institutions were an old-age home, Bikur Holim,an Eza clinic, a children’s home, Linat Hazedelc and acharitable loan fiind ("maskil el dal").Vilkovishk was well-known in Lithuania as a city thatcombined Torah and enlightenment. The community hadnoted rabbis, researchers, scholars, writers, joumalists andpublic figures.From the rabbinate: R. Yukel Metiktin; R. Zvi-Hirsh barSimcha Hacohen Rappaport; R. Yisrael bar David Katzenel-lenbogen; R. Yakov-Yirkel Halevy Horvitz; R. EliezerLandau jgreat-grandson of Noda b’Yhudah - Ezekiel benJudah Landau (1713-1793); died in the year 5646/1886]; R.Yakov-David Vilbasky; R. Zvi-Hirsh M’Yafit; R. YehielHeller; and the last rabbi, R. Eliahu-Aaron Green’.Natives: Zebulun Harlap; Menachem Karkovsky; thepreacher Haim from Rumshishok; Shmuel Borovsky [writer];the brothers Eliahu-Zev and Levy Levine-Epstein; Dr.Shmuel Melamed [joumalist]; George Margoliouth [scholarof the Bible and the Orient]; Samuel Hyman; Josef Bloch[1871-1936; leader of the Socialists in Germany]; Dr. EliahuSintovsky [writer]; Leon Kamaiko [joumalist and publicfigure]; Shimshon Rauzok [librarian]; Issachar Barr [wrotethe book "Ohel Yissacher"; later served as rabbi in Sigat,Hungary]; Mordechai bar Zvi-Hirsh Grodzensky [wrote thebook "Yalkut Mordechai" on legends of our sages, "MaamarMordechai", and sermons "Beit Mordechai", Keidan Publish-ers, 5692/1932].Public figures included: Esther Sovolvitz’ [active in allthe institutions, especially the old-age home]; the brothersEliahu and Shmuel-Abba Sovolvitz [active in ORT, the board348LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESof the Hebrew high school and others]; Bendt Rabinovitz,[Mayor of the town at the time of the German capture inWorld War IJ; Yosef Rabinovitz [intellect and great teacher].Additional reference:Jacob OIeiski, A Man’s Work, Israel: ORT Israel and TheAssociation of Lithuanian Jews in Israel, 1986 (Hebrew,Yiddish, English). OIeiski grew up not far from Vilko-vishk and worked for a short time in a Yiddish elementa-ry school in Vilkovishk.VILNA (VILNIUS) - CAPITAL CITY E3Vilna has a special place in Jewish history. It was calledthe "Jerusalem of Lithuania."The city was founded around 1320 as a fortress. In 1387,it was granted city rights of self-rule.According to tradition, the old cemetery in Vilna wasestablished in the year 1487. In 1527, the Christian towns-people in Vilna received written rights ffom King Sigmundthe Elder to forbid Jews from settling in the city. Apparently,some Jews had already done so.The Jews, however, petitioned for rights of settlement.The Grand Duke of Lithuania, who was also the King ofPoland, needed the money and expertise of the Jews. Hetumed over the administration of the mint to them. He alsoleased them customs revenues. These Jews resided in Vilna.In 1551, King Sigmund-Augustus authorized 2 Jews firomKharkov and their servants to live and trade in the city ofVilna as guest-merchants.According to tradition, a synagogue was built in Vilnaaround 1573.The townsmen feared the competition ffom the Jews intrade and crafts, and in 1592 attacked the synagogue, storesand apartments of the Jews on the street that was alreadyknown as "The Street of the Jews. The attack helped theTHE COMMUNITIES349Jews convince the King to give them official authorization tolive in Vilna. A year later, the Jews received written rightsof residence ffom King Sigmund III to live in houses of thenoblemen, pray according to their religious traditions andengage in trade. Some time after that they received a permitto establish public institutions needed by the community, suchas a cemetery, bathhouse and slaughterhouse. From that time,the organized Jewish community was recognized by law.In 1633, community leaders received written rights ífomKing Vladislav IV. Besides renewing their previously-gainedrights, he authorized Jews to maintain shops, work in crafts,produce and sell beverages, buy and process hides and animalhair for sale and purchase work animals.The townsmen opposed these orders. In 1634 and 1635,they organized attacks on the Jews, the synagogue and thecemetery. An investigating committee appointed by the Kingplaced all the blame on unidentified assailants, and told thetown to protect the Jews. As compensation, the Jews weregiven permission to sell hard drinks in 20 buildings, but theannual payment to the city was raised. They were permittedto erect gates at the ends of the streets of their residence.In 1645, the municipality of Vilna conducted a census ofJews living within the municipal jurisdiction. They surveyedGlaziers Street and the Street of the Ashkenazim as well asthe Jewish ghetto and wrote down which houses the Jewslived in and which houses were up for sale so that Jews couldbuy them. They counted 262 families; however, the numberis believed to be nearly 3000 individuals. The Christianpopulation was close to 12,000.The Chmielniclci massacre of 1648 did not hit Vilnadirectly. However, the refugees who came needed assistanceand support. They raised the number of those wanting tomake a living in the city. The heads of the Vilna communitythen borrowed large sums ffom the Jesuit priests and gave350LTTHUANIÁN JEWISH COMMUNITIESthem as security houses and even "claims" on seats in thesynagogues.Massacres hit Vilna in 1655. As the Muscovites ap-proached, nearly all Jewish residents fled north to Zhamot,and from there to the Prussian border. There they met therefugees fleeing the Swedish Army, which also invadedPoland. The Russian Army set Vilna on fire. It bumed for 17days, and consumed the entire Jewish quarter.When the Polish Army liberated the city in 1661, theJews retumed and began rebuilding the community. Polishroyalty helped the Jews by giving them licenses for rentingapartments in all parts of the city and for selling beverages.They exempted them from the annual payment to the munici-pality, delayed the payment of their debts, reduced interest,and authorized them to have stores with entrances onto thestreetThe townspeople strongly opposed any move that favoredthe Jews. Problems increased for Jewish craftsmen afterguilds were founded by Christian artisans. They called forlimitations on Jewish craftsmen. The Jews complained to thePolish king, who issued an order authorizing Jews to engagein crafts for which there were no artisan guilds. Exampleswere furriers, glaziers and twine-malcers. The Society ofCord-makers (Chevra Kadisha Shmukler) existed from at least1674. The number of guilds grew. Every one of them triedto have its own beit midrash or kloiz. Jewish artisans beganto organize their own guilds. The Christian barbers’ guildwas the only one that accepted Jewish members.The townspeople would periodically organize attaclcs ona Jewish street. However, the king would come to theirdefense. The attaclcs caused more damage to property than topersons.In the late seventeenth century and early eighteenthcentury, the country experienced wars, famine, plagues andfires. During the Northem War, the Swedes and tiie RussiansTHE COMMUNITIES351entered the city. The Swedes levied taxes and fines on thecity, and they demanded large sums of money from the Jews.The War caused a famine in the country in 1708-1710, andwas followed by a plague in 1710. Many Jews were amongthe casualties. In the great fires of 1737, 1748 and 1749 inVilna, the courtyard of the synagogue, the synagogue and thepublic instítutions within it were damaged. Amidst all thesedifficulties, the townspeople did not relent in their activitiesagainst Jews.In 1738, King August III extended Jewish rights for 20years. The municipality brought the community to trial oncharges that the Jews had misled the King. The municipalitywanted to revert to the regulations of 100 years earlierforbidding Jews to live there. In 1740, a judgement wasissued in favor of the townspeople. The District Ministerappointed a committee to consider the position of both sidesand to obtain a compromise. After an exhausting period ofnegotiations, the Kahal was forced to sign on a compromiseagreement in 1742 that was most unfavorable.Jewish tradesmen and craftsmen ignored the new agree-ment. They opened stores with entrances onto the street.They traded in everything and worked in all crafts. Theyexpanded the area where Jews resided.In 1783, the King ordered an end to the ghetto. Jewscould live anywhere in the city, except for 2 streets, from the"Austra Brama" Gate to the Cathedral Church and from theTroki Gate to the Johanon Church. Taxes were equalized withthe rest of the city. The annual tax of 600 zlotys was re-voked.For tax purposes, a census was taken in 1765, showingthe Jewish population of Vilna and its suburbs as 3887. Acensus was taken again in 1800. Although not consideredexact, it gave the Jewish population as 6971. The totalpopulation of Vilna was estimated to be 17,351.352LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe Kahal (Jewish community council) had its ownadministrative staff. Due to the system of eíections, Kahalseats were held by scholars and the well-to-do. Duringdifficult times, the positions went more to the wealthy. Oneof the leaders had been Eliahu Hasid, son of R. MosheKremer and great-grandfather of the Vilna Gaon. However,his place was taken over by the rich. At one time a contro-versy erupted between the head of the Beit Din, R. Shmuelbar Avigdor, and the head of the community council, R.Abba ben Zev-Wolf. At the same time the masses, especiallythe artisans, rose up against the leaders of the community.They wanted the rule of the kahal reduced to only matters ofreligion and charity.From the founding of the community in the first half ofthe seventeenth century, Vilna rapidly became a center ofTorah studies. Scholars from Czechoslovalcia, Austria,Germany and Poland came to the city. The son of the soferof Prague came to Vilna and brought with him his father’slibrary. Renowned rabbis occupied the seat of the rabbinatein Vilna. One was R. Moshe Lima, author of "ChelkatMechukak" (printed in Cracow in 1670), an exposition on aresponsa of Ibn-Ezra. Members of the Beit Din in Vilnaincluded R. Efraim [author of "Shaar Efraim"]; the Shach, R.Shabbetai Cohen [1621-1662; author of "Sfatei Cohen"]; theMaharshak, R. Aaron-Shmuel Kaidanover [1614-1676, authorof studies and expositions on Shas, responsas, and drashim];R. Hillel [author of "Beit Hillel'']. When the community wasdestroyed in 1655, they left and went to westem countries.The community regained its strength slowly. By themiddle of the century, Vilna was filled with scholars andwriters. One individual stood out with particular prominence.He was R. Eliahu of Vilna, who became known as the VilnaGaon. The Vilna Gaon wanted to guard traditional Judaism.He fought both Hasidism and the Haskalah Movement ofBerlin founded by Mendelssohn. Hasidism found someTHE COMMUNITIES353followers among the heads of the Kahal and the scholars, butwith the influence of the Vilna Gaon, expansion of Hasidismwas halted in Lithuania.The fírst Maskilim (advocates of the Enlightenment) inVilna were Hebrew language enthusiasts. They were interest-ed in Hebrew grammar and also in the "Biur" (Germantranslation of the Torah and Hebrew commentaries by MosesMendelssohn). They were traditionalists and preferred that tophilosophy.During the Russian conquest of Vilna in 1794, approxi-mately 30 Jews were lcilled in one of the suburbs.The French Army, which captured the city in 1812,tumed the cemetery into a cattle and sheep pen. The Jewshelped the Russian Army.Czar Nicholas I ordered the drafting of young Jewishchildren into the army. The Kahal was responsible for fíllingthe draft quotas. It became hated by the population; itsmembers were called the ”kidnappers."In 1802, an order reached Vilna that Jews were to beeligible for city posts, as was the case in Russia. Despitestrong objections from municipal leaders, Jews held positionsin the administration of the city until 1820 when they wereagain banned.The prohibition on Jews living on the 2 off-limits streetswas finally lifted in 1861.In 1844, the regime eliminated the Kahal and self-mlefor the Jewish community. They placed the gabbais of theshul in charge of religious needs and social assistance.During the period which began with the reign of CzarAlexander III, Jewish Vilna was very active in nationalmovements for equal rights and national ffeedoms. The firstcenter for Jewish social organizations was established in 1872in Vilna. One of the first chapters of Hovevei Zion wasfounded in Vilna.354LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESIn 1897, the founding council of the Jewish (anti-Zionist)Social-Democratic Party, the Bund, met in Vilna. It wasespecially active there during the 1905 Revolution. In 1906,Dr. Shmaryahu Levin (1867-1935) was elected to representthe Zionist movement, which then met in Vilna, as a delegateto the Russian Duma.In 1832, the Jewish population was 20,706 as comparedto 15,216 non-Jews. The census of 1897 found that of154,532 residents, there were 63,996 Jews or 41% of thegeneral population. In 1916, the Jewish population was61,263 out of a total population of 148,840 (41%).Vilna served as a center for trade and industry. Productswere shipped to markets throughout Russia and exported toGermany. Industries that developed in the Vilna area includedthe processing of lumber, hides, flour, beer, and tobacco.The percentage of trade handled by Jews grew from22.2% in 1827 to 75.6%. In 1875, there were close to 3194tradesmen; 2752, or 86.1%, were Jews. In 1897 they were77.1%.The number of Jews in various occupations in 1897included: trade - 6117, crafts and industry - 13,573, trans-porting and transportation - 875, agriculture - 78; and freeprofessions - 1026.Most of the Jewish residents worked in crafts andindustry. They dominated the maricets in gloves and ready-wear merchandise.Nearly all shoes produced in Vilna were made by Jews.Other Jewish-dominated industries were hat making andleather work. The first Jewish factory was established in1815; it produced plain fabric. By 1858, nearly all factoriesfor fabrics in Vilna were owned by Jews.Throughout tiie nineteenth century, Vilna played a centralrole in the cultural life of the Jews of Eastem Europe, as wellas being a center of Torah studies. Haskalah became wide-spread in Vilna and attracted many writers from other cities.THE COMMUNITIES355By the mid-1800’s, it was a center of Hebrew literature. Theleading fígure of the maslcilim in Vilna was the Hebrewwriter Mordechai Aaron Guenzburg (1795-1846).There were Hebrew poets living in Vilna, includingAdam Hacohen Lebensohn (1794-1878) and his son Michal(1828-1852), Shlomo-Zalman Zelkind and later Yehuda LeibGordon. There were scholars such as Matityahu Shterson,Yitzhak-IsaacBen-Yakov, AvrahamZackheim, Shmuel-YosefFinn, Eliezer Lifman Horwitz and Yehoshua Shteinberg, andthe Hebrew writers Kalman Schulman (1819-1899), BenjaminMandelstamm (1855-1886), Isaac-Meir Dick, Moshe Reicher-son, David-Moshe Mitzkun and A.Y. Papima. Yiddishwriters included A.M. Dick and Michal Gordon (1823-1890).Hebrew printing came to Vilna in 1799 when 2 Polishprinting companies opened and had Hebrew departments. TheHebrew department of the printing house of Baruch benJoseph was managed by his son Menahem (Emanual) Mann(died 1841). He took the family name of Romm. Menahem’ssons developed the business and printed the first VilnaTalmud. It caused a serious conflict between the Jewishprinters in Vilna and Slobodka and led to the closing of allHebrew printing houses in Russia except for Romm and oneother in Kiev. This monopoly continued until 1863 whenother printers opened, such as Avraham Rosenkranz andRashi Fuenn.In 1841, a group of maskilim established 2 schools,headed by Nissan Rosenthal.The govemment founded a rabbinical seminary in Vilnain 1844. In 1873, it became a teachers college. Some of thestudents became writers and scholars, including R. Dr.Yehuda Leib Kantor (1849-1915), Dr. S. Mandelkem, A.S.Lieberman [founded the first Hebrew socialist periodical,"The Tmth"], A.A. Harchavy, A. Kahn (Cohen) and L.Libenda.356LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAt the beginning of the twentieth century, the Jewishgymnasia (secondary school) of Vilna was founded. Thelanguage of instruction was Russian, but the curriculumincluded many Hebrew studies. The principal of the gymnasiawas P.A. Cohen. A Zionistic Cheder Metuchan was alsoestablished.In 1904-1905 a daily paper "HaZman" appeared.Contributors included BenZion Katz, Y.H. Taviuv, Y.A.Trivosch, S.L. Citron, Hillel Zeitlin, Y. Bershadsky, S.Chemovitz, Y.D. Berkovitz and Ben-Eliezer.Each group had its own publication. For example, theYiddish weekly called "Das Idisha Falk" was begun in 1906,edited by Dr. Yosef Luria. Parties such as the Bund, PoaleZion and Socialist Democrats had their own newspapers andliterature, especially in Yiddish.A scientific library was set up in the city through abequest of the scholar Matityahu Shterson.The capture of Vilna by Germany on Yom Kippur of1916 spariced the beginning of a period of shortages, hunger,unemployment and forced labor.During this difficult time, mutual help and assistancedeveloped with professional woricers. Jewish education inHebrew and Yiddish was expanded. A Hebrew gymnasia wasestablished, the first in the Diaspora, and a Yiddish theatre.At the end of 1918, the Germans left. The local Polestook charge, but in a few days the Red Army entered thecity. Communist rule lasted a short time, but the economicsituation of the Jews deteriorated very badly.On April 19, 1919, the Polish Legionnaires enteredVilna. Their entry was accompanied by pogroms.Under Polish rule, Vilna was cut off from IndependentLithuania.Jews participated in the municipal administration and hadto fight for their rights. The community council was reducedby Polish law to dealing with matters of religion and charity.THE COMMUNITIES357Due to the economic situation, there was a continual flowof emigration to Eretz Yisrael and other lands.The Jewish schools, both in Hebrew and Yiddish,continued to develop. There was a teachers college and agymnasia conducted in Hebrew and Yiddish. The Polishauthorities tried to introduce the Polish language into Jewishschools. They opened govemment schools in Polish forJewish children. The Polish University in Vilna accepted onlythose who had Polish matriculation certificates. Graduates ofthe Hebrew and Yiddish gymnasia found it difficult to beaccepted. However, despite the limitations, many Jewishstudents studied there.No longer a center of Hebrew literature, Vilna becameactive in Yiddish culture. A networlc of ethnic schools,various gymnasias and a beit midrash for teachers in Yiddish,were established. A science institute opened which concen-trated on research on the Yiddish language and other subjectsrelating to the Jews, such as history and statistics. "TheInstitute for Jewish Sciences," known as YIVO, becameknown throughout the Diaspora. Before the Holocaust, it wasmoved to New York City.On the Street of the Jews, a struggle ensued between theZionists and the Bund. In communal affairs, the Zionistsruled; the Bund controlled the occupational associations.In the final years prior to World War II, anti-Semitismoverran all of Poland and Vilna.When World War II broke out, Soviet Russia capturedlarge sections of Poland. Russia tumed over Vilna to Lithua-nia in October 1939. Many refugees ffom distressed areas inPoland found refuge in Vilna. In June 1940, Lithuania wasannexed by the USSR. Community leaders and writers of allparties were banished to Russia.Natives: Abraham-Zvi bar Shmuel-Isser Hacohen, Aaronof ViIkomir (R. Aareleh), Avraham bar Eliahu, Eliahu barEzriel, Moshe-Shimon Antokolsky, Eífaim bar Yakov358UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESHacohen, Yakov Ashkenazi, Yitzhak Belzar, Zelig-ReuvenBengis, Bezalel bar Yisrael-Moshe Hacohen, Yisrael Ginz-burg, Nahum Greenhoiz, Eliezer-Eliahu Daiches, BezalelDaiches, Saul-Haim Horwitz, Avraham-Zvi Halprin, Eliahu-Gerson Halprin, Yakov Zack, Yisrael Zakheim, MosheHalevy Zakesh, Haim bar Shlomo-Zalman, Hillel-DavidHacohen Trivesh, Yehuda bar Eliezer (Yesud), Yehoshua barYosef, Haim-Uri Cohen, Yehoshua-Heshel Halevy Levine,Yehoshua Lang, Eliezer Landau, Yechezkel Halevy Landau,Yitzhak-EliahuLandau, Yekutiel-ZalmanLandau, Alexander-Moshe Lapidot, Noah Mindes, Hillel Miliakovsky, MenahemEliezer bar Levy, Moshe bar Hillel ("R. Moshe HaDar-shan"), Moshe-Revakes ("Be’er HaGoIa"), Yosef Skovitz,Mordechai-Eliezer Kovner, Zvi-Hirsh Kaidanover [author;died 1712], Mordechai Klatchko (Meltzer), Abraham Kretch-mer, Shabbetai bar Meir Hacohen (Shach), Shlomo barYisrael-Moshe Hacohen, Arye-Leib Shapira, Yitzhak-Eliezer-Lifman Sharshavsky, Avraham-David Shterson, AlexanderEzra [actorj, Avraham Eisenberg [sculptorj, YeshayahuEisenshtat ("Yudin") [Bund leader], BenZion Alfas [author],Leib (Leon) Antokolosky [artist and educatorj, Mordechai(Mark) Antokolsky [1843-1902; sculptorj, Yehuda Biheck[scholarj, Jacob Billikopf [1883-1951; U.S. public figurej,Yehuda-Leib Ben-Yakov (Dudovitz) [doctor and writerj,Yakov Ben-Yakov [bibliographerj, Louie Bender ("LouieMiller") [jOumalist], Shlomo Bastomsky [writer and educa-torj, Zeev (Vladimir) Baskin [music criticj, Avraham-AaronBrode [writerj, Avraham Broides [poetj, Yitzhak Broides[communal leaderj, Reuven-Asher Broides [writerj, Yosef-Louie Braun [rabbi and professor of philosophy], Y ehoshua-Zev Bertonov [actorj, Aaron-Michel Brachiahu (Borochov)[teacher and writerj, Bemard Baronson [art criticj, Sinayev-Leopold Bemstein [artistj, BenZion-Yehuda Berkovitz("Bantsld Sakars") [authorj, Alexander Berkman [anarchistj,Leopold Godovsky [pianist and conductorj, Shmuel Gozhen-THE COMMUNITIES359sky (Lanu) [Bund activist], Yisrael Isser Goldblum (Yafaz)[bibliographer], Ezra Golden [writer], Aaron Gordon [physi-cian], Yehuda-Leib Gordon (Yelez) [poet], Yekutiel Gordon[physician], Michel Gordon [poet and writer], Aaron Gord-land [writer], Eliahu (Ilia) Ginzburg [sculptor], Gabriel-Yakov Ginzburg [financier and philanthropist], YakovGalprin (Heilprin) [attomey], Haim Grada [poet], Avner andAvraham Grilicas [engravers and artists], Zvi (Henry)Gershoni [rabbi and writer], Wolf DoremsMdn [musician],Yisrael Dushman [poet and educator], Shmuel Daichas[scholar], Isaac-Meir Dick [father of secular Yiddish litera-ture], Shmuel Dilcstein [member of Congress, U.S.], Eliezer-Lifman Horwitz [literary scholar], Genya Horwitz [revolu-tionary], Yitzhak Horwitz [writer], Pinhas-Eliahu Horwitz[maskil and mystic], Shlomo-Zalman Horwitz [writer],Marcus Human [member of Canadian Parliament], Haim-Yakov Helfand (A. Litvak) [a founder of the Bund], Dvorah-Esther Helfer (Gelfer) [charity worker], Michael Halprin[pioneer in Eretz Yisrael], Yosef Harari (Berger) [physician,educator and Bible scholar], Michael Haskel [businessman],Yosef Wolf [cardiologist], Yitzhak Wittenberg [partisanj,Yosef Vinogradov (Weinstein) [singer], Rachmiel-AaronVeinstein [early Bund member], Taibe Vinshesky [partisan],Avraham Virshubsky [physician and writer], Max Veskind[stage director], Zvi Verblovsky fjurist], Batya Vemik[writer], Peretz Vamik fwriter], Hillel-Leon Zolotkof[editor], Aaron Zondlevitz [revolutionary], Rozalia (Sarah)Sudfeld [mother of Max Nordau 1849-1923], Moshe Zilber-stein [singer], Shlomo-Zalman Zellrind [poet and educator],Amold Zellrinson [physician and mathematician], Yitzhak-Edward Zelkinson j translator of Shakespeare into Hebrew],Daniel Hebolson [orientalist], Yitzhak-Bar Hones [lexicogra-pher], Yascha Heifetz [violinist], Max Heifetz [biologist],Moshe-Leib Heshen (Danzig) [poet and satirist], Haim Tabris[merchant and writerj, Kalman Toiber [rabbi and educator],360LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESYosef-Eliahu Trivash [writer and educator], Yeshayahu-Yonah Tshama [pedagogue and writer], Leon Yegikes-Gre-zovsky ("Tishko") [revolutionary], Vladimir Yuchelson[revolutionary and ethnologist], Aaron Yonatanson [educatorand poet], Zvi Yonatanzon [writer and philanthropist],Binyamin-Zev Yakovson [attomey and delegate to the Duma],Shlomo Yaffe [Bilu leader], Haim (Eyafim) Yeshuran [laborleader], Yehuda-Leib Cohen [folldorist], Avraham-DovLevinsohn (Adam Hacohen) [poet and grammarian], Micah-Yosef Levinsohn ("Michel") [poet], (E)Manuel Levy [judge],Yisrael Levinthal [rabbi and Zionist leader], Liova Levinson-Eisenstat [revolutionary], Yakov Leiboshitz [physician],Yot-Lipman Liflrin [mathematician and physicist], LeonLaskov [pharmacologist], Liza Magon [partisan], DavidMaggid [historian], Hilíel-Noah Maggid [biographer andgenealogist], Avraham Moravsky (A. Menker) [actor], MosheMaizilesh [author], Yosef (Osif) Minor [revolutionary],Shlomo-Zellrind Minor [rabbi and writer], Hanan-YakovMiniks [writer and teacher], David-Moshe Mitzkon Ipoet],David Mekler [editor], Haim-Zev Margaliot [rabbi andwriter], Haim-Leib Markon [scholar], Mordechai Nemzer[rabbi], Yonah-Bemard Natansohn [physicist], MordechaiNatansohn fauthor], Toiba Segal [midwife], Lazar Segal[artist], Eliahu-Louie Solomon [rabbi], Yosef Sorkin [writer],Shaul Sapir [joumalist], Ezriel Ben Moshe-Meshil [grammari-an], Avraham Efron [writer], Eliahu Eíron [teacher], Yehu-da-Leib Polikansky findustrialist], Gershon Ploderemcher[pedagogue], Eliahu Pinchas [scholar], Yosef Pessels [Vilnamaskil], Shmuel Peslrin [labor leader], Yehoshua Friedman[writer and educator], Yosef Peres/Press [musician], ElikumTzonzer [ethnic poet], Yisrael-Shlomo Chieflrin [educator],Sarah Kadesh [midwife and author], Avraham-Uri Kovnerfliterary critic], Michael Kovner fpartísanj, Shaul (Savli)Kovner [medical historian], Hertz Koversky [physician andpublic figure], Zemach Kopelsohn [revolutíonaryj, AvrahamTHE COMMUNITIES361Kupemik [businessman and philanthropist], Yehuda (Julian)Klatzko [writer], Zvi-Hirsh Klatzko [community leader inVilna], Yehuda-Leib Kantor [editor and journalist], AlterKatzisna [poet and dramatist], Uria Katzenelbogen [writer],Avraham Katzenellenbogen [writer], Haim-Leib Katzenellen-bogen [educator], Zvi-Hirsh Katzenellenbogen [leader ofVilna community], David Radner [translator], MichaelRubinstein [physiologist], Yeshayahu Rozovsky [communalleader], Yehuda-Leib Rozenthal [philanthropist], MosheRozenson [philanthropist and author], Yosef Romshinsky[musician], Avraham-Yakov Rongi [gynecologist], MosheRickherson [grammarian], Zvi Rickherson [author], ShmuelResser [author], Moshe Refess, Zemach Sheved [physicianand communal leader], Yehoshua Steinberg Iresearcher],Maximilian Steinberg [composer and conductor], MatityahuShterson [leader of the maskilim of LithuaniaJ, ShmuelShterson [librarian], Moshe Shalit [writer and public fígure],Shmuel Hakton [author], Shmuel-William Shapira [physi-cian], Eliahu-Yisrael Shershavsky [writer].Additional reference:Lerski, George J. and Lerski, Halina T., Jewish-PolishCoexistence, 1772-1939, N.Y.: Greenland Press, 1986.Good bibliography on Vilna references.Cohen, Israel, History of the Jews in Vilna, vol. XXIII,Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of American,1943. (English)VILON (VELIUONA) - Kovno District C2Vilon is near Vilki (15 miles) and Yurburg (18), on theNieman River, stretching from the river valley to the sur-rounding hills.Before World War I, 100 Jewish families lived there. InApril 1915, an expulsion order was issued requiring the Jewsto leave within 2 hours. The Russian commander warned in362LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEShis order that any Jew found after the expulsion would behung. During that period the entire town was destroyed.After the War, some of the Jews retumed to Vilon. In1921, the Jewish population was 258. Before the Holocaust,it was approximately 400.The Jews worked in small-scale trade and crafts. Somemade a living operating rafts for transportation on theNieman River. Almost every family had a vegetable garden.At the end of the nineteenth century, a yeshiva wasfounded by R. Yakov-Yosef. Many hours were devoted to thestudy of Torah. During Independent Lithuania, there was aYiddish school. The anti-Zionist atmosphere of this schoolcaused trouble for the local Zionist movement. There were 2houses of prayer in Vilon.From the rabbinate: R. Yakov; R. Moshe-Bezalel Luria[served later in the rabbinate in Shaki, Sieni and Suwalk); R.Yakov-Yosef; R. Marvis; R. Shmuel-Menahem Halevy Katz;the last rabbi R. Zvi-Leib Persky*.Native: R. Yonaton Abelinan, rabbi in Bialystok andauthor of the book "Zichoron Yonatan."VIRBALN (VIRBALIS) - Vilkovishk District B3Virbaln was associated with the 2 nearby towns of Kibartand Eidkunin (Evdtkuhen). It was 3 miles ífom Kibart, whichin tum was across ífom the German (East Pmssian) town ofEidkunin (Evdtkuhen). The train station of Virbaln was 3miles from the German border along the Berlin-Leningradline.The Jewish communities of those 3 towns were in dailycontact and traded together. But each one had its owncharacteristics, spirit and atmosphere. The Jews of Eidkunimwere quite assimilated and distanced from Torah and Jewishculture. The Jews of Kibart and especially of Virbaln werecommitted to Torah and Jewish values.THE COMMUNITIES363Virbaln was known for its scholars and maskilim. It wasamong the first places in Lithuania to have Zionist activities.As early as the nineteenth century, many Jewish families usedHebrew for their spoken language (called "Hebrew Virbaln"in Hamelitz, 1884).In 1897, 1219 Jews lived in the town, 37% of thegeneral population. Prior to World War I, the town enjoyeda sound economy. Most Jews made their living through tradewith Germany and various border services. During the War,there was a large fire in the town, and the Jews left. Afterthe War, they retumed and rebuilt the town. The mayor atthat time was Zvi Friedlander. When Lithuania was separatedffom Russia, Virbaln became a border station of a smallcountry. Its location was no longer advantageous and itseconomy declined. In 1921, the Jewish community had 1223people (about 30% of the overall population), but in 1939,only 150 Jewish families (about 600 people) remained.The main trade that Virbaln had with Germany was inthe export of farm products and the import of industrialproducts (fabrics, machines, chemicals).Many of the Jews there worked in agriculture, especiallyin field crops, but there were also some greengrocers andfruit growers. The latter were tenant ífuit gardeners. Thewife would mn a store or an inn. There were some Jews whoowned large parcels of land. They included the Friedlander,Veldislabovsky, Skotzky, Hilenberg, Greengardand Brozdov-sky families. During the growing season, they employedthousands of farm workers. Yakov Filipovsky set up amodem nursery. Koschovsky and Becker owned large tobaccoplantations. Eliahu Koschovsky brought chicory to Lithuaniaand established a plantation and a factory for drying it. Withthe exception of 2 factories, all of the local industry was inthe hands of Jews.At the center of Jewish economic life was the JewishPeoples Bank with 342 members.364LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESJewish farms also served as training grounds for Hecha-lutz (Pioneers) members who would be going to EretzYisrael. Rosenberg and other Jewish farm owners took inpioneers to work and learn about agriculture.Due to its proximity to Prussia and the Westem influenceon education, this Jewish community was among the mostprogressive in Lithuania. It was receptive to the concept of anational rebirth and Zionism. (The Hovevei Zion writerBen-Avigdor wrote in "Hatzfira" in 1917 about the pioneersin Virbaln. The subject was mentioned in prakim idishegashikate" of S. Leon).Before World War I, there was a cheder metukan of R.Avraham-Eliahu Sandler, in which they studied "Hebrew - inHebrew." Also teaching in the town was S. L. Gordon. Hehad a great influence on the younger generation. There wasa modem cheder directed by Hannah and Reuven Kaplan, acheder operated by R. Pinhas Pintzik and a Talmud Torah forpoor children. In the schools they had a generation ofHebrew speakers, and Hebrew and the retum to Eretz Yisraelwas the vision of many. During Independent Lithuania, aHebrew high school was established which served as a modelfor similar educational institutions in other cities in Lithuania.Its fotmder and administrator was Dr. Yakov Rabinsohn.There was also a Tarbut School in the town and a Hebrewkindergarten.Almost every child knew Hebrew, and many used it ineveryday life. In spite of a law prohibiting Jews from makingsigns, there were signs written in Hebrew in Virbaln right upto the time of its destruction. The extent to which the Jewsbelieved in speaking Hebrew was evidenced by a townmeeting of the Jews of Virbaln shortly after World War I,where it was decided to change from Yiddish to Hebrew foreveryday life. Within a short time, eveiyone was making aneffort to carry out the decision. In the Hilenberg, Greengard,THE COMMUNITIES365Sudarsky, Kagensky families and in others, Hebrew was thespoken language.The town had youth groups, sports groups, branches ofall the Zionist parties, a library, a drama club, differentcharitable institutions (Bikur Holim, an interest-firee loan fundfounded with money from Abba Vistintzky, a women’sassociation and others), and a Ben-Zakkai association forlessons in Torah for high school students.From the rabbinate: R. Yehuda Bloomgard; R. David-Tabli Ratzenelbogen [who later served as rabbi in Suwalk andin Petersburg]; R. Ephraim-Dov Lapp; and the last rabbi R.Yitzhak-Isaac Hirshovitz’.Natives: Shlomo (Solomon) Bloomgarden [the poet"Yehoash"; 1870-1927]; Morris (Moshe) Rosenfeld [poet];Moshe Evenstein [writer]; Zvi-Hirsh Filipovsky; A. Freiman[the Zionist public-figure and philanthropist].Among its first Zionists: Caleb Bloomgard [1808-1897];Baruch ben Shmuel Vishinsky [died 1899]; Feival Greengard[died in Tel Aviv in 1951]; Mordechai and Sarah Hilenberg[their house was the committee house for Zionists; theirdaughters went to Eretz Yisrael in 1920]; Mordechai Hilen-berg, Ridelitzky and Pragmot [among the founders of thelocal Hebrew high school j.VISHAY (VEISIEJAI) - Sieni District C3Vishay is near Kopcheva (6 miles), Laipoon (6), Serhai(12), Lazdai (12) and Sieni (12). It is 18 miles from therailroad. On 3 sides is a wide lake, which divides the townin two, joined by a wooden bridge. The part across the lakewas called "under the bridge."Jews began to settle there in the eighteenth century.Before World War I, about 400 Jewish families lived there.During Independent Lithuania (1923), the number did notexceed 200 families. Just before the Holocaust, the Jewishpopulation was 100 families.366LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThree large fires occurred, in 1872, 1924 and 1929, inwhich large parts of the town were destroyed. These causeda decline in the Jewish community through emigration.Before World War I, 50% of the Jews engaged inagriculture and fishing. There were also large propertyowners. During Independent Lithuania, most left agricultureand went into commerce or crafts. Almost every Jewish homehad a small farm - a vegetable garden, fruit trees, a cow, andchicken coops. Prior to the Holocaust, some factoriesbelonged to Jews, including 2 sawmills, an electric powerstation, a flour mill and a beer and soda water factory.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 116 members in 1929. Itserved both the Jewish and non-Jewish communities.In 1891, a general school was established under thesupervision of R. Natan-Kelman. Before World War I, therewas a cheder metuchan founded by David Boyarsky. Amongits teachers was the writer A.A. Kuback, who described lifein the town in his story "On the Night of Hamdcah," whichappeared in Hamelitz, 1900. During Independent Lithuania,there was a Tarbut school with 60 students and a Hebrew andYiddish library. Most young people belonged to Zionistorganizations, including Zionist Youth, Pioneer, Maccabi andGordonia.From the rabbinate: R. Eliahu Margaliot [his son Yitzhakserved as rabbi in Drosknik and afterwards in New York]; R.Natan-Neta Kalonimus Kabak; R. Nachman Koliaditzky [laterrabbi in Sieni and Alyta]; R. Avraham Resnik [a delegate toa meeting of congregations in 1920]; R. Yosef Goldin; andits last rabbi, R. Yehezchiel Goldshlak.Natives: Mordechai Semolnik; Binyamin Diskin [philan-thropist and public figure] and Shlomo Hirshel [long-standingteacher in Vishay].THE COMMUNITIES367VISHINTA (VIESINTAI) - Ponevezh District E2Vishinta, on Lake Vishinta, is near Kupishok (12 miles),Subotsh (9), Trashkun (12), and Ponevezh (22), and 6 milesfirom the train station at Serdeg.There was one street in the town - Market Street, wherethe Jews had stores. In 1897, the town had 80 Jewishfamilies. In 1914, there were about 60 families.During World War I, the Jews of the town íled to thenearby forests. Many set out on foot for Aniksht and Vilnaand from there to the interior of Russia. When the Warended, some returned but found their homes had beenplundered and bumed. In 1921, about 50 Jewish families(approximately 250 people) were living there. In 1923, theJewish population was 188; it decreased before the Holocaust.There were about 20 Jewish shops and 4 tavems, whosemain business derived from farmers who came on marketday, every Tuesday. On other days, they worked in theirstores. Some had some small-scale trade in the neighboringtowns, or they did various kinds of crafts. Among theartisans of the town were 4 blacksmiths, 3 butchers, 2shoemakers, 3 tailors, 10 seamstresses, 2 carpenters, 2glaziers, a baking board cleaner, and 5 coachmen. Next toeach house there was a section of land for growing vegetablesand firuit trees. Every family had a cow or a goat, andchickens. Four merchants had large businesses in produce,flax and geese.Three flour mills were owned by Jews: one was operatedby a water-turbine, another by a windmill and the third by asteam mill. An oven for bricks and pottery was also ownedby Jews.The beit midrash was the center of religious and sociallife of the town. There was also a yeshiva, founded in5671/1911 by R. Yosef Chaim Tropp, and 3 cheders. Therewere the cheders of R. Kopel Isaacson, R. Yehiel-Michel andR. Leib. Many of the pupils frorn the cheders cOntinued their368LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEStheir studies at the yeshivas in Ponevezh, Telz and others.The beit midrash had a Shas Society.During Independent Lithuania, some of the young peoplestudied in the Hebrew schools in Ponevezh and nearby towns.Most of the youth joined Maccabi, Young Zionists andSocialist Democrats.From the rabbinate: R. Yechiel-Michel bar Hillel Yaffeffirom 5632/1872; died 5659/1899]; R. Benzion Feldman|previously served as rabbi in Plungian; iater went to Old-Zhager]; R. Yosef-Chaim bar Shlomo Tropp; R. AbrahamEpstein [5634-5699/1874-1939]; and the last rabbi of thetown, R. Yerachmiel Yashpe*.Natives: Yehoshua Levinsohn [author of the book "TheLand of Russia and Its Multitude"].VISHTINITZ (VISTYTIS) - Vilkovishk District B3Vishtinitz is near Kibart (12 miles), Kalvaria (22) andVirbaln (13), on the border of East Prussia. The nearest railstation was in Virbaln.The town is situated between forested hills and a largelake. During Czarist rule, revolutionary literature wassmuggled by way of the lake to Russia.At the beginning of the century, the town was almostentirely destroyed by fire. Kaiser Wilhelm II visited on YomKippur, and when he saw the destruction, he gave thecommunity a donation of 10,000 Marks. When this wasannounced publicly, Czar Nicholas II gave 5000 Rubles.Before World War I, the town was rebuilt.In 1915, the town was destroyed by the retreatingRussians. The only building that remained intact was thesynagogue. The Jews fled. Some retumed after the War.In 1921, there were only 40 Jewish families (about 250people). They worked in small-scale trade, crafts, fishing andprocessing bristles and poultry. During Independent Lithua-nia, the economy declined and the town deteriorated. ManyTHE COMMUNITIES369of the residents emigrated to America. At the outbreak of theHolocaust, about 30 Jewish families lived there.From the rabbinate: R. Yakov bar Haim Hacohen [authorof "Zerah Yakov," a commentary on the Psalms, 1788]; R.Moshe bar Aaron [died in 5635/1875]; R. Haim Vaserzog;R. Haim bar Shimshon [died in 5635/1875]; R. Elhanan-ZviLapp fdied in 5645/1885]; R. Yitzhak-Elhanan Niderland[died in 5646/1886]; R. Avraham-Yehuda bar Haim-EliahuPoltinov*; and the last rabbi, R. Zalman Sodelnitzky*.Natives: Efraim-Dov Lapp; Dr. Mendel Sodersky[physician and public figure].VISOKI-RUDA (VISARIO RUDA) C3Visoki-Ruda is near Kovno (18 miles), Kazlova-Ruda (5)and Shaki (20). It had a Jewish population before the Holo-caust.VISOKIDBOR (AUKSTADVARIS) - Troki District D3Visokidbor is near Hanoshishuk (8 miles), Semilishok(9), Stoklishok (9), Butrimantz (13), Troki (18) and Vilna(36) miles. The nearest train station was at Rodzhishok (13).Visokidbor is located near the Polish border. It sits on alofty hill, with a large lake and the Verkna River at the footof the hill. Its name means "tall estate." Only a dirt road con-nected it to the surrounding area.The town is first noted in a document dated 1534,according to which it was transferred by the King of PolandSigmund-August as an estate for the Squire Lidsky, who hadescaped from Russia. Five hundred people were living on theestate. There was a large winery and a water mill on theestate.It is difficult to establish the time of the beginning of theJewish settlement. However, the elders of the communityagreed that it began several hundred years ago and that at onetime there was a large Jewish settlement in the town. Then,370LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESfor unknown reasons the number of Jews declined in thebeginning of the nineteenth century to a few dozen families.There was an ancient cemetery in the town and in it wereremnants of tombstones from 5520\1760. This cemetery alsoserved many nearby settlements. It was the opinion of theelders of the town that the cemetery was as old as the one inVilna.During the time that the town belonged to the Squire, theJews would lease the rights to make and sell beverages. Theyalso leased from him the Inn ("Kratshma"). Before WorldWar I, there were 70 Jewish families living there. During theWar, most of them fled to Vilna; 4 families remained in thetown. When the Germans entered the town, the Jews re-turned. During the occupation by the Germans, many died ofstarvation and disease. At the urging of the local rabbi, anassistance committee was set up to help save the Jews firomstarvation. After the retreat of the Germans in 1918, the townresidents were bothered by gangs of robbers. The Jewishyouth organized a self-defense group. Polish and Lithuanianyouth also joined the group and together they formed a civilmilitia. In 1919-1920, fights broke out between the Red,Polish and Lithuanian armies. The town changed hands manytimes, and the Jews suffered greatly. In 1920, alter Lithuani-an rule was established, the borderline between Lithuania andPoland ran very near the town.Visokidbor was damaged twice by large fires, in 1905and in 1935. Afiter the second fire, it was rebuilt and was thenicest-looking town in the area.During Independent Lithuania, there were 65 Jewishfamilies (272 people) and a similar number of Christians.According to one count the social structure of the Jewishcommunity during that period was made up of: 17 shopkeep-ers, 17 artisans (5 tailors, 3 blacksmiths, 2 shoemakers, astitcher, a hat maker, a glazier, a fisherman, a roof-tiler, 2clock makers), 4 butchers, 3 peddlers, 2 gardeners, 7THE COMMUNITIES371seamstresses, a stocldng lcnitter, a painter, a bath attendant,a medical orderly, 3 beadles, 2 teachers, and 5 others.The most activity in the town occurred on market day(every Wednesday) and during 6 annual fairs. On those daysfarmers and merchants flowed into the town from thesurrounding area. The competition was fierce and theeamings were small. In Independent Lithuania, trade declinedbecause the town was cut off firom Vilna, which had been itsmain market, and the villages were given over to Poland.Moreover, anti-Semitism and the competition from theLithuanian cooperatives seriously hurt the economics of theJewish settlement, especially the shopkeepers (their numberdropped from 30 before World War I to 17 in IndependentLithuania).Another source of livelihood for the Jews came ffomtheir vegetable gardens. Twenty-two families had vegetablegardens beside their homes from 3/4 of a dunam to 10dunams in size (about 1/5 acre to 2 1/2 acres). However,with few exceptions, the gardens were owned by non-Jews.The Jews would sow potatoes on the farmers’ land. Thefarmer would receive payment in money and goods. Fromartisans they received payment in services. No Jews of thetown were in agriculture. One Jew who had leased and hadbeen on land for 39 years was thrown off when the landreform was put into effect.Of 65 families, 35 each owned a cow and 5 others ownedgoats. There were also 5 horses.Before World War I, there were 37 Jewish families inthe neighboring villages of Hota (1 mile away), Tomsha (2),Alshishok (3), Pasameva (4). Some of these Jews ran inns,leased land and made beverages. Most of them, however,were artisans, such as tailors, shoemakers and blacksmiths.After World War I, there remained only 5 Jewish families (amiller, a land tenant, a farm worker, a sawmill tenant, andone who was supported by relatives abroad). The Jews from372LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESthese settlements would celebrate the Holidays with the Jewsin Visokidbor. The disintegration of the Jewish communitiescame before World War I, following their expulsion firom thevillages by the Czarist regime. Most of the families emigratedto America, and others settled in Visokidbor or in othertowns.During the period between 1920 and 1925, 31 Jewsemigrated from Visokidbor (8 wentto the U.S., 7 to Mexico,2 to Argentina, 1 to Canada, and 13 to Palestine). Of the 65Jewish families in the town, 55 were supported by relativesabroad. Seven of these lived on their relatives’ support alone.The support per family was from 5-25 dollars a month. Dueto the low cost of necessities and low standard of living,families could subsist on the small amount of support.Without this support, the Jews could not have existed at allin the town.Of the Jewish families in Visokidbor, 37 (57%) lived intheir own homes (all but 3 of which were on plots owned byfarmers); 23 (36%) - in rented homes, and 5 (7%) lived inapartments. Most buildings were made of wood; only 4 of thehouses were made of block. The majority of apartments had2 rooms. Only 10 families had larger apartments. There wasone doctor (a Lithuanian) who served the entire area. Therewas also a medical assistant who was Jewish. By and large,the people of the town preferred the medical assistant. Thetown had a beit midrash, a shtibl for visitors, a mikveh anda bathhouse which was heated once every 3-4 weeks.The more prosperous Jews of the town would bring inmelameds (tutors) and later teachers from Vilna. Some of thechildren went to study in Vilna or in other cities.The cultural life of the town was influenced by Vilna,where the Jews had trade and economic ties, at the end of thelast century. At the time of the first Zionist Congress, alocal Zionist organization was founded and had 40 subscrip-tions to the Jewish Settlement Fund. Also in IndependentTHE COMMUNITIES373Lithuania the cultural life of the town was developed. Thetown formed a cultural center for all the surrounding com-munities.Three teachers taught the young children and one taughtGemara. With the help of the Joint (JDC) in 1919, a schoolwas founded in which the general studies were in Yiddish.However, this school was only in operation for a short time.In 1930, a Yavneh School was founded at the initiative of R.Reuven Beraz. The school had 30 pupils. At the localLithuanian pre-high school, there were 7 Jewish girls en-rolled. Just before the Holocaust, there were 14 boys study-ing outside the town (3 in yeshivas, 2 in high schools, 9 inuniversity). They had a library in the town with a readingroom, a drama club, and a small string orchestra. They hada chapter of Maccabi which had 30 members, branches ofGordonia, Pioneers, and other Zionist organizations activelyworking for the Jewish National Fund.From the rabbinate: R. Reuven Beraz [the first rabbi ofthe town, 1901-1932; went to live in Eretz Yisrael. Prior toR. Beraz, the town only had a shochet]; R. MordechaiRabinovitz [1932-1935; came from Telz to replace R. Beraz];and the last rabbi, R. Aaron Elinovitz'.Some of the public figures from the last generation therewere Yakov Sapirstein, Yitzhak Sheltoper, Asher Miller,Chaim Stareltzsky‘; Reuven Radin* and Shneur Radin.VIZHAITZ A2Vizhaitz is a village near the town of Gorzhd. Some Jewslived in the village before World War II. The forest aroundit is also called Vizhaitz.VIZHON (VYZUONIS) - Utian District E2Vizhon is near Utian (7 miles), Ushpole (6), Sviadoshitz(10), Dabeik (6) and Aniksht (14). It is located on the banks374LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESof the Vizhonka River. Nearby is a large lake, surrounded byforests.Vizhon had one of the first Jewish communities inLithuania. It was mentioned in documents of the Council ofLands under the listing "Vizhon and the District." At thattime, the district included Bratslav, Droy, Kraslovka, Utian,Aniksht and Polotsk. According to an historical document,Jewish craftsmen received a work permit in the year 1646.The "Kuna” chain, which had been used to hold criminals,remained in the synagogue, which had been built at the endof the eighteenth century. As evidenced by the large, oldsynagogue, Vizhon once had a large Jewish community.Elders would relate that they remembered ancient woodentombstones, hundreds of years old, which had been destroyedor otherwise disappeared.One story was told that about 200 years ago an apostateentered the synagogue and hid a cross under one of thebenches. He then went about saying that the Jews werebeating the crucified figure on the cross with willow branch-es. Judges came and surrounded the synagogue and saw theJews beating with willows. They searched and found thecross under one of the benches. They arrested all of the menand took them on foot to Vilna. They were sentenced to behanged. One of the condemned sacrificed himself and took allthe blame onto himself. He was hung and the others wentfree. From then on in Vizhon, 4 times a year there was aremembrance for the soul of "Menahem of the Holies" whogave his life.Before World War I, Vizhon had about 130 Jewishfamilies. In 1921, there were 357 Jews (about 70 families).At the outbreak of World War II, approximately 50 Jewishfamilies (367 people) lived there.The Jews worked in small-scale trade of grain, poultry,and flax, and in crafts. The town winery belonged to Chaim-THE COMMUNITIES375Hanoch Polovin. In 1937, there were 11 Jewish craftsmen, 5needleworkers, 5 butchers and 1 shoemaker.Twice a year there were fairs. The Peoples Bank alsoserved the towns in the surrounding area (Sviadoshitz,Dabeik, and Ushpole). It had 114 members.From the rabbinate: R. Asher bar Shaul Ginzburg [Headof the Beit Din for the Vizhon region. He served as rabbiffom 5461/1701. His father, R. Shaul, served as the firstHead of the Beit Din in the "country of Russia." His brother,R. Yitzhak-Isaac bar Shaul, replaced his father. The son ofR. Asher was R. Arye-Leib, author of "Shagat Arye" andone of the Torah greats of the eighteenth century. FollowingR. Asher were his nephews, the sons of R. Yitzhak-Isaac, R.Meir and R. David. When the district was dissolved, R.David was appointed rabbi of Sventzian, and afterward inVidz]; R. Eliezer bar Shabbatai Dun Yechaya; R. Chaim barEliezer Dun Yechaye; R. Meir-Eliahu Veiner; R. AaronSmidat [died at age 106 in Tel Aviv in 5725/1965); R.Abraham Katz; and the last rabbi, R. Zalman Meltzer'.Natives: Zelda Kniznik [poetess]; Joseph Mezel [writerand teacher].VORNA (VARNIAI) - Telz District B2Voma is near Telz (18 miles), Tver (6), Zharan (9),Luknik, Loykuva, and Shukian, on the Voma River and alake.In 1897, 1226 Jews lived there. During World War I, theJews left. In 1921, there were 1070 Jews. Prior to theHolocaust, there were 700.Some were in trade and crafts and a significant numberwere engaged in agriculture. The one flour mill and thefactory for precipitates belonged to Jews. The Jewish PeoplesBank had 92 members in 1929.During Independent Lithuania, Voma was a remote,out-of-the-way town. It lacked streets and convenient trans-376LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESportation to the central cities in the country. The Jews livedunder great stress. The priests and the ”Verslaninkis”instigated a pogrom on November 11, 1936, which was amarket day. One Jew was killed and 33 were injured.The economic condition and anti-Jewish incitementscaused many of the youth to emigrate to South America,Australia, and especially to South Africa.Voma was a town of scholars and maskilim. Manystudied at the Telz Yeshiva. From 5635 to 5670 (1875-1910),there was a yeshiva in the town with 60 young students. Theyeshiva was founded by R. Nahum-Lipa Chanania, whotaught there all his life. After his death in 5670 (1910), theyeshiva was closed. Rabbi Chanania also founded the TalmudTorah and the Bikur Holim society.There was an old synagogue, a kloiz and 2 shtiblach.During Independent Lithuania, there was a Tarbut School, alibrary and a drama club.From the rabbinate: R. Shmuel-Shmelka Itingeh [descen-dant of R. Moshe of Telz]; R. Binyamin Merber fdied in5662/1902); R. Yosef Leib Bloch [1860-1939, rabbi ofVomafrom 1903, and later in Shadova]; R. Sholom-YitzhakLevitan [5668-5669/1908-1909; later served as rabbi inMaisiad and in Oslo, Norway]; R. Yisrael-Yehoshua Segal[related by marriage to R. Zvi-Yakov Oppenheim; died in5679/1910]; R. Yehoshua-Heshil Melamed; R. YakovAbramovitz; R. Levy Shpitz*; and the last rabbi, R. AbbaShur’ [from 5698/1938].Natives: Professor Bamch Shatz; Yehuda-Leib Lazerov;and Y.D. Kamzon [poet].YAROVNITZ - Vilkomir District D2Yakovnitz was a village less than a mile firom Bogoslavi-shok. It had a Jewish population before World War I.THE COMMUNITIES377YANCHIKI - Alyta District C3Yanchiki is near Simna. At one time, Yitzhak Frank andhis son Yehuda owned a large farm in the Simna area.YANISHKEL (JONISKELIS) - Birzh District D1Yanishkel is near Posvol (6 miles). At the time of theHolocaust, there were about 70 Jewish families (162 individu-als) living there, including the Furman and Shapira families.YANISHOK (JONISKIS) - Shavli District C1Yanishok is near Zhager (17 miles), Linkova (19),Poshvitin (4), Zhaimel (18) and Kruk (11), along the Kovno-Riga rail line, 6 miles ffom the Latvian border. It was acenter for trade and social life for the surrounding area.In 1847, there were 1042 people in the Jewish communi-ty. In 1897, there were 2277, out of a general population of4474. The Jews were exiled in 1915. Only part retumed afterthe War. In 1921, 940 Jews lived there, with the numberdeclining. Just before the Holocaust, there were 600.The Jews engaged mainly in trade of grains, flax, horses,large work animals, eggs and geese. The local fairs werewell-known, with merchants coming from all over Lithuania.Before World War I, they came from central Russia as well,with Yanishok serving as one of the important centers in flaxtrade. The economic condition of the Jews was relativelygood.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 228 members in 1929.There were three houses of worship, with the Shas,Mishnayot, and Tiferet Bachurim societies.In 1908, an association for Haskalah and Zionist leamingwas founded by Haim-Shlomo Rabinovitz, Haim-DavidKlatzkin and Reuven Tabachnik. In 1920, the communitycommittee established a Hebrew school, a kindergarten anda library. The women’s agency founded Linat Hazedek. The378LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEStown had a lecture hall and dramatics club. The youthorganizations included Young Zionists, Hashomer Hatzair,Betar, Maccabi and Pioneers.From the rabbinate: R. Sholom son of Asher Israelsohn[author of "Divrei Sholom"]; R. Yehiel-Michal [author of"Sfat Hayam"]; R. David-Tabli Katzenelbogen; R. Eliahu-Issachar Yaffe; and the last rabbi, R. Nahum-Bezalel Dzimit-rovsky'.Natives: Sholom Israelsohn; the brothers Avraham andReuven Tropp; Ably Yaffe; Eliahu Lazerovitz; ShmuelEidelzalc; Yehoshua Klauvan [a rabbi in Burlington in U.S.];Haim-Yisrael Zacks [Zionist public figure]; Yitzhak-ZevRabinovitz; Hillel Pinsky [public figure who lived in Odessabefore World War I; was a ífiend of Mendely and BialifcJ;and Benzion Hersh [joumalist].YANITZ - Alyta District C3Yanitz was a village near Serhai (5 miles), which had aJewish population before World War I.YANOVA (JONAVA) - Kovno District D2Yanova, 18 miles northeast of Kovno, is located on bothbanks of the Vilia (Nerys) River, along the Libau-Rumanianrail line. A narrow-gauge train connected it to Vilkomir. Theroad connecting Warsaw and Petersburg passed the town. Thearea was surrounded by thick forests.A small Jewish settlement existed about 100 years ago inthe village of Skarull (Slcarouli), which is on the left bank ofthe Vilia River. Remnants of the Jewish cemetery stood at theedge of this village. At the end of the eighteenth century, theJewish community began to be concentrated on the right bankof the river on land owned by noblemen named Kosakovsky.Princess Maria Kosakovsky founded the town and invitedJews to settle there. Jewish settlement began in 1775.THE COMMUNITIES379In 1847, the Jewish community numbered 813. In 1897,the Jewish population was 3975, 80% of the general popula-tion.A large fire damaged the town in the early 1890’s. In1905, almost the entire town bumed down; 75% of the build-ings were destroyed, but soon after were rebuilt in brick andstucco.ln 1915 during World War I, the Jews were exiled by theCzar, mainly into Russia. Some concentrated in Vilna andretumed at the time of the German conquest.At the end of the War, in 1918, Jews began to retum tothe town ffom Russia. The town rabbi, R. Haim-YitzhakShilman, retumed, along with public fígures Abba Pagirsky,Haim Levine, Shmaryahu Stem, Yakov Gloz, and A.Abramson. They began to reorganize the Jewish community.The Talmud Torah was reestablished, with veteran Hebrewteacher Saul Keidansky as principal. A small yeshiva wasfounded. An interest-free loan charity for craftsmen and shopowners was established and later became part of a largeJewish bank. Institutions, including Bikur Holim and LinatHazedek, were reorganized.Jews formed a majority on the City Council. HaimLevine served as Mayor. In 1921, the Jewish population was1800, and in 1932, it was 2710, 65% of the general popula-tion. Prior to the Holocaust, approximately 3000 Jews, 60%of the population, lived there.Natural conditions and its geographical location favoredthe economy of the town. The forests provided lumber forexport and raw materials for building and industry (fumiture,matches, etc.). Trade in lumber supported hundreds of jobsfor workers employed in cutting down trees and transportingthem on the Vilia. The latter were called "water people." Thesights of bonfires on the transport rafts at night and the voicesof singing that broke the stillness of night were a regular partof the town environment.380LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESThe town was a center for all the little villages in thevicinity. There was a market day twice a week. Jews engagedin marketing agricultural products (grains, large animals,chickens, fruit, etc.), both within the country and as exports.Many families in the villages eamed their livelihood in smallshops and crafts. In 1939, 140 members registered in theassociation of craftsmen. This membership included 25shoemakers and seamstresses, 20 blacksmiths, 26 carpenters,10 bakers, 8 painters, 9 scribes, 3 tinsmiths, 3 watchmakers,and others, such as iron-workers, plasterers and butchers.Dozens of families worked in the transport of freight andpassenger traffic to Kovno, Vilkomir and other places. Theywere wagon-owners. In the 1910’s, the horse and wagon wasreplaced by machines and autos. Many sold their horses andbecame drivers or automobile owners.The fumiture industry played an important role in theeconomy of the town, employing 600 woricers. Severalhundred Jewish workers were employed in factories produc-ing parquet, matches (owned by the Burstein family), andsugar, in sawmills and in 4 flour mills.The Jewish Peoples Bank had a membership of 560 inthe year 1929 and was administered by A. Abramson andShmaryahu Stem, chairman of the bank council.Unlike most towns of Lithuania, Yanova was healthyeconomically. The Jewish community consisted primarily ofworking people - men with muscles, working hard during theweek and religious in their observance of the Sabbath. Whenthe need arose, they could react using their strength againstwild hooligans and in pogroms against the Jews.At the end of the nineteenth century, emigration to theU.S. and South Africa began. The number of emigrants wentaltemately up and down. The ones who left maintainedconnections with the town. They gave support to needyrelations and helped with public projects.THE COMMUNITIES381The Jewish community had religious and secular groups,scholars and Maskilim, Hasidim and working people. Therewere 7 houses of prayer: the Great Synagogue, the Great BeitMidrash, the New Beit Midrash, the kloiz of the Peddlers,the kloiz of the Stonecutters, a shtibl of the Chabad Hasidimand the Beit Midrash of Tiferet Bachurim. In addition, therewere small prayer houses of various craftsmen. They servedas the center of tradition, spiritual life and sometimes also asa center of public action in times of emergency. At the prayerhouses, there were many active societies of Six Orders ofMishna (Shas), Mishnayot, Chayei Adam, and MegidaiTehilim. The Yeshiva was founded by Yehuda Gorfunkel andadministered by him from 1902-1914, and afterward byMendel Dietch. There were also numerous cheders.During Independent Lithuania, there were 3 ethnicschools - a Tarbut School (administered by Shaul Keidansky),a Yavneh School, and a Yiddish school. About 100 studentsstudied in these schools. Many went to the high schools andto the Lithuanian university in Kovno. There were threelibraries: the Zionist, the Yavneh, and the Yiddish libraries.In the town was a hospital, an interest-ffee loan fund, adowry fund for poor brides, a hostel for wayfarers, maot-chitim and a bath-house. At the beginning of the presentcentury, youth began to seek a secular education. During thepolitical agitation in Russia at the beginning of the century,there were activists in Yanova from all the revolutionaryparties. The bourse on Bolvoar Street was the scene of manystormy arguments.Between the World Wars, public life crystallized aroundthe two camps of the Zionist and the Yiddishists. Both didconstructive work. They established schools, night classes,libraries, sports clubs and institutions for occupationaltraining. The majority of the youth belonged to Zionist youthmovements. Motivated by the Zionist youth, a Pioneer382LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESHouse" was established. It served the pioneer group and wasa center for Zionism and a place to leam different vocations.Of the first Pioneer group ffom Lithuania to make aliyahat the end of World War I, one half came from Yanova.They joined various settlements in Palestine.From the rabbinate: R. Yehoshua-Heshil Eliashzon; R.Moshe-Arye Halevy [died ca. 5652/1892. Before that heserved as rabbi in Eishishuk and in Ponevezh]; R. HaimSegal [a cantor ffom 5653/1893]; R. Haim-Yitzhak Shilmanfauthor of "Zera-Yitzhak"]; and the last rabbi, R. Nahum-Baruch Ginzburg*.Scholars ífom Yanova: R. Abraham Shlomovitz; Profes-sor Yisrael Davidsohn [scholar in Hebrew poetry]; MorrisVintshavsky [poet]; Dr. Avraham Meyerson [psychiatrist];Natan Yonsavitz [Secretary of the Kovno Community and anhistorian, folldorist and founder of the Jewish museum inLithuania]; Dov Zisla (Gazit); Rachel Zisla-Lavi [a leader ofHechalutz and one of the founders of Ein-Harod]; DavidCohen and Yishayahu Kolviansky [artists]; Noah Stem [poet].Public figures: Moshe Ivansky [a leader of the SocialistZionists in LithuaniaJ; Shmaryahu Stem [built a building forthe Tarbut School); David Burstein [Chairman of KerenHayesod and a member of the Zionist Center in Lithuania];Zvi Levine [active in Betar]; and Menahem Mins/Miness[active in Socialist Zionists].YELOK (YLAKIAI) - Mazhik Distríct A1Yelok is near Shkud (12 miles), Zhidik (7), Siad (15)and Barshtitz (9). The train station was at Lusha (13 miles).In 1897, 775 Jews lived there, 57% of the generalpopulation. Before World War I, there were about 800 peopleor 250 families. At the outbreak of the Holocaust, approxi-rtiately 100 Jewish families lived there.During World War I, nearly the entire town bumeddown and was rebuilt.THE COMMUNITIES383There were 250 in the Jewish community (70 families)during Independent Lithuania. They were in trade, small-scaleagriculture and peddling. Two large flour mills were ownedby Jews. Market day was Wednesday, and 5 fairs were heldthere each year.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 80 members.Jews of Yelok emigrated to the U.S., South Affica andPalestine.There was one beit midrash, a Yavneh School with 40children, a Talmud Torah, a Iibrary and an interest-ffee loancharity.From the rabbinate: R. Yehoshua Leibovitz; R. Shmuel-Yakov Rabinovitz; R. Meir-Mordechai Zilberman [rabbi andteacherf; R. Nahman Hirshovitz (related by marriage to R.Shmuel-Yakov]; and the last rabbi, R. Meir Pekalnishky*.YEZNA (JIEZNAS) - Alyta District D3Yezna is near Pren (7 miles), Stoklishok (5), Butrimantz(10) and Alyta (16) on the Alyta-Kushidar Road (laid in1910). The nearest railway station was in Kushidat, 24 milesaway.Jews began settling there in the middle of the nineteenthcentury. In 1866, there were 176 Jews in the Yezna area, outof a general population of 553. In 1915, they were exiled toRussia. A part retumed after the War. In 1921, the Jewishpopulation was 319. Before the Holocaust, there were about300 Jews, half of the general population.The Jews engaged in commerce, cralts (7 families) andagriculture (5 families). The local cheese factory was ownedby a Jew. Market day was Wednesday, and 4-5 times a yearthere were fairs.There was a Jewish Peoples Bank.Yezna had a beit midrash. The children studied at acheder and afterward in a cheder-metukan. During Indepen-dent Lithuania, there was a Tarbut School with 50 pupils and384LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESa library housing hundreds of books in Hebrew and Yiddish.The youth belonged in part to Young Zionists or to theRevisionists. There were also the Shas and Mishnayotsocieties.From the rabbinate: R. Moshe-Sholom Stol [in 5663/1903; later in Boisk]; R. Yitzhak Bilitzky; R. Rahaner; andthe last rabbi, Moshe Litvak‘.Natives: t>r. Yitzhak Peretz [educator and linguist]; DovAlony (Dubin) [educatorj.Additional reference:Yizkor Book of Yezna, edited by Dov Aloney, 17 Shur St.,Tel-Aviv, published by Yezna Association, 1967.YOSVINE (JOSVAINIAI) Keidan District C2Yosvine is near Reidan (6 miles), Ayragola (15),Chaikishok (11), Bobt (13) and Datnuva (12), in a valleysurrounded on three sides by the Shoshava River.The market place was in the center of town. Near it were4 roads called Keidan, Ayragola, Kovno and Shoshava.In 1897, 534 Jews lived there. Most were expelledduring World War I. During their absence, a large part of thetown bumed down. After the War, some retumed. Before theHolocaust, the Jewish population was 270, about 70 families.They lived around the market place and the nearby streets.The Jews engaged in trade and crafits and also gardening- during the summer shopkeepers and craftsmen becamegardeners. Quantities of cucumbers and tomatoes weredistributed throughout the country. There were 13 shopkeep-ers, 17 craftsmen, 8 butchers, 12 peddlers, 3 tavem owners,5 grain merchants, 2 flour mill owners, a sawmill owner, awood merchant, a wool processing factory-owner, 2 shochets,2 teachers, a rabbi and a pharmacy owner.The beit midrash was in the center of town, housed in abrick building. The spiritual and social life of Yosvine wasTHE COMMUNITIES385concentrated in the beit midrash, with weddings, brit milahsand funerals conducted there. There were Shas, Mishnayot,Chayei Adam, and Tiferet Bachurim societies.The local cheder, conducted in the beit midrash building,was headed by Shmuel-Aaron Repayko*, who taught bothreligious and secular subjects. A significant part of thestudent body continued at the yeshivas of Keidan and Slobod-ka. Repayko, a member of Hovevei Zion, instilled Zionismin his students, and many of them later made aliyah to EretzYisrael within the Mizrahi ffamework.After World War I, an ethnic Hebrew School wasestablished at the initiative of Shmuel Repayko. The chederalso continued to operate.There were Bikur Holim and Linat Hazedek charities,and a low-interest loan fund. The local library had 500books. In 1924, a Jewish Peoples Bank was set up.From the rabbinate: R. Shmuel Levinson |author of"Zichron Shmuel”]; R. Naftali Amsterdam; R. Avraham[author of "Beit Avraham"]; and the last rabbi, R. Avraham-Dov Terna* ]a Slobodka educator].From its public fígures: R. Avraham-Abba [maggid inthe Shas and Mishnayot societies]; Shmuel-Noah Stark[cantor and shochet; maggid in the Chayei Adam society |;Aaron-Yakov Rabinovitz* [shochet and maggid].Natives: Yitzhak-Michel-Eliahu [aneditorof Halevanon];Yitzhak Aniksht [educator]; R. Zeev Repayko [the rabbi ofErzhvillci; related by marriage to R. Zligel from Kelme]; andDr. Zeev Yaslovitz [a doctor in Yelok].YURBURG (JURBARRAS) - Rasin District B2Yurburg is near the settlements of Shaudina (3 miles),Sudarg (5), Skirstmon (6), and Smoleninken in Prussia (6).In Pakalnishky (8) and Gauvary (14) there were Jewishsettlements before World War I, but they were liquidated386LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESduríng Independent Lithuania. Yurburg is located on thebanks of the Nieman River and surrounded by forests.In the town there were wide streets with sidewalks andtwo public gardens. One garden was called "Tel-Aviv."Mituva and Imastra, tríbutary streams of the Nieman, flowpast the town. The Nieman River was heavily traveledbetween Kovno and Germany. There were trade connectionswith East Prussia. Most cargo boats and ships on the Memel-Kovno line were owned by Jews. The brisk trade activityprovided a source of income.The Jewish community dates firom the seventeenthcentury, but actual data only exists ffom 1766. That year2833 Jews lived there, out of a general population of 7391people. The town is mentioned in the rabbinical responsa"Meharam M’Lublin" (R. Meyer of Lublin, seventeenthcentury) by the name Yurbrig. Yurburg became part ofLithuania with the Third Partition of Poland in 1795. In1847, the Jewish population was 2527.In 1906, a fire broke out and 120 homes were destroyed.Most Jews had to leave during World War I. In 1923,the Jewish community numbered 1887, out of a generalpopulation of 4409. The number rose to 3000, about 700families, but before the Holocaust, it had declined to 600families. They traded in lumber, chickens, fish, firuits andeggs. They were involved in crafts, shipping and fishing.Market days were Mondays and Thursdays. There were 24fairs held during the year. The Peoples Bank had 360members in 1929. There was the Mutual Bank for loans andcredit and the private bank of the Bronstein Family.Jews emigrated to South Africa, Australia and Americaand some to Palestine.The synagogue was built in the eighteenth century andhad a lovely ark, bimah and Elijah’s chair. There was a beitmidrash and 3 kloizes. The children studied in cheders andsome in the Russian public school. Abraham Mapu was aTHE COMMUNITIES387teacher in this school. During Independent Lithuania, therewere 2 cheders with 20 boys; 2 ethnic schools, in Hebrewand in Yiddish with 200 pupils; a Hebrew high school; 2 lib-raries; a drama club; and a school of agriculture. A localZionist party, youth groups and sports groups were alsoactive in the town.From the rabbinate: R. Isaak bar Eliezer; R. Arye-Yehu-da-Leib [at the time of the Vilna Gaon]; R. Moshe barShmuel Levinsohn [5621-5645/1861-1885]; R. Zeev-WolfSteinfeld [5639-5640/1879-1880]; R. Yechezkel Lifshitz[5649/1889]; R. Abraham Dimant; and R. Haim-ReubenRubinstein’ [author of "Divrei Reuven"].Natives: Shlomo bar Arye-Leib; William Zerach [sculp-tor]; Shlomo Feinberg [public figure and philanthropist]; andZvi Ram [teacher and intellectual; 1842-1886].Additional references:Picture of the Yurburg Synagogue in Wooden Synagogues byMaria and K. Piechotka, 1959.In Encyclopedia Judaica, vol. 11, p. 366.YUZHINT (JUZINTAI) - Rakishuk Distríct E1Yuzhint is a village near Kamai (8 miles), Rakishok (16)and Dusiat.Twelve Jewish families, 50 to 60 Jewish people, livedthere out of a general population of 60 to 70 families.In this village, the Christians were farmers and the Jewswere shop owners or craftsmen. On Sundays, crowds offarmers from the surrounding areas would come to church.Afterward, they would shop in the Jewish stores. There werealso two fairs during the year.There were many villages in the area for which Yuzhintserved as a center. In these villages were Jewish farmers whoalso engaged in trade. On holidays and festivals, they wouldcome to Yuzhint.388LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESA fanatic príest incited the Chrístian population againstthe Jews. One event involved a Jewish villager named EidelNikelisker (named for his village), whose daughter waskidnapped. When she was located, the beit-din ordered herretumed. On Sunday, the príest headed a massive pogrom innearby Dusiat. One Jew was murdered, and the property ofmany Jews was plundered.On one of the Jewish holidays when the Jews of thevillages were in Yuzhint, the Christians bumed down Jewishhomes. The victims were forced to leave and settle in thenearby towns.Yuzhint had neither a synagogue nor other Jewish institu-tions. Prayers were conducted at the home of Abraham-HirshLevitt. A butcher would come in firom Kamai to serve theJews of the villages. A melamed would come to teach theyoung children.The older children studied at Rakishok.The youth tended to be Zionists; they received pioneeringtraining and many went to Palestine. However, before WorldWar I, Jews emigrated to the United States and South Africa.Haim-Leib Brickman was a local farmer. His childrenand grandchildren live on kibbutzim in Israel.Additional reference:There is a chapter on Yuzint (Yuzhint)-Natzunishok in YizkorBook of Rakishok and Environs, 1952.ZAGRINI - Erzhereni-Zarasai District.Zagrini was an estate 5 miles firom Salok (F2|. SixJewish families lived there before World War I.ZARECHYE E3Zarechye was the suburb of Vilna where R. IsraelSalanter (Israel Lipkin) established a yeshiva in the 1840’s.THE COMMUNITJES389Additional reference:Jerusalem of Lithuania by Leyzer Ran, New York: VilnerParlag, 1974, p. 83.ZATZISIA C2Zatzisia is near Betigola, west of Krok (4 miles). Beforethe Holocaust, Berel Vinik had an estate there.ZHAGER (ZAGARE) - Shavli District C1Zhager is near Shavli (42 miles), Yanishok (16), Gruzhd(21), Akmian (21), Klikol (21) and Veger (22), and is on theLatvian border.At one time, there were Jewish settlements in the nearbytowns of Skaisgir (6 miles), Krop (12) and Shakina (15) andKalanel. The nearest train station was 11 miles away atBenen, in Courland.The Shventa River divides the city into Old Zhager andNew Zhager (Nei-Zagore). Each side had its own communi-ty-The Jewish community was one of the first in Lithuania,dating back to the sixteenth century. The Jews of this bordertown engaged in tax farming and traded in salt and metalbrought íirom other countries. They exported honey, wax andhides. Some were artisans. In 1766, 840 Jews lived there. In1790, the market square was a totally Jewish residentialsection of about 50 families. They maintained 30 shops andtavems in the town and environs. There was a synagogue anda beit midrash. Berel Isaacovitz was the rabbi. He wasresponsible for tenancy fees from the Jews which were set at900 gold coins per year.New Zhager belonged to the Narishkin family, whosemembers were influential in the court of the Czar in Peters-burg.In the early nineteenth century, the number of marketdays and fairs was increased upon request of the local Jews.390LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAccording to one record, merchandise equivalent to 4000rubles would be brought to Zhager on market day. Theturnover reached 900 rubles (a large sum). In 1814, the firstpharmacy was opened. The government established a civilcourthouse with an investigating judge. There was a new beitmidrash. The market area was paved in 1803. Jews set upfactories for candles, mead, wire and hides and for process-ing bristles. Trade in flax, grains, metal and material, winesand machines developed. Most exports went to Germany.Four thousand wagons of flax a year and 1000 cars ofgrain/produce were exported by local Jews by the end of thenineteenth century. Three hundred wagons of variousmerchandise were imported.In 1847, there was a Jewish population of 2266. In 1897,the Jewish population was 5443, including 1629 in Old-Zha-ger and 3814 in New-Zhager.Prior to World War I, Zhager grew and its economyexpanded due to the hard work and initiative of the Jews.The Jewish Rehillah was the first autonomous institutionin the area. The Jewish beit din (court) was the first lawcourt. Documents ífom the time of Catherine the Greatindicate that the Kehillah was active in many areas.The Jews were active in the revolutionary movement of1905 and in establishing the Republic of Zhagerite. Hundredsof Jews were injured by the Cossacks of General Orlov’sexpedition. The house of Leib Liyas was destroyed bycannons. A group fine was levied on the Jews in the amountof 4500 rubles. Zemach Essin, a tailor, was shot. Ritter, arevolutionary, was shot in Riga prison. Other local revolu-tionaries were sentenced to death or exiled to Siberia. A fewsucceeded in getting over the border. Among the refugeeswere Mrs. Goldberg, who later became an opera singer, andRifka Kreiger, who embroidered the flag of the Republic ofZhager. She married L. Kussman/Cossman, a writer andnative of Zhager. She died in 1919 in New York.THE COMMUNITIES391Zhager suffered ffom fires in 1881, 1909, and 1911.During World War I, the Jews left.After the War, some retumed, but it was not the same.The new borders cut oíf the town from neighboring commun-ities in Latvia. The new train station was 17 miles away. Itwas without a regular road linking it with other towns. Onrainy days it was totally cut off. The town became impover-ished. Many of the Jews emigrated to America, South Afficaand Palestine.In 1923, there were 1928 Jews, 40% of the generaloverall population. Before the Holocaust, there were 1000.They engaged in trade and crafts and in raising vegetables.There were 7 prayer houses, including 2 synagogues and2 beit midrashes. Each of the communities had its ownrabbis, shochets, and cantor, and even separate cemeteries.New-Zhager was more well-to-do, with nicer buildings, mostof which were of 2 stories. There was a Yavneh School with135 students, cheders, a kindergarten, a large library, andmany charitable institutions, including a home for the aged,Bikur Holim. There was a Jewish Peoples Bank.Zhager had a reputation as a city of Torah and wisdom.It was known for the "Chachamei Zhager" ("wise men ofZhager").From the rabbinate from New-Zhager were: R. Shimonbar Shaul Horvitz, R. Eliahu Schick [R. Elinkeh Lider); R.Uri-David Efrion; R. Haim-Zvi Broide; R. Yakov Yosef; R.Benzion Feldman; R. Yakov Katz from Klikol; R. HaimKorb; R. Yisrael Reif; R. Yehuda-Leib Reif; R. YitzhakReif.From Old-Zhager: R. Yekutiel-Zalman [died 5608/1848;a student of R. Haim of Vlozhin]; R. Kalonimus Goldstein*[judge of the beit din]; R. Duber Rabiner [published the book"Gedolat Mordechai" of his grandfather R. MordechaiRabiner]; R. Yitzhak-Isaac Rabinovitz; R. Haim Luriye [from392LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES1858]; R. Zemach Zakesh |formerly of Vendzhigola]; and R.Zvi Pashdamsky.Natíves: Shlomo Elishov; Isacchar-Bar Gebronsky;Hanoch-Zondel Luria; Arye-Leib Lipkin; Yisrael Lipkin(Salanter); Mordechai-Yitzhak-Isaac Rabinovitz; Bainosh-Zelkind Rabiner; Zemach Rabiner; Yisrael Reif; MiriamGabronsky [philanthropist]; Yakov Dinsohn [writer]; SidneyHillman [labor leader]; Kalonimus-Zeev Visotzky [philanthro-pist and public figure]; Shmuel Zanger [writer]; Haim Zack[scholar; leader of the maskilim]; Abraham-Simcha Zakeshfwriter]; Haim-Yosef Yaffe [Zionist spokesman]; Fabus-Aaron-Theodore Levanah [chemist]; Casper Levias [linguistand researcher]; Yehoshua Magach [writer]; Arye-LeonMandelstamm jwriter]; Benjamin Mandelstamm [writer];Yosef Mandelstamm [scholar and writer]; Max-EmmanuelMandelstamm [ophthalmologist and Zionist figure]; andRaphael-Neta Rabinovitz [Talmud scholar].Additíonal reference:"The Judeikins: A Lithuanian Jewish Family in Dispersion"by Len Yodaiken, Ribbutz Kfar Hanasi, 1987."The Family" by Josef Lavee/Leibowitch, 36 Beeri St.,Tel-Aviv, Israel, 64233, 1982 in English.Pinhas Shavli by Eliezer Yerushalmi, 1958.A.S. Sachs, Worlds That Passed, Philadelphia: The JewishPublication Society of America, 1928. The book hasnumerous stories about Zhager, the author’s hometown.Chapter 5 - "Local Pride" delightfiilly describes therivalry between Old and New Zhager witii the local prideof both communitíes and the disdain with which theyviewed each other. In Old Zhager they spoke of the NewZhager Sinners and in New Zhager tiiey referred to theOld Zhager Corpses.Lucy S. Dawidowicz, The Golden Tradition (London:Vallentine-Mitchell, 1967), Chapter 12 - "From Shtetí toTHE COMMUNJTIES393the Capital," by Lev Ossipovich Mandelstamm, who wasbom in New Zhager. He discusses his early life there.Also found in The Golden Tradinon by Lucy S. Dawidowiczand mentioning Zhager is Truth and Legend AboutIsrael Salanter," by Jacob Mark.ZHAIM (ZEIMIAI) - Keidan District D2Zhaim is near Yanova (9 miles), Shatt (7), Keidan (12),Vendzhigola (12) and Sheshik (9). It is 9 miles from thepresent town of Koplitza which once had a Jewish settlement.Before World War I, 60 Jewish families lived there.Before the Holocaust, 20 families remained. Most emigratedto South Africa or America.They had a beit midrash and a cheder with ten pupils.From the rabbinate: R. Haim bar Yakov Glatzer; R.Haim Klibnov (later a rabbi in Vendzhigola].ZHAIMEL (ZEIMIELIS) - Shavli District D1Zhaimel is near Vashki (12 miles), Poshvitin (12),Yanishok (18) and Zhager (27), and is cíose to the Latvianborder.The Jewish community was one of the first in Lithuania.The old cemetery had tombstones from several hundred yearsago. Before World War I, 150 Jewish families lived there.During Independent Lithuania, the Jewish communitydiminished. Prior to the Holocaust, there remained about 50Jewish families.After World War I, the town was cut off from the largevillage environs, as it was then included within the borders ofLatvia. Because of this and the anti-Jewish economic policy,many, especially the young, emigrated to the U.S., SouthAfrica and Eretz Yisrael.During 1927-1928, five Jewish butchers were accusedand tried for the murder of the veterinarian Pozhella. Thebutchers were sentenced to 5 years imprisonment, but the394LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIEShigh court commuted the sentence to 8 months. Jews at thattime saw the trial as a "Lithuanian Edition" of the BeilisTrial. Among the counsels for the defense were Dr. YakovRabinsohn and A. Gruzenberg.There was a beit midrash, a dilapidated old synagogue,a Tarbut School and a library. Organizations included achapter of Pioneers, an amateur band and a Maccabi soccerteam.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 101 members.From the rabbinate: R. Shlomo [ffom 5584/1824; diedin 5624/1864]; R. Binyamin bar Dubar Dimand ffrom5624/1864]; R. Shlomo-Elhanan Yaffe, [from5646/1886]; R.Avraham Yitzhak Kook [1889-1895; later Chief Rabbi ofPalestine and noted rabbinic thinker]; R. Yakov-Dov Rappa-port [from 5656/1896; related by marriage to Yosef-Zachar-iah Stern]; R. Haim-Zalman Kron*; R. Yisrael Kamitz*; R.Leib Seeger*; R. Arye-Leib Schneider*.Natives: Zvi-Yehuda son of A.Y. Kook; AbrahamShulhoifer.Additional reference:Biographies of Rav Kook (R. Avraham-Yitzhak Kook)discuss his six years as rabbi in Zhaimel ffom 1889 to1895. He was 24 years old when he became rabbi ofZhaimel. Two such biographies are: High Priest ofRebirth by Jacob Agus, New York: Bloch PublishingCo., 1972, and Shepherd of Jerusalem by Dov PeretzElkins.ZHARAN (ZARENAI) - Telz District B2Zharan was a small town near Voma (9 miles). Just priorto the Holocaust, there were a number of Jewish familiesliving there.THE COMMUNITIES395ZHEZMIR (ZIEZMARIAI) - Troki Distríct D3Zhezmir is near Kushidar (5 miles), Zhusli (7), Semili-shok (16) and Rumshishuk (10). A road connected it toKovno (27 miles). The nearest train station was at Kushidar.The Starela River divides the town. From the market-place square in the center of town, 4 streets branched out:Kovno, Vilna, Zhusli Streets, and Mill Street on the river-bank.In 1918, the town bumed down, including 3 prayerhouses. Another fire swept the town in 1923, destroying 20houses.In 1766, the Jewish population was 482. Before WorldWar I, the population was 700. During Independent Lithua-nia, about 300 families lived there. Before the Holocaust, thepopulation dropped to 200 families due to emigration to theU.S., Uruguay and Palestine.The Jews engaged in small-scale trade, agriculture, craftsand fishing. Merchants exported produce to Germany andtraded in furs and hides. Yitzhak Shugan owned a flour mill,and Starzh owned a factory for soda water.There was a Tarbut School. The principal was MosheShufer and the teachers included Z. Petrekansky, ShmuelSidrer, Chaviva Sidrer-Kaplan. There was also an orphanage,a library, a drama club, a beit midrash and a shtibl. A branchof the Jewish Peoples Bank, administered by Dr. S. Sapir,had 156 members.From the rabbinate: R. Yedidya Ginzburg [related bymarriage to R. Haim Shas]; R. Yehoshua-Heshil Eliashsohn;R. Mordechai Eliasberg [until 5623/1863 and later in Boisk];R. Yakov from Krozh [a student of R. Haim from Vlozhin;died 5637/1877]; his son, R. Yekutiel-Leib Elion [author ofcommentaries and revisions to the Mishnayot]; R. Moshe barYehoshua-Fibush Shapira [a rabbi in Zhezmir 5656-5690/1896-1930]; R. Yoel-Yitzhak Katzenelbogen fdied at the age396LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESof 83]; and the last rabbi R. Yisrael-Trachum Portman/Fort-man*.Natives: Ably bar Benzion; Kalman Beinoshavitz;Yitzhak Romesh [writer]; Zalman of Zhezmir [leader ofChabad movement].ZHIDIK (ZIDIKAI) - Mazailc District B1Zhidik is near Siad (12), Yelok (5), Pikeln (9) andMazhaik (15), and 4 miles from the Latvian border. Thenearest rail station was at Lusha (4).In 1897, 914 Jews lived there, 73% of the generalpopulation. During World War 1 (1915), the Jews wereexpelled. Most were sent to Bachmut in southem Russia.After the War (in 1921), there were 366 Jews. Before theHolocaust, the Jewish population was 150, about 30 families.The majority went to larger cities or emigrated.The Jews eamed their living through small-scale trade.Some were peddlers in the villages of Courland. A numberof families worked in agriculture. Many worked in the 6 localtanneries. A flour mill was owned by a Jew.The Jewish Peoples Bank had 87 members in 1929.There was a beit midrash and a synagogue, the "Kar."Children studied in cheders. During Independent Lithuania,there was a Tarbut School.From the rabbinate: R. Zvi-Hirsh; Dov bar Zvi Dimand[formerly of Tavrig; later went to Pilten]; R. Moshe-Shlomobar Yosef Levinberg [served as rabbi for 38 years; he died in5656/1896]; R. Haim bar Avraham Natansohn; R. Avraham-Zeev Heller* [later in Mariampole]; R. Yitzhak Begun* [laterin Radvilishuk]; and the last rabbi, R. Eliahu Lotzki*.Natives: Bamch Levinberg; David Levine ]a Haredicommunity figure in Kovno]; Gershon Gutman; Zvi Shlaz[writer].THE COMMUNITIES397Additional reference:Photo of old beit midrash of Zhidik in Encyclopedia Judaica,vol. 11, p. 373.ZHIDU DVARAS - Mazhaik DistríctThis was a settlement next to the town of Siad [Bl]. Itwas made up of 10 to 12 Jewish farmers and their families.The gentiles called it "Zhidu Dvaras."ZHUSLI (ZASLIAI) - Troki District D3Zhusli is near Rushidar (7 miles), Rumshishok (16),Zhezmir (7) and Veviya (15). Only dirt roads connectedthem. It is surrounded on 3 sides by lakes, Lake Statkonishki,the "Liman" and the third just called "The Lake." It was onthe rail line firom Kovno to Vilna, and about halfway betweenthe two.In 1847, the Jewish population was 836. In 1897, it was1325, out of a general population of 2000. Before theHolocaust, there were about 1200 Jews, constituting amajority of the population. The Lithuanians, Poles andRussians lived in a separate neighborhood.The town bumed down several times - the last timeduring World War I.The train station was 3 miles away. Near it was a largeneighborhood, which included many Jews whose occupationsrequired proximity to the railway, in particular merchants inwood, grains and poultry.Most Jews engaged in smalf-scale trade, peddling, andcrafits. There were tailors, shoemakers, carpenters, barbers,butchers, blacksmiths and clockmakers.Tuesday was market day. The local merchants would buyfiruits from the farmers in the summer and sell them to whole-salers in Kovno. They also exported berries, cherries andapples to Russia and Germany. Some local wood and grainmerchants also traded abroad. Many people had their own398LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESsmall farms beside their homes, with a vegetable garden, achicken coop and a cowshed. Most people raised goats. Itwas because of the goats that the people requested (and weregranted) that the train tracks be laid farther from town.The standard of living was very low, and when thepeople could no longer sustain themselves, many emigratedor were supported by their relatives who had emigrated.There were two large Jewish prayer houses, a TarbutSchool, 2 cheders, a library, a Jewish Peoples Bank with 148members, a volunteer fíre department (which acquired itsequipment through donations from former residents living inthe U.S.), an association of artisans, Maccabi and variousZionist organizations, including Socialist Zionists, Revision-ists, Mizrahi, and Nationalists. Youth trained and preparedfor aliyah at various farms. Many of these pioneers wereabsorbed in Palestine, especially on kibbutzim, includingGivat Brenner, Yagur, Dafna, Ein Harod, and Tel-Yosef.Some settled on moshavim or in the cities.From the rabbinate: R. Yitzhak bar Shlomo-Zalman[later served as rabbi and teacher in Vilna]; his son R. Davidftook R. Yitzhak’s place. He was the rabbi for 40 years untilhe died in 5591/1831]. The son of R. David, R. Menahem-Mendel [served as rabbi from 5594-5634/1834-1874]; R.Shaul bar Arye-Leib; R. Yitzhak-Meir Rabinovitz [later inSlobodka]; R. Yitzhak-Eliezer-Leifman Sharshavsky [5643-5648/1883-1888. Later in Nesvizh]; R. Avraham-Haim Shas[grandson of R. David]; and the last rabbi, R. MosheLevine’.Natives: Shmuel-Menahem Halevy Katz [maggid inCourland]; Shimshon Shas [maggid]; Prof. B.Z. Halper[linguist and orientalist]; and A. Klaus [joumalist].ZHVING (ZVINGIAI) - Tavrig District B2Zhving is a village near Payora (4 miles). It had a Jewishcommunity before World War I.THE COMMUNmES399ZIGALTZ/ZIGLATZZigaltz was a village 4 miles ítom Stoklishok [D3]. Ithad a Jewish population before World War I.ZUDGALAZudgala is a village 3 miles from Subotsh [D2]. SomeJews lived there before World War I.ZVIERINETZ E3Zvierinetz is a suburb of Vilna.Additional reference:Jerusalem of Lithuania by Leyzer Ran, New York: VilnerParlag, 1974 (p. 84) has some scenes from Zvierinetz.ZVILONZvilon was a village 2 miles from Sobotsh [D2]. It hadsome Jewish population before World War I.APPENDIX ILITHUANIAN TOWNSALTERNATE SPELLINGS ANDKEY TO MAP LOCATIONSYIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESAbelE1ObeliaiAbelyAkmianB1AkmeneOkmian, AkmaneAleksatC3AleksotasAleksatusAlexandrovolE1AleksandravekAlshishokD3AlsiskisAlsiadB1AlsedziaiAlsedziay, AlsedzaiAlytaD3AlytusOlita, Alitus, AlyteAmianD3AndriavaA2Andriejavas,AndriusAnilcshtE2AnyksciaiOnikshty, Onikszty,Anikst, AnikscaiAnishokD3OnuskisAntalieptE2AntaliepteAntokolE3AntakoliaLITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES402YIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESAnushishokE1OnislrisAnishuk, OnuskisAulavaD3AloveAlovaAvanastaF2AvantaE2AlunteAlunta, AlantaAyragulaC2AriogalaRagula, Ragola,ArogallenBaduta(El)BaisigolaC2BaisogolaBaisagole, BaisogalaBalbirishukC3BalberiskisBalberishlci,BalbieriskisBalshB2BarshtitzA1BarstyiciaiBarzhinskC2BatukB2BatakaiBatokBaulavahD3BazilianC1BazilionaiBasilanBetigolaC2BetygalaBirshtanD3BirstonasBirzhD1BirzaiBirzhi, Birzi, BirsenBlatoshuva(E2)BaltoshuveBlatshishokC3BaltchishokBobryC3BobtC2BabtaiBogoslavishokD2BagaslaviskisBagailaviskisBolnikE2BalninkaiBoydC3BudaBudovitzC3BukantzD2BukonysButrimantzD3ButrimonysButrymana,Butrimonis,Butrymantsy,ButrimantzySPELLINGS & MAP LOCATIONS403YIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESChaikishokC2CekiskeChekiskaChaviadanA2KvedarnaChweidannen,Kvedamai,Konstantinova, NewConstantineChekenovaC2ChislovkaD2DabeikE2DebeikiaiDobeik, DabaikDarbianA1DarbenaiDorbianen,Dorbyan, Dorbyany,Drobian, DorbenaiDarshunishokD3DarsuniskisDatnuvaC2DotnuvaDotnevaDaugD3DaugaiDoigDaugalE2DaugailiaiDauienD1DainjenaiDainienaiDekshnaC3Dekshna-SeloDgaitz(B2)DirvianishukC2DvarininlcaiDrosknikD3DruskienikiDrukenik,Drosgenik,DruskininkaiDubinikE2DubingiaiDukshtF2DukstasDuksztyDusiatE2DusetosDusetoi, Dusyat,DusiatyEishishokE3EisiskisEjszyszki,Aisheshuk, Eisiskes,EyshishkesErzhvilkyB2Erzvilkas404LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESYIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESEzhereni-F2ZarasaiNovo-AleksandrovkZarasaiEzherene, Ezererai,Zarasi, Novo-AlexandrovskGailishok(Bl)GauraB2GaureGauvaryB2GavariGedrovitzE2GiedraiciaiGedraicaiGelezD2GelaziaiGelvanD2GelvonaiGilvan, Gelvany,GilvanyGintalishokA1GinteliskeGirtigolaC2GirkalnisGirtagola, GirtakolGliyunC3GodnovaB1GudnoveGorzhdA2GargzdaiGuraden, Gorzhdy,GaradenGrinkishokC2GrinkiskisGrenkeshekGrishkabudC3GriskabudisGrivaklaD1GrivakleGrosvilldA1GruzdC1GruzdziaiGudlevaC3GarliavaGodlewoGudzhonD2GudziunaiHanushishokE3HotaD3IntorikE2InturkelnturikKalanelC1KalnalisKaltinanB2KaltinenaiKoltynianyKalvariaC3KalvarijaKalwarya, Calvaria,Kalvariya, TerabaSPELLINGS & MAP LOCATIONS405VIDDISHMAPCIJRRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESKalvaria-B1KalvaijaZhamotKamaiE2KamajaiKamaiai, Komaje,KamieKamirintzaC3KaneverazC2KamuvaraKatbishokD3KietaviskasKatkishokC3KazakishokE2KazakasKazlova-RudaC3Kazlu-RudaKozlova-RudaKeidanD2KedainiaiGedahnen, Keidany,Kaidan, Kedainai,KazranKelmeB2KelmeKelmy, Kelm,KelemKenaE3KenaKibartC3KybartaiKibarty, KibartaiKlikulB1KlykoliaiKlikol, KlikulaiKlovianC2KlovainiaiKlovainaiKoktishkaE2KuktiskesKoktishokKolatovaC3KulautovaKomianD1KoolA2KuliaiKuhlKopchevaC3KapciamiestisKupchevo,Kopciawa, KoptzeveKoplitzaD2Kavarskas, KavarskKovarskD2KovarskasKovilonD1KovnoC3KaunasKowno, KauenKrakinovaD2KrakenavaKrakinovo,KrekenavaRrapinaC1406LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESMiimsin»MAPCURRENT. mftusm :NAMEK£YNAMENAMESRretingaA2KretingaKrottinge,Kretingen, KretingeRrinchinD1KrincinasKrokC2KrakiaiKrakesKronD3KruonisKropC1KraopiaiKrozhB2KraziaiKroz, Kruz, KrazaiKrukC1KriukaiKrakiai, KrukiKrukiC2KriukaiKupishokE2KupiskisKupishki,SlavianiskyKuprelishkaD1KapreliskiaiKurkliE2KurkliaiKurkil, Kurkla,KurkaliaiKurshanB1KursenaiKurshanyKurtovianC1KurtuvenaiKortovianKushidarD3KaisiadorysKoschedaren,Koisedary,Kashedar,KaisiadorisKuzhiC2KuziaiKvatkiE1KvetkaiLabanorE2LabanorasLaipoonLaivishukC3D2LeipalingisLandvarovaE3LendvaravasLandwarow,LandvorovaLatzkovaB1LeckavaLiatzkava, Letzkau,LatzkeveLayazhovaB1LaizuvaLayzhovaLazdaiC3LazdijaiLozdzieje, Lozdzy,LozdzeeSPELLINGS & MAP LOCATIONS407YIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESLidovianC2LyduvenaiLiodvenovaLieplaukaB2LieplaukeLeplaukeLigumC1LygumaiLigem, Limgumai,LygumiaiLilionE2Lelyunai,LeliunaiLingmianF2LinkmenysLyngmianyLinkovaD1LinkuvaLinkmenys,Lyngmiany,Linkovo, LinkeveLiodvinovaC3LiudvinavasLiodvinoa,Ludvinova,LiodvinovaLishkovaD3LiskavaLiskiava, LiszkoweLiubovaC3LiubavasLubova, LiobovaLoikzimA1LaukzemeLoykuvaB2LaukuvaLuoke, Lavkov,LoykeveLuknikB2LuokeLukshi(C3)LuksiaiLybishokD2MaishigolaE3MaisiagalaMaisiadA1MosedisMeisadMakushki(Bl)MakoshkiMaliatE2MoletaiMaletai, Maljaty,Malat, MoliatMariampoleC3KapsukasMaijampol,Maijampol,Staripole,MariampolMashkutzC3MeskuiciaiMaurotshC3MauruciaiMaurucie408LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESYIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESMazhailcB1MazeikiaiMazeild, Mosheiki,MorviovaMedingianB1MedingenaiMemelA2KlaipedaKlaypedaMeretshD3MerkineMertsh, Meretz,Merlcinis, Meritz,Merecz, MerechMergilopkaC3MargalowMintza(F2)MiroslauC3MiroslavasSlabada, MaroslawMishti(B3)Mitzintzkes(Cl)MontvidovaC2MorlishokE2MusnikD3MusninkaiNadzingD3NedzingasNaishtut-D2NaumiestisNeustadt-PanevezysPonevezhNaishtut-B3Naumiestis-Kudaros-Naumiestis,ShakiSakiaiNayshtat,Naumestis, Vladisla,Vladislavov,Kodirka,NaujamiestisNaishtut-A2Naumiestis-Zemaiciu,TavrigTaurageNaumiestis,Neishtut-Sugint,Nowe Miastro,Neustadt-Taurage,Naumiestis,Kudirkos-NaumieA1NatenNotenaiSPELLINGS & MAP LOCA TIONS409YIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESNazionishokE2NatzunishokNei-D1Nemunalis-Nemunelio-RadvilishokRadviliskisRadviliskisNemokshtB2NemaksciaiNemokshty,Nemaksht, NimokstNemunaitzD3NemunaitisNevaranB1NevarenaiNiementshinE3NemecineNiemenczynNovigorodE3Novogrudok01kenikD3Valkininkai01kieniki, 01knik,Volkinik, Valkniki,Alkenik, 01keniOranD3VarenaOranyPabirzhaD1PabirzePadbradie,RastauskinePachinelC2PociuneliaiPadovisaC2Padusha(C3)PadusiePagirD2PagiriaiPagirysPakalnishkyB2Pakon(D3)PakuonisFakuonisPalanishokC1PalobyC3PaluobiaiPamushaC1PamosePanashishokE3PanosiskesPanimonPanemunePoniman, Poneman,Panemunia,PonemunPanimunikE2PanemunelisPonemunik,Ponemunek,PanemonokPansishok(C2)Zidkiemis410LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESYIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESParasiyeC3PorowsiePasaild(C3)PasameveD3PashalaD1Pasorishok(C3)PatilzheC3PatilciaiPayuraB2PajurisPerloiD3PerlojaPetrashon(C3)PikelnB1PikeliaiPilvanaD2PalevenePilvna, PlivanaPilvishokC3PilviskiaiPilwiszki, PilvishkyPiniavaD2PiniavaPlodnogy(D2)PlotelA1PlateliaiPlatelPlungianA2PlungePlungiany, PlongianPodberezheE3PodbrzeziePabereze, PaberezhaPodzhelveE2ZelvaZhelva, Zelova,Pozelva, PodzelvaPokroiC2PalcruojusPakruoyus,Pakrojus, PafcroisPolangenA2PalangaPalonga, Polangen,PalangePonevezhD2PanevezysPonewis, Ponievesz,Ponivezh,Panivezhis,Ponevetz, PonevezPonidelE1PandelisPonedel, PonedeliPoonD3PuniaPunePopil(Dl)PapilysPapilis, PapilePopilanB1PapilePapilaPoplavyE3SPELLINGS & MAP LOCATIONS411YIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESPoshelatD2PusalotasPoshvitinC1PasvitinysPashvitin, PasvitinisPosvieskeli(C3)PosvolD1PasvalysPasvul, Pasvalis,PoswolPratkonF2PrenD3PrienaiPrenyPumpianD2PumpenaiPampian, Pampenai,PompianRadaykE2RadeikiaiRadvilishokC2RadviliskisRadzivilishki,Rodvilishuk,RadvilishlciRaitarada(E2)Raken(F2)RakishokE1RokiskisRokischken,Rakishky, Rokishuk,Rokisken, RakishikRasinC2RaseiniaiRossieny, Rassein,Raseinai, Rasein,Rushigen, RossyenRaudonaC2RaudoneRaudondvarisC3RaudondvarisRoiter Hoif,RotenhofRemigolaD2RamigalaRamygola,RemegolaRenishkyA2ReniskesRibuk(C2)RimshaniF2RimseRimszanyRitovaA2RitavasRetovo, Rietevas,Riteva, Rituva,Rietawo412LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESYIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESRogovaD2RaguvaRogov, Ragova,RaguveleRomanova(D2)RozaliaC2RozalinasRudaminC3RudamineRudminaRumshishokD3RumsiskesSalantA1SalantaiSalanty, SalanySalatD1SalociaiSalokF2SalakasSololci, Saluk,SalokaiSapizishokC3ZapyskisSapyskis, Zapishki,SapiezyszkiSbovodaC3SemilishokD3SomiliskeSemaliskes,SemeliskesSerhaiC3SierijaiSereje, Seree, Serai,SerhaySesikD2SiesikaiSfema(C3)ShadovaC2SeduvaScheddau, Shadov,Shador, Sheduva,SzadowShadvigi(C3)ShakiC3SakiaiSchake, Szaki, Saki,Schaken, Shakyai,Shakyay, ShakiaiShakinaC1SakynaSokynaShantzyC3SanciaiShantzShataikyA2SateikiaiShattD2SetaSchaten, Shott, Shat,ShotShaudinaB2SiaudineSiaudina, SiaudiniaiSPELLINGS & MAP LOCATIONS413YIDDISHMAPCIJRRENTOTHERNAMEK£YNAMENAMES.ShavlanC2SiaulenaiShavlianShavliC2SiauliaiShavl, Schaulen,Shavel, Shauliai,Siavliai, SchawliShaymena(C3)Sheshvill(D2)SesuoliaiShidlovaC2SiluvaShikly(Cl)ShilD2SiliaShilelB2SilaleShilale, Schillehlen,Shilely, Silaliai,ShileliShimantzaE2ShimanziShimkaichB2SimkaiciaiShirvintE2SirvintosShervinty, SirvintShkudA1SkuodasSchoden, Shkudy,Shkod, SkuedasShlavantC3SlavantaiSzliwantyShnipishokE3SnipiskisShnifishukShukianB2SaukenaiSokynaShvekshnaA2SveksnaShvekshnyShventezheryC3SventozerisSwietocziorySiadB1SedaSyad, Siady, SiadaSimnaC3SimnasSimnoSintovalB3SintautaiSkaisgirC1SkaistgirysSkarolyD2SkoruliaiSkarooli, SkarullSkopishokE2SkapiskisSkudvillB2SkaudvileSkadvile, Shkudvil,Shkodvil, SkaudvilíeSkumianE2SkiemonysSkimian414UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESYIDP1S.HMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESSlobodkaC3VilijampoleViliampoliai,SlabodkeSmilgD2SmilgiaiSofianikiE3SolominkaC3SrednikC2SeredziusSrednik, Serednik,Srednius, SrednikiStatzionyC2StaciunaiStoklishokD3StakliskesShtoklishokSubotshD2SubaciusShubotch,Subachyus,SiubaiciaiSudargB2SudargasSugintE2SuginciaiSurvilishukC2SurviliskisSuvianishokE1SuvainiskisSventzionF2SvencionysSvenchen,SwencianySviadoshitzE2SvedasaiSviadoshz,SviodoshitzTalonD2TlonTarginE2TauragnaiTauvianD2TauyenaiTaujenai, TaunusTavrigB2TaurageTaurogen,Tauroggen, Tavrik,TaurigTelzB1TelsiaiTelschy, Telshe,Telsch, Telschen,Telshi, Telzh, Telsh,TelshaiTenanisA2TeneniaiTirkshlaB1TirksliaiSPELLINGS & MAP LOCATIONS415YIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESTomshaD3TraipD2TraupisTrapeTrashkunD2TroskunaiTroshkunTraskovaD2TruskavaTrishikB1TryskiaiTrishkiTrokiD3TrakaiTrakenTshabiskyD3CiobiskisTurmontF2TurmantasTuvinB2TubinaiTuvmiaiTverB2TveraiTzitovianC2TytuvenaiChitovian,Tzitavian, CitovianUlinovaC3UngarinaC3UngarynUpinaB2UpynasUshpoleE2UzpaliaiUshpol, UzpalisUtianE2UtenaUtiana, Utsiany,Utyana, UtyanUzhventB2UzventisUzvintzF2UzvinciyVabolnikD1VabalninkasVabalnikas,VobolnikVagofiaC2VaigovaB2VaiguvaVainutaA2VainutasVaiyverC3VeiveriaiVarzhanA2VeivirzenaiVashkiD1VaskaiVoshkiVeckshnaB1VieksniaiWekshni,Wekshniai,Viekshani, WeksneVefer(D2)416LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESVIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESVegerB1VegeriaiVendzhigolaD2VandziogalaVendziogalaVeviyaD3VievisVuya, VevisVidishokD2VidisldaiVidisldsVidnishokE2VidniskiaiVidniskisViduldaB2VidukleVadokliaiVilkiC2VilkijaWilkiVilkomirD2UkmergeVilkmerga,Wilkomir,Wilkomierz,Vilakomir,VilkomierzVilkovishkC3VilkaviskisVolkovyski,Vilkovishki,Vilkovishky,Wylkowyszki,VolkovishkyVilnaE3VilniusWilno, VilnoVilonC2VeliuonaVelionaiVirbalnB3VirbalisVerzhbolov,Virbalen, Wirballen,Wierzbol,VerzhboloroVishayC3VeisiejaiVeisy, Wiejsieje,Veisee, VeisijaiVishintaE2ViesintaiViesintosVishtinitzB3VistytisVishtinetzVisoki-RudaC3Visaldo-RudaWysoka RudaVisokidborD3AukstadvarisAukstdvaris,AukstodvaraiVizhaitzA2VisaitzVizhonE2VyzuonisVizhun, VyzuonosSPELUNGS & MAP LOCATIONS417VIDDISHMAPCURRENTOTHERNAMEKEYNAMENAMESVomaB2VamiaiVomy, Vome,VamaYakovnitzD2JacobnitzYanchikiC3YanishkelD1JoniskelisYonishkelis,YanishkelYanishokC1JoniskisYoniskis, Yanishki,Janischki, JanishokYanitzC3YanchikiYanovaD2JonavaYonava, JanovoYelokA1YlakiaiYlakaiYeznaD3JieznasJezna, Yezne, Jezne,JeznaiYosvineC2JosvainiaiYosvainYurburgB2JurbarfcasJurburg, YurbrigYuzhintE1JuzintaiYuzhintaiZagrini(F2)ZarechyeE3ZaretceZatzisiaC2ZhagerC1ZagareZhagory, Zhagarren,Zhagare, Zagere,ZagerZhaimD2ZeimiaiZheimZhaimelD1ZeimelisZeimalis, Zeimys,ZeimelZharanB2ZarenaiZhezmirD3ZiezmariaiZhizhmory,ZizmariaiZhidikB1ZidikaiZhidiky, Zidikai,ZidikZhidu Dvaras(Bl)418UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESYIDDISH MAP CURRENT OTHERNAME KEY NAME NAMESZhusli D3 ZasliaiZhvingB2Zigaltz/(D3)ZiglatzZudgala(D2)ZvierinetzE3Zvilon(D2)ZvingiaiZasle, Shosly,Zhusla, ZosliMaps bySectionLITHUANIANJEWISHCOMMUNITIESSCALEKiiometers0 10 20 30 40 50 600 6 12 18 24 30 36 roadrailroad river.bordersMaps are based on the map in Volume III, fehadut LitaBaltic SMAP I24°MAP II25°.4\rKRUKíZHAIMELSAL-ATVASfflO3SHVTTTNBERZHsuvianishoi:'• UMKOVAYANISHKELiPOSVOLPONTOELVABOLNIEPUMPfANHCNCtHADOVAPOSHELATSMILOSKOPISHOK |jOJPISHORj56°PAN[BAlSIGOLAljOtAlONOVAJRVILISHUXTNUVA#PONEVEZHsubcttshROGOVAREMIGOLATRASHKUNTAUVIANPAGIRYOSVINEtOBTREIDAN shaTTZHAIMVRND ZHIGOLAVHJCOMDlYANOVAf •DABESANICSHTlOJRBLIPODZHELGELVANBOGOSLAVISHOCSHIRVTNT55°MAP IIIMAP IVrUBMBSTIOOLAB 23° C 24°MAP VMAP VIMAP VIIAPPENDIX 2LITHUANIAN JEWS AND THEIR TOWNSAMERICAN FEDERATION OF LITHUANIAN JEWSOn November 17-18, 1928, some 800 participants met inconvention in New York City to found the Federation ofAmerican Jews of Lithuanian Descent. The conferenceassemblage included representatives of societies of LithuanianJews around the U.S.Chairman Henry Hurwitz described the objectives of theFederation as an effort of mutual cooperation. Lithuania, heexplained, had provided an overwhelming majority of thespiritual leaders - rabbis and teachers - of world Jewry. Thus,it was the obligation of Lithuanian Jewry in America to helptheir brethren with economic assistance in their time of needto recover from the destruction done to their homes, commu-nities and livelihoods in the World War. In his concludingremarks, Mr. Hurwitz stated, "We wish to help rehabilitatethe historic Lithuanian Jewry and to continue to receive itstreasures of Jewish spirit and intellect. Let us endeavor tomake the Federation an effective means for these ends."Also addressing the convention body was Envoy B.K.Balutis from the Independent Republic of Lithuania to theUnited States, who pointed out that it was the tenth year ofLithuanian independence. He cited the great hardships that430LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESthe Jews of Lithuania had been subjected to by the Russianswho had banished about half their numbers to internal Russiain World War I for "strategic reasons." When the Jews hadretumed, they had found everything in shambles - theirhomes bumed down and their property destroyed. They werein the deepest despair. Jewish charitable organizations camein to help, but this new Federation, suggested the Minister,could be more than just a charity. Moreover, it could helpJews and Lithuanians alike.The Principal of the Hebrew Gymnasium (school) inKovno, Dr. Zemach Feldstein, had come specially toAmerica to deliver the principal address at the opening of theconvention. He spoke about the devastation to the Jewishcommunities of Lithuania caused by World War I and the ur-gent need for loans to Jewish merchants (beyond what wasmade available through the JDC and ICA). They were facedwith the cooperative movement of the Lithuanian govem-ment, which had given privileged tax status to non-Jewishenterprises and thereby precluded Jews ffom reentering thefield of trade.The Principal told the assembled body that the Jews whowished to emigrate from Lithuania needed aid in purchasingtickets, settling in South Africa (U.S. immigration wasclosed) and providing temporary means for family membersleft behind.Dr. Feldstein described the hard work in Lithuania inregard to education. He said that 80% of the schools (Tarbutschools) provided schooling in Hebrew. Other schoolsincluded the religious Yavneh schools and the Yiddishschools. He expressed his hope for the continued "culture-contact" and mutual aid between Lithuanian Jewry in Lithua-nia and in America.The Lithuanian Federation became part of an overallFederation Movement organized on behalf of fellow country-LISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS431men. It followed the Federations of Galician, Polish, Ruma-nian, Russian, Hungarian, Ukrainian and Bessarabian Jews.After a few years of action, keeping contact withmembers and leaders of the Jewish community in Lithuania,activities of the Federation were suspended. In 1937 it wasreorganized.In 1943 as they waited for word of the fate of theirfamily and friends in Lithuania, members of the AmericanFederation for Lithuanian Jews collected money, as well asclothing and other supplies, to send abroad. They alsoinstituted a joumal entitled "Lithuanian Jew" to disseminatewhatever pertinent news the Federation could gather. Thefírst edition, dated June 1943, included a "List of LithuaniansIn Soviet Russia" (see below). Later issues lísted Holocaustsurvivors and recipients of aid.The Lithuanian Federation of the forties had branches inmany cities of the U.S., such as Washington DC, HartfordCT, Los Angeles, Pittsburgh and Cleveland. There was evena branch in Cuba. Landsmanshaften groups, each composedof former residents of individual towns, were organized andbecame chapters of the Federation.The April 1944 Federation publication issued its list ofCouncil of Landsmanshaften. Some additional landsman-shaften chapters, not on the list below, included the Shaduvasociety, Yurburger Emergency Society, Meretsch ReliefAssociation and Meretsch Young Ladies Association, Mari-ampolers-Chicago. Many of the American groups remainedactive as social service organizations for the immigrantgeneration and their families.South Aírica, with its large numbers of Lithuanian Jews,had numerous Iandsmanshaften societies.432LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESCOUNCIL OF LANDSMANSHAFTENCotmcil MeabersAniketor Banevolent Piscliei TshuvoAssocia'tionZndependen-t Rovner, Lodge no. 546Keidaner Benevolent AssociationKelner Benevolent AssociationKovner Alte FreintKovner Branch 83 W.C.Kovner Ladies Club, Branch 83 W.C.Kovner Unt. FereinKroker Benevolent AssociationKurshaner Y.M.B.A.Ladies Auxiliary of the BronxM. & L. Ladies AuxiliaryMalater Benevolent AssociationMalater Social Ladies OrganizationMarianpoler and Lidwinower Aid SocietyOshnaner Bros. Mutual Aid B.A.Ponevezer Ladies AuxiliaryPonevezer Prog. Y.M.B.A.Prener Bruder1icher VereinShavler LadiesShirwinter Soc.Skuder and Sturchiner Br. 458 W.C.Suwaiker-Wilkowisker Br. No. 300 W.C.Tavriger Benevolent Societywilkosirer Prog. Y.M. Br. 233 W.C.Max RosenbergNathan KarpLouis wilentzDr. Hynan EpsteinA. CorbinA. BerkowitzH. RosenblunMrs. A. NevianskyMrs. A. StirmanJ. NathanM. Yano£skyMrs. S. BlackerMrs. S. KesslerMrs. A. CheslerMrs. EpsteinMrs. R. HernanMrs. I. ReissMeyer FinkelsteinSan FinkelsteinD. LevinsonJulius StirnanSan RravitzL. ShapiroA. ReichlinMrs. LevinsonMrs. S. BernsteinMrs. BuchalterMax StalofskyMax GordonVictor NelkinJoseph SchulnanSanuel WynerMrs. N. FeldmanMrs. R. CohenMrs. MarksMrs. S. ShernanJulius RushnerM. GoldsteinH. LiebernanMrs. Bessie GlassJacob SoiferJ. HillnanElias StoneBernard HillnanMrs. S. KatzRabbi Dr. JacheilH. MeklerRev. Israel FeinMr. PearlHarry GerberWn. PeskoffN. LensJoseph SinonDavid KaplanB. W. BerkowitzPhilip ShuldinerHarry KaplanLouis SanpsonLISTS OF UTHUANIAN JEWS433LITHUANIAN JEWS IN SOVIET RUSSIA IN 1943*JULVTOS [ALYTA]Bernstein, S.Bubli, X zerChazanevitz, ZeevChazanovitz, ChajaGernstein, Babia (witb 2children)Klis, JehudKlis, JosefLiubeclci, MoscheMilner, EliezerMrs. RiklianekiRappaport, ElimelachSchultz, RivkaSereiski, Zalman (with sonGershon)Serejski, RachelShor, ChaimSpiro, JechielANYKSCXAX [ANXKSHT]Binder, XsraelGrinblei, JacobRarpuch, MeierShlosberg, BenjaminBXRZAX [BIRZH]Beker, ChaimGendler, LejaGendler, NatanLevin, HirshGARGZDAX [GORZHD]Barkan, GuteGELVONYS [GELVAN]Schochat, RachelShochat, Meier (With childrenJosif-Sara)Shochat, MiraJONAVA [YAMOVA]Dracki, Lea (with 2 children)Dragacki, BrainaDragacki, ShlimeaDragacki, ShmuelDragackij, S.Dragcki, DvoraEntes, B.Entes, ChajaEpstein, JakovJudelevitz, Liuba (with 2children)JOMISRIS [YANXSHOK]Bruchne, MinaJakushok, EtaLevin, MischaLevin, SaraJORBARKAS [YORBORG]Fainbergaite, MinaGeselovitz, EfraimGeseloWitz, CiliaKALVARXANatowitz, ShloraaKOVNOAdv. MichlesAlpern, BroniaAlpern, Dr. AvramÁlpern, LydiaAlperovich, RachelArasterdamski, RivaAmsterdamski, SaulArane, DoraAshkenazi, JosifBandlerBaronBassBecker, ZalmanBedakas, LeibaBencion, BrudniBerensteinBerenstein, MiriamBerenstein, Wolf (18 years old)Berger, Dr. BenjaminBerkauskas, MoneBerkauskiene, GeniaBerkmaniene, OnaBernstein, Boris (DirectorKomerzbank)Bernstein, FrauBiz, RafaelBorochow, RachelBrandvain, Dr. SomaBrandvain, RufaBraude, Rachil ChaukelevnaBraun, NoachBregstein, Liza (& son George,David)Bregstein, MosheBroide, Rachil (with 2 children)Broide, TamaraBruckus, AnnaBruckus, JoelisBrundi, C.G.Buchraan, MinaBuchraan, NaftaliBukancBukanciene, EsterBukanciene, ZavelBurstein, Xsak*This list was printed in "Lithuanian Jew," June 1943434LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBU2, OviBuz, KivkaCanciparChajet., Pescha (witfe 2 cliildren)Cba SbinonCharash, BelaCharash, HirshChasaanChazan, FaivuahChazanas, FaivtishesChernes, Azalija (with childrenJehuda & Ahras)Chernes, LeibChodeshCifnes, LibaDaniene or Dantiene SaraDaniene or Dantiene MoisheDaniene or Dantiene Abrahan (hus.of Sara)DavidovitzDavidovitz, SidoinaDektor, IdaDeutsch, BorisDeutsch, IraDilionDilion, Saul AnnaDionion, DinaDisler, AronDisler, DavidDisler, LeliaDisler, SaraDr. HetzelsacherDubrovichius, Isakas ChonaDubrovicius, RaisaDushnicki, JosephDushnickiene, RochaEidels, BenjasinEidels, PinchasEidels, SulasitErna, DobeFainbergas, JoselisFalkFaIkovskij, Hirsh LeibFalkowskiFeifelovitz, SepselevicaiteMirjaz (with child Liola)Feigelovitz, AronFeigelovitz, BatiaFeigelovitz, MoiseiFeinberg, B.S.Feldstein, RozaliaFidlerFinkelstein, Dvora IsakovnaFogelFreidbergFridlander, EtaFriedlander, EtaGavrenski, Adv. GirshGavronski, OtiaGenzu, FridaGer, MoscheGersteinas, RuvinasGerwish, LizaGiber, OvsejusGlaziene, PeschiaGlaziene, PishiaGlazsanGliksanas, MorisGold, B.Gold, Elena (with 2 children)Gold, Nachzan "Autotechnikas"Goldengeisos, BorisGoldengeisos, SoniaGoldfarb, Dina (with childCipera)Goldfarb, PhilipGoldknopas, ShisonasGor, ZalsanGordonaite, NechasaGornstein, Briche NachsanevnaGotlib, J.Gotlibiene, BeilaGreenberg, Leibe Mira (wife EllaDvora, daughters)Grinherg, EfraisGrinberg, RechanaGrosnan, E.A.GruzdGurevich, MirjanGurevitz, MaierGurvitz, ClaraHeselzonas, LeibaHirsch, KlisasHoroshIlgovski, G.Ivanski, BenjasinIzraelit, EsterIzraelit, Etel and daughtersIzraelit, SalasonJaphet, AleksandrJaphet, MishaJaphet, SoniaJaphet, Zina (with 2 children)JasvonskiJeverovichius, IzraelisJoffe, Nosch BerasJudelevitz, Adv. AbrasJudelevitz, DavidJudelevitz, JosifJudelevitz, Tauba AbelvnaKagan, AbelKagan, Abel "GelvakanwKantor, MoscheRantorovicius, NajerisKaplan, Rlva RosaiteKaplan, ViktorKapulski, Zelis (with sother)Katkes, NaftaliKenigsberg, BorisKenigsbergiene, Lota (with childJogana)Kliachka, G.J.Kliachko, WolfKlibanski, GershonKlibanski, MendelKlibanski, Shaina RachelKlisKoganKor, M. Kopeloviene, ChavaKotkes, Chana RozenbliumaiteKotkes, DoreKotkes, FaivushRurcsan, Dvora OlstainKurcsan, IIJa OlsteinLandsaniene, RozaLanglebenLangleben, AbrasLapin, FannyLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS435Lapin, LeibLapina, FeigaLeibovit.2 , ChvoleLescas, Meisanelis (Lager)Levin, DavidLevin, Dr. MaxiaLevin, ErikaLevin, FiaaLevin, J.Levin, Riva DeslerLevin, ShevaLevinson, BenjasiniLevinson, LeibLevinson, Rachil (with childJehoschua Mosche)Levinson, Sara (with childValerian)Levitan, Adv. SijaLevitan, GitaLevush, Shlioaa (with wife soniaand 2 children)Lichtenst.ein , E.Lifschitz, BeraLifshitz, Elijahu CviLinski, MaxLipec, SauuelLipec, SaraLosasas, BeneLurje, DavidLurje, MirjanLurje, RivaMacht, Fanie JakovlenvnaMaizel, M. Adv.MargolinMargolin, s.MarkMarkus, Berta (with son Moisha)Markus, MeierMarkus, Ruth-KlaipodaMazelis, SalaaauasMiankes, ZeniaMisleris, NisanisMachnanOlshtein, Elia KuzaanOrensteinPalunski, B.PerlsteinPeskin, Sheine (with childrenIzchaúc & Sara)PitumPlochskiPlotek, Ch.Plotkin, LeaPlotkin, MordechaiPyldus, R.Rabinovitz, Dr. PeisachRachmilevit, Nechaaa (Natalie)Rachmilevitz, ElijashRachmilevitz, MichlaRacie, Rivka RotsteinRappoport, MoscheRashkes, Rachel (with childrenElen 6 Oskar)Rashkes, Wolf (and family)Reznikas, ZusmanReznikiene, EsterRozenbliumiene, RachelejaRozenbliumiene, Vera BincbergaiteRozenfeld, ElaRozentalis, LeibaRozenzveig, A.Rubinstein, BubiRubinstein, Chaik (Chaim)Rubinstein, DaviRubinstein, Joesel LeibRubinstein, LejaRubinstein, LenaRubinstein, Rachel (with childrenAbram & Asher)Rudashevski, PinchasSalamon, MeischeSalamonas, Chaim LeibSalamonas, SheieSalamoniene, ChajaSalamoniene, ChanaSalamoniene, SoniaSchochat, MeierShapselbaumas, ShmulaisSheinzon, SimonSheinzon, ZinaSher, BelaSher, CiraShiganas, AromasShildianski, SheinaShilonski, JennyShkiarovitz, RuveniShlapobersHiene, GoldeShnitzel, FaivelShnitzel, MordchairShochat, BenjaminShochat, ChaimShochat, RachilSimec, Maizel IdaSlucki, IzchakSoloveichik, LeontijSoloveichik, LinaSolz, ChaimSteinberg, IsaakStukarevicius, AbromasSudarskiene, FeigeSudarskis, ChaimTavrisTkach, Direk, InturietTrakeniski, Zalman (wife and son)Trakenski, MiriamTrakenski, ZalmanTrivaksiene, Chana NachumovnaUliam, PerlUliamperl, BerlUliamperl, ItaUliamperl, RivkaUlsteinVainerman, AsiaVainerman, BelaVainerman, MinaVarshavskis, B.VidklerVikar, IvaVilenchiukVinik, GertrudeVinik, SaraVistanecki, Basia GerberoviciuteVistanecki, IzchakVolfas, JakobasVolovichVolpert, SalamonVolpert, Zalinger Jehudit (with 2children)436LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESZaid«l, Buniaovits, EleaaZalingar, Git.1Zalinger, OserZeicer, LiovaZaigar, RajaZilinakaa, ÁlakaandrasZietonas, EafirRBIDAVIAJ [KEIDAM]Bliuaburg, LaizarBrourianaBurstain, MeierChazaniena, MiriaaFrankl, S.Pinchuk, RachelPinchuk, YankialRondal, JudalRondal, ValvalRudnar, Velvl JudlTurko, YantlZans, LinbuZankobicZincelZUk, AnnammLMM [KELMB]Alparn, IzchakAlparn, ZlaaanElpariane, TaibaElpernas, IsakElpernas, ZalaanasKLAIPBDA [HBMEL]Stoliar, SoniaKRBTIMGA [RRETIMGA]Bunis, IsraelGirshovitz, DoraGirshovitz, JehudithKils, Sara TovaKratinger, MotelMarkus, EtaMarkus, JosifKDPZSKIA [KOPISBOK]Rravec, Ch.Kravac, GirshKravac, Motal (14 years old)Sniag, MalkaKURSENAI [KURSHAN]Minkov, JehushuaKYBARTAI [KIBART]Abeleviciene, B.Barnstain, Liza A.Eidels, AronEidals, IdaEidals, JakovEidals, JechialEliashav, BoruchEljdshav, BorisE1jashav, OnaJasvena, R.Lavin, DavidLAZDEJAI [LAZDAI]Prusak, JosefTatavsky, JaschuaLOKMIK [LUKMIK]Davidov, Moisha GurviFisher, Faival BaraFishar, RevaFishar, RivaGurvitz, Davidov MaischaKacav, JiosaKaplan, Kailakovksi CiliaKirznar, BatiaLeizer, FisharMelcer, BarlMelcer, GirshMelcer, J.Melcer, LejaMercler, MalkaMALETAI [MALIAT]Burgin, ChainGordon, LeizerKagan, ElijahuKov, KirsOzur, ShinonRibak, PinchasSheulker, MelachNARIAMPOLEMedalie, JanetRuslander, KlaraRuslander, ShlomoShnulkiarskiane, Chana (withchild)Wilkozerski, FeigeMAZEIKIAI [MAZSAIK]Avrach, Reveka IsakovnaIting, IdaMAUMIESTIS [MAISHTUT-POMEVBZH:Salanski, GirshSalanski, Golda (with childChana)PAKROJUS [POKROI]Relicaan, ElchananKolicaan, Dvora (with 2 children)Rolicaan, Shinon P.Rolicnan, ZeldePAMEVEZYS [PCBTBVBZH]Abelson, AnitaAbransonAizenbud, L.Aiz enbud, MoshaAizenstein, BerkoAizikovich, Etel (with 2children)Alperovich, JehudaBinchkovski, MirjanBrauer or Brown, FaniaCenachovitz, ItzchakChai, BelaChai, Feiga VatnikChai, ShalonChajetovsRi, BenjaninChitovski, BanjaninCindl, BerlCindl, ChainCindlesherDenho, KasrielLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS437D«abo, Lina (witJi 2 childLren)Eis«nsht«in, BerkoFanelok, WipGurvich, ChaikeIcikson, ChajaIcikson, Shava Levit. <with 3children)Ilinevich, HecheniaJoffe, Malka (wit-h childrenShaule-Mina)Kac, Choaer KatiaKur, M. (with family)Lanpert, ChanaLevian, 6.Levin, A. Ch.Levin, Meier HerzLeviniene, Sara MerlLevit, FaiveLevitas, ElijjahuLison, AbraaaMadel, LeibMalaned, ItzikMeerovitz, LiubaMelamed, ItzchakMelamed, SaraMilner, EliezerPalejjes, JonaPalojas, DvoraPalojas, MirjaePlatovski, BenjaminPrudinski, ChajaRapoport, Meisej (with family)Rikles, Icik MelamedRikles, Sara (with 4 children)Rikles, ShmuelRozenfeld, Moshe LeibRozin, MoschaRurnicki, L.Shein, JartkielisShein, RoniaSher, ChaimSher, Ita LejaShulmanas, AbramasShulmans, Sonia (with 3 children)Solomeschch, AizikSolomeschch, Roza (with 2cbildren)Suraski, A.Suraski, MUrelovich, Ch.Vainer, RevekaVainer, ShewelVais, MoisejVeksler, ChanochVeksler, JochevedVinokler, IzchakWainer, Rebeka Shewel (andfamily)Zalcman, LeibZuk, Paul Asef (with child Avram)Zuk, Paul AsiaPIVISKIS (PILVTSHDR]Markson, ChanaMarkson, FreidlMarkson, J.M.Markson, JudelShimbergUspitz, B.Uspitz, LeibUspitz, M.Uspitz, ZilePLUMGE (PLUMGIAN]Olschvang, ChanaOlschvang, LeonOlschvang, ShimonRolnik, BorisRolnik, Rivka (with children)Shloma, MiriamRADVILISKIS [ RADVILISHOR]Fain, AronFain, LazarFain, ShoshanaMaizel, Dr.RAKISKIS [RAXISHC*]Abel, Mosche IzchakFein, GinaKuras, G.J.Kurs, HaonochRotstein, Aron Sh.Ruch, JerachmielShomer, Leja (Lea)RASEIHIAI [RASIM]Aif, MoisejusChvedan, ChanaChvedan, HirshChvedan, Motel BerChvidan, Gola (with 2 children)Kaplan, OsiaLevi, ZlotaLeviniene, RajaNisanelis, AleksanderPerlov, MalkaPerlov, RozaPosel, AbrahamPosel, EliezerRatman, CileRatman, Mishel ZeliovitzSandler, Ch. Z.Zef, Chana Ickovna (Rraziai-Raseiniu)Zif, Batia (with children Nomiand Izchak)Zif, JosefZif, Roza (with child Aviva)SALAHTAI [SALAHT]Abelman, JehudaBunis, HercelJaffe, JechielJoffe, M.Joffe, MordechaiLevy, FridaMinster, ChonePlotnik, MinaZinger, MoscheSEDAI [SIAD]Tegeraite, ChajaSIAULIAI [SHAVLI]Abramson, Klein GeniaAverbucb, MalkaBer1in, NechamaLITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES438Broida, V-M.Disanskaja, HirjaaDuahan«ky, «J.H.Erlich, AizikFarkin, ChavaFerkin, HirshGacGordon, BatiaGordon, DavidGordon, Mania (with child)Gordon, SaulGurwichas, S.Jaloveckaja, R. (with 3 children)Kac, Arie MoscheLeizerovitz, JakovLifshitz, Gerson (with 2children)Lipkin, HindeLipkin, JehoschuaLipkin, LipaanLipkin, HechaaaLipkin, Sheine (with childrenDvora*Leja)Lipean, LipkinMalina, Raissa Evsejjevna (withchild Rivka)Malkin, JechielMelcer, GirshPerkin, Svi (and faaily(Schauli))Perz, FaivushRauzReznik, JosephReznik, SoniaShapiro, EsterSherieneShilianski, ShnuleShiasher, MirjaaShlapoherski, BenjaminShaitShpaiShufnanSilbernan, Plia (with 2 ehildren)Silianski, AronSiliianski, Fania (with child)Soner, ShnuleVolper, J.Volpert, J.Volpert, JudelWolpe, Ella (with 3 children)Zalnanovitz, MotelZalnanovitz, PerlaZilbernan, NachunZinger, Mosche (Salantai)Ziskind, EllaZiv, KopelZundelevich, BatieZundelevitz, V.SIHME [SZMNA)Freid, ChainShinanskaite, Chaya (with child)Shieanskaite, ChienaShisanski, ShloeoSieanski, ChainSIRVIMTAI [SHIRVIMT]Mirkin, Roza (with son Chirschka)SKAPXSKIS [SKOPISHUK]Baronaite, IdaBaronaite, SaraSXUEDAS [SHJCOD]Aizen, LeizerAizen, LejaAizen, LiubaHovsha, Natalia (son of Rabbi - 2children)Mirkis, Chaja (with fanily)Terushkin, BasiaSOBBCIUS [SUBOTSH]Borvain, RAchelTAURAGE [TAVRXG]Aronson, Dr.Bas, EtaEpel, Eta DavidovnzFeinberg, IzchakFeinberg, UeisachFridman, MendelPalavin, CiliaTBLSBIAI [TELZ]Vainer, Batia (with 2 children)Vainer, ShmuleYoselevich, R.TRASEUMAI [TRASHKUM]Krasovski, RivkaKrasovski, SoniaVaskobinikTRYSKIAI [TRISHIK]Segal, DavidSegal, Dora LeibovnaSegal, ZeldaUKMERGE [VILXOMIR]Abelson, M.BukancDraznin, JakovGrac, Mrs. (with children)Janovski, FanieKoltun, IdaKoltun, Olio (with child 17years)Levin, Mrs. (wife of ShmerlLevin, with child)Minlevski, Mrs. (with children)Oguz, LejaOguz, MeierOguz, OsnatPalecShapiro, Lili LvovnzShapiro, LiovaShapiro, Rachel (with son Aba)Shochat, Sheina Leibovna (withchild)Tobias, JehudithVaisbraut, RivaZak, MariashaUTEMA [UTIAM]Goldfain, EfraimGoldfain, IzchakJak, SanderLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS439Kac, IsraelKoc, BenjaninKoc, LeibKoc, MoscheLieberman, DavidLifsic, DavidSbapiro, AbaSbapiro, VolfVAREMAI [VARENA]Ersbanskijj, D.VILKAVISKIS [VILKOVISHK]Baronaite, RozaKovarski, MeriLang, FridaRibovski, TaubaRibovskij, AbrabamSilber, Dr. B.VILRIJA [VILKI]Tamscbe, S.L.Tantse, DavidTamse, ItaTamse, «JuditTamsbe, SbneierVIRBALIS [VIRBALM]Fistanecki, JebudaMiler, LejjaVISTIMEC [VISHTIMITS]Abelevicius, Daniel CbaimovitzAbelovicius, AbaWIKOMIR [VILKOMIR]Sbapiro, Racbil (Wilkom andcbildren)ZAGARE [ZHAGER]Kurland, Fania (wit.b cbildMargalita, 1 year old)Lisus, DveiraLisus, LibuaZARASIAI [EZHEREMI—ZARASAI]Grinman, FaneGrinman, JosefZIEZMARIAI [ZHEZMIR]Jankelevitz, LiubaZYDYKIAI [ZHIDIK]Kurs, LeibeLurie, SblimoSOME JEWISH SURVIVORS IN LITHUANIAREGISTERED WITH THE JEWISH ANTI-FASCISTCOMMITTEE IN MOSCOW SUBMITTED TOTHE WORLD JEWISH CONGRESS*Ableski, MoisbeAbramovitch, IsaacAbramovitcb, MoisbeAbramson, GitaAgres, Motl SonjaAkabas, JosepbAkabas-Joffe, MiraAkbber, MoisbeAleksander, MordcbaAronovitch, EtaThis list was published in the March 1945 edition of"Lithuanian Jew." (342 of these names had previouslybeen published by the American Federation forLithuanian Jews.)440LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESAronovitch, H«rshAronomka ja , Apr ianaka jaaAronowski, HojsajAronstain, AhraaAronstain, Jo*«levitchB&R, GheneBak, GiraheBak, LaizarBak, RocheBak, RuviaBank, AbeBarkovaky, ChoneBaron, DinaBartikowskaja, RivaBenyakonskaya, IdaBer, KadaanBerknan, SophiaBerlovitch, KalnanBeraan, JelenaBaraan, LenaBeraan, RachilBeraan, RachilBeraan, RachaiilBeraan , Rachai i 1Beraan-Hunan, NutaBernstein, IsabellaBernstein, ManyaBershtanski, Heraan RochelBerstein, ClaraBerstein, IliaBirger, DanielBirger, FraidaBirger, GilelBirger-*Tarshia, RosaBiraan, Abe HirschBla2berg, AbeBleiean, TsodikBlokh, RiveBlokh, SisonBlokh~Bem, SonyaBloaiberg, AronBlooai, RuvijaBloomberg, ChayaBloomberg, HochinBluesenthal, RachilBrick, HirshBrodas, MendlBroer, ShemaBroido—Gurvitch, FrumaBruker, MotlBrxmstein, NeseBrustein, ChaimBunisovitch, BerlBurak, AnnaBurstein, YakovChaporskaya, MenuchaCherniavski, ChaisDalfon, DavidDavidovitch, Meyer RachilDavidovitch, ShelmaDeitch, MendlDitlin, IsraelDranes, YankelDwogowskaya, Riva MishaEichman, BenjaminEisenstat, MichelEisenstat, SonyaEisenstat, VelenaEley, MeerElin-Koraan, DvoireEikon, AbrauElkon, Rachi1Elperin, VeraEndlin, MashaEndlin, NechemeEpstein, LiubaFarber, TanyaFeder, EsterFein, JohananFeinberg, DovidFeinberg, FaniFelnzilber—Miltz, YevaFeldberg, ShmuelFeldberg, ToibeFin, BorlsFinkelbrand, BrocheFinkelbrand, ManyaFinkelbrand, SarahFreizinger, LeibFinkelstein, LilyaFinkelstein, MinaFinkelstein, SimonFisher, SashaFler, AkivaFler, BasyaFler, LeahFrenkel, Tsipoira, LuciaFriedman, BenjasinFriedman, EsterFrok, BellaFunk, AnnaFunk, ManyaFunk, SheineGafanovitch, AronGalant, LilyaGantsveikh, AbramGapanovich, AbramGarber, RozaGarber, WolfGavler, HosinGavronskaya, RivaGeler, HenachGelman, CbavaGenelin, BelaGerber, DoraGerber, SimonGerber, Yetta IdaGerman, MartotGertner, EchevedGertner, YoselGiles, IsraelGilman, MoisheGilman, SheeineGilman, SheinaGlashak, Ch.Glaz, RivkaGokhman, MoisheGoldber, BerlGoldberg, AnnaGoldberg, BorisGoldberg, LeizerGoldman, IsraelGoldsbmid, FaiviahGoldshmid, GoldaGoldshmid, ShevaGoldstein, EsterGoldstein, RivaGoldstein, ShloimaLISTS OF LTTHUANIAN JEWS441Golub, AbramGordon, AbranGordon, CbaimGordon, SulamifGorpain, AronGrabJcan, LeabGrishkan, IsraelGrossnan, ZalmanGurvitch, BelaGurvitcb, EtaHaidefish, DovidHaidefisb, FridaHaidefieb, YettaHalperin, LeizerHazan, Rosa, LinaHelfer, SarabHell, ChayaHelson, YakovHemelitsky, IzikHempel, Ben-ZionHerapel, EraraaHeruaniskaja, FridaHersbanovitch, BoruchHershovitch, RachmielHershowitch, RivaHertz, IsraelHildin, ZialHink, Kama, FrenkelHirschel, Frantz MaryHodos, RachilHofraan, Rosa, Rachil, AvshalomHolok, ShejnaIbed, CeliaIndurskyIngena, Shmue1Ipp, IsraelJarraoski, Zisel, Sbolera, MashaJasvonskaja, OljaJed, Chaim, MotelJelokolud, LiubaJilin, DavidJilin, LeahJilin, McisheJilin, ShifraJoffe, BaseJoffe, CbairaJoffe, ChaneJoffe, LidaJoffe, SaliJoffe, SimonJoffe, TeveJoffe, UdesJoffe, YakubJoffe, YanklJoffe-Sandler, BraineJoselevitch, ChayaJoselevitch, DavidJoselevitch, Peisach, SimonJoselovitch, ChanaJosin, ElyJosiri-Maltsker, RocheKagan, AbramKagan, AbramKagan, MariashaKagan, MiraKagan, Tzipa, BerlKagansky, BorisKaltun, RachmilKalvaia, ChaimKalvaria, MendlKalvaria, RochilKalvaria, SimonRantor, ShmuelKapelushnik, Mates DoraKaplan, LeahKaplan, SimonKaplan, WholemKaplitsky, PeisachKarmovskaya( RutKarmovsky, AlfredKarmovsky, MorocheKarnovsky, MoisheRarpus, BenaRasinov, BenjaminKaskov, MeyerKatsenelenbogen, HenachKatz, ChairaKatz, KeileKatz, ShrauelKatz-Vuzan, PesheRatzsonow, Alexartder, Sonja,Boris, Janja, JankelKaz, LazarKazarson, VictorKhait, PesyaKhasman, ChaskiRhazanovitch, DinaRhazanovitch, ShloiraaKhotser, RebeccaKlehanskaya, TatyanaKlig, AbraraKligman, ShapseKlugraan, Shapse, MoisheKlyachko, Peret zKoenigsberg, HannahKolesnik, RivaKop, HoisheKopelraan, DhitriRopelman, GidoraeKopelvansky, IdelKorb, RuviraKoretinskaja, EsterKovel, HirshKovel, ShrailKovel, YoslKrakinovsky, MoisheKravchuk, MashaKriger, LeonKrink, Chaira, CharunKrohik, SarahKrupnik, KalmanKuropatkin, MotlKushner, FaivelRushnerjhitski, Paveel, FridaKutzben, BenjarainKverskaya, Rachi1Kversky, IsraelKweskin, Chaira, MiriamLandansky (child)Landau, Solomon, Mariana,HildegardLandler, EsterLandman-Langleben, AnnaLantsman, SonyaLaskov, Kies-ChaskelLavltas, DavldLeibovitch, ChairaLeibovitch, Chaya442LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMVNITIESLtistrovitcb, SolomonLema)ekaya, MiriamLantaman, ChaimLarner, AaneLev, LeibLevin, AnibaLevin, DavidLevin, HirabLevin, ZsaacLevin, KatvaLevin, Rafel, ZinaLevin, RosaLevin, SarabLevinmky, ChaoneLevinmon, IliaLevit, IdellLevit, Jurborskaya, TaibeLevitan, (Dr. Levitan's child)Levitan, JettaLevitan, ManyaLevitan, RuvimLevstein, AvivaLevstein, HenyaLewin, Ben-2ionLewin, Iser, GitaLezman, YakovLibovitch, LeizerLibovitch, ManyanLifshits, MendelLifshits, MiraLifshitz, RodaLifshitz, ShmerlLipman, ChaimLipman, LeahLipshitz, IdelLomiansky, MitziLomyanski, MoisbeLudwinovskaya, AnnaMaizela, Moishe (Maigelis)Malkin, YakubMamulis, BliashMankovitch, GilelMariner, GilelMarkovskaya, ChayaMarkovsky, DavidMarkushavntch~Kisin, MichleMatz, DvoiraMayerovitch, Shl.Melikowsky, HirshMeltser, SalmanMerechinsky, RuvimMeyerovitch, YoslMichelson, BronyaMichelson, DvoiraMichelson, OscerMichelson, simcheMikhles, MotlMikhlis, Israel, Doba, Biselia,MosheMikhnatskaya, MashaMikhnatsky, HirshMiknatskaya, FridaMilikhowsky, MordechajMiller, BenjaminMilstein, BchielMirvis, MinaMishtonsky, SamuelMitkovskaya, JuditaMitlovsky, SaroMovshovitch, SholemMuller, AronNegenvitsky, YaúcovNeiman, 2islNeimark, AronNeimark, ManyaNeimark, MaryNeimark, Philip, Gusja, JulisNemitsin, FinaNovakovitch, LiraObiski, HenechObolnik-Kovalskaya, RozaOgus, SimaOkunetsky, FaivishOkunatzkaya, Libaolitskaya, LeahOsher, Noach, SkejnaOshinskaya-Kruk, AnnaOshinsky, GrigoryOshri, EphroimPats, JuliaPenkinsky, Ber1Per, AmosPer, JozenPer, YakovPer-Blat, GoldaPeres, Sholem, LibaPerkul, SolomonPerkul, TaihePers, ShulaPeser, LeizerPogir, LidaPogir, MotelPomerants, LuciaPort, LeahPortnoi, NikolaiPortnov, Jakob, EmmaPotchtivisk, HenachRahinovitch, DvoiraRabinovitch, TanyaRabinovitch, YakovRaikbes, RocheRaikhes, UditRapeeika, Leib, AbramRash, FanyaRejbolovsky, LeeRezer, FelyaRezman, CulamiaReznik, BertaReznik, ChasyaReznik, SheinaRibatzki, Israel, Doba, ChanaRibin, SarahRokhman, UnyaRokhman, YelenaRosenblatt, AnnaRosenzaft, HirshRosenzweig, RachelRozenhaft, HirshRo zovskaya, ManyaRubin, DavidRubin, RuvimRubina, EstarRudnikSakhmansky, AleranderSalansky, MoisheSalansky, NochimSalitan, ZalmanSalskaya, IdaLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS44*T V mJSandler, Est.erSchneyder, Ben jaminSchneyder, MeraSchwartz, YanklSegal, ChainSegal, ZsaacSegal, SarahSegal, ZlateShases, IsaacShaaes, SiraonShames-Feinzilber, LeahShapir, LidaShapiro, AbraraShapiro, DavidShapiro, LizaShapiro, TanaraShapiro, YoslShaps, MarRusShaps, NisanelShaps, ShulamisShaps, SophiaShatil, IdaShefer, IdelSheinyak, RachmielSherason, PejrlSherayavitch, MichelShenker, TevelSher, MashaSheres, IdelShershinevsky, MotlShevts, EsterShevts, MiriaraShevts, YenteShifranski, NaumShimansky, RachraielShkolnik, YakovShmigel, LeibeShmukler, ZalmanShneyder, DalraanShneyder, GoldaShofraan, AndreiShowmacher, MiriamShtern, KhoneShulgasser, Bernard, PaulineAdasseShulgasser, LevShulkiner, ChaimShuster, AbramShuster, ChanaShuster, JosephSilberraan, Ephroim, LenaSilberstein, MeierSislav, YentaSkovansky, EliashSler, SarahSlutsky, IsaacSnelis, AronSobotsky, BronyaSoifer, GilelSoifer, GrishaSokher, BertaSolsky, ChankiSolsky, ZavelSrednitsky, TeveSteinbach, WolfSteinberg, Chaske1Stender-Per, Ro z aStrashun, FridaStrera, MargaritaSuvalskaya, SheinaTaktorowski, TeweTaub, ChayaTodorovitch, HoeraiTsipkin, AJbraaTsipkin, LeizerTsipkina, EtaTsipkina, SoraTz erkerraan, MardcheCJshpitz , ChanaVaka, SonyaVarshavsky, ChairaVerbovski, Jankel, PessiaVidelewskaja, ChanaVidutsinskaya-Asinovskaya, BraineVidutskaya, LibaVidutskaya, MiriamVidutskinsky, IsaacVidzer, DavidVin-Zingmanvink, MironVisgardsky, Yavnelia, GitaVishin, BorisVisliktsky, EliashVislitsky, EliashVolpe, ChaimVolpe, ChayaVolpe, SimonVonkul, MinaVuker, ChoneVuker, ReineWargaftig, RivimWaserson, TaraaraWeiner, AbramYablon, ManyaYashinskaya-Feivelson, simaYasman, HadasaYasvoin, BenjaminZaider, RochaZakroisky, NisonZeldovitch, JankelZhelesnik, DovidZilber, StasZilberman, ShloimaZilbon, SonyaZimon, IsaacZimon, RozaZiv, EphraimZundelevitch, ShimonZundelevitch, VeraVILHO [VILHA3Abramovich, Apt RivkaAbramovich, DinaAlkenitzkaya, AnnaAlpervich, DinaAnalik, LibaAnilovich-Bernstein, NechamaAronovich, KeilyaBar, SoreBarit, SholemBaron, HirshlBaron, ShloimeBerent, ChairaBer1iand, ShmuelBlazer, AbraraBliakher, BenjaminB1iakher, YakovBluementhal-Epstein444L/THUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBlu»entihal-P«r«gal DoraBot>rovskaya, 6®nyaBorovlk, LanaBosak, Chaia Henache®Botvlnnlk, JenyaBrand, AkivaBrenaizen, ChatskalBurgin, EchialDanllovskaya, Rudner, SonyaDiainstain, FaigaDindas, NosnDoaaashavltsky, MoishaDovaltov, DobaDrutz, NosnElta, EchazkalEisanfald, ChayaBngar, DovidEngalstarn, DaizarEpstain, AlikEpstein, BetyaEpstain, RivaFain, BinominFein, FraideFain, LilyaFainganbarg, MeiteFeinganbarg, Moishe Dr.Feingenberg, SlavaFeldhaia, RochelFaldaan, FanyaFuks, MaryFuks>an, YoselGarbal, SolomonGaraan, PeshaGdut, Ber MeilachGallar, ShaindalGelmar, AronGilinska, Aya-Belskaya, SoreGilinsky, LeibGitaan, MirianGitnan, SiaaGlaznan, AronGlazaan, CeliaGlazaan, DoraGlazean, IsaacGlazaan, YakovGlaizer, LaibGoldbarg, NegudaGoldstain, WolfGontovnik, ShoulGorbotskaya, Avidan, MalkaGraanstain, MironGraanstain, RozaGrenadir, BrochaGroidans, BeilaGruntwagan, ChayaGruntwagan, ChayaGurland, Chaya-EtaGurland, ZisalGurvich, AbraaGurvich, BertaGurvich, EshaeGurvich-peretz, IsroelGustman, Isroel RabbiHalperin, AbramHalparin, MoisbaHalparina, PolyaHalfatz, MirashaHaifatz, ShloimaHeifatz, YanyaHarovskaya, EtlHershstein-Rablnovich, NinaJarusalamisky, JoslJoffa, RochelJoffa, SoraJoffa, YakovJoffa-Balskaya, RivkalCabachnik , ZorachKagan, PaisachKalinovich-Rashanskaya, SoraKampaz, BasyaKantorovich, EfimKaplan-Zilberkweit, VeraKarchmer, YakovKarpinkes, RebeccaKatz, AbeKatz, AJbramKatz, BetyaKatz, SoniaKhaikbes, ShayeKhaiker, RivaKhait, ZiveKhait-Milchiker, LiubaKhelem-Goldberg, MasbaKhmelevsky, MeyerKhvales, SoniaKleinberg, NechamaKleinstein, EstherKlorin-Ezerskaya, PosyaKoifman, MoisheKokin, AbramKomraz, BasyaKopanskaya, RaisaKopanskaya, SbeinaKort, VolkKovarshaya, IdaKovarskaya, GaliaKovenskaya, SlavaKovner, AbeKoZel, SbolemKrakovsky, Tel1aKranik-Korsbelnik, MashaKravetskaya, RisyaKremerman, EcheskiKrengel, SoreKreaberg, Chaya EmmaKropchevsky, Ben zionKucher, SoniaKukliansky, ShoulKulbis, SoniaKulbis, VolodyaKurgan, ZalmanLam, LyayaLam, WolfLam, YashaLazdunskaya, RaizlLev, ZalmanLevin, Efraim, LeibLidovsky, ChononLipengal, MachoelLurie, LeibMakovsky, BerlMilikovsky, GedaleMilikovsky, HirshMizeretz, PeisachMostovich, IshokMuller, GitaMuller, IsaacMuller, ToibaLISTS OF UTHUANIAN JEWS445Natanzon, ChainM02, SholenOstrinsky, NoechPersky, ChaiuPol, XschokPresma, SorePupko, ChanaRabinovich, FriedaRabinovich, GavridRebinovich-Banchevskaya, GitaRadzelya, JochaRudnik, TanaraRutman, DovidSalit., DoraSarakhan, PeisachSegal, AnnaShafer-Shnukler, EsterShafir, EsterShaplro, MulyaSheinker, SoraShelkhter, ChvalyaShemyavich, MoishaSher, AnnaSher, IraSheres, TeveShimel, ShmuelShklovskaya-Greenstein, RozaShklovsky, MironShliamper, GoldaShneider, GrishaShovendanz, AbramShufyan-Levin, FelyaSimanovich-Torf, SoraSluzberg, ZevSolinskaya, Rrasner, BlumaSolt.z, MoishaSonushevskaya, PaulinaStein, ChaimStein, JakovSvirskaya, MinaSvirsky, ElyaTarkutzin, HirshTeitlboim, GenyaTelerant, EmmaTelerant, HirshTeper, ZalmanTreger, ZeldaTrotsky, ShmuelWaiman, EruchimWeiner, MiriamWeinstein, ToibaWeisman, SenerWidutzinskaya, EsterWilbinder, MotlWilkomir, IsroelWniker, ShiponWolfovskaya, ChayaWolfzon, YelenaYablonsky, EshaeYablonsky, IoelYambro, EsterYanilovich-Kravchinskaya, RivkaYashuner, SloimeZablotzkaya, EvaZagorskaya, GitaZalkind, TamaraZaremba, YakovZarembak, YakovZeidel, MotelZelikman, Isroel sonZelikman-Aronovskaya, ChanaZelitzkaya, AdeliaZelmanovich, FaivlZiris, LeahZiris, MichleZiskovich, ElyaZretzkaya, ChanaZukerman, AbramZukerman-Wersatskaya, ShifraALITDS [ AJLYTA]Feldman, FishlGoldberg-Marshak, DinaAKDMYAN [AKMIAH]Bunes-Grossman, DinaANIRSHTRatzev, HershnKupitzky, ChaimAISHISHEK [ EISHISHCMC ]Ronuchovsky, MariamLevin, LeibUrkyansky, Itze-MendlRAUNAS [KOVNO]Desler, BinsteinEpstein, GitleGonanskaya, RebeccaLevin, GoldaNaerman, SimchaShimelishsky, YoslSukenik, PninaKEIDANY [KEIDAN]Bubilsky, DavidGefen, ChanaGlazer, Meyer (Kelm)KRAKINOVO [KRAKINOVA]Faifert, ShmuelKUPISHKY [KUPISHOK]Toker-Kaplan, PolyaNEMENCHINDeich, BerlDeich, SholemDeich, SoraGlyk, IsyaKagan, RochlKhaJcim, DovidLeifer, RivkaNidzon, YoklNraenchinskaya, NechamaPogorelsky, MatesPrujjan, ChononPrujan, MichoelSnipilsky, AbramOSHMYANIBaron, IdaGlezer, ChavaShapiro, TomorPILVISHKY [PILVISHOK]Ushpitz, Abram446LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESPOVEVEZ [POWBVBZH]Pal«es-Gordon, LiubaSHADOVO [SHADCJVA]Gradnik, BoruchGradnik, ChanaSHADLAI [SHAVLI]Analar, Shaine, BaseAmaler, ShauelAmaler, ChayaAuerbuch, MalkeFur-KaplanGoldherg, Yakov Dr.Green-Hirsh, FeigaIlinskaya, Xhazan, ChayaIlinskaya, LeahJerushaleiJilinskaya, Leah-ChayaJoffe, EsberJoffe, MoisheJoffe, Rut.Jokheles, FanyaKaplan, LeibLurie, Git-aPalavin, Leah (with husband &daughter)Peneusova, Ema (children Max &Liba)Rod, JosephRod-Greenberg, RaizlSheskin, UshpitzShtein, EtaYashunskaya, MirraZaltzberg, ShulanisZeidl, FaivizZinger, CeliaSMARGOH [SAMARGOH]Danishevsky, MayerKhodosh, Legat, FeigaPolevsky, ShinonHeiner, MarianZeltzer, NahnanSUVALKIKravchinsky, LazarRNZYAMI [SVEMTZIOM]Daikhes, LeahKha j z evskaya-Motzkin, SonyaParus, ChayaOTYAMI [UTIAM]Kran, MoisheVZLROMIRBlumberg, PinchasShurnavsky, YakovVILKOVISHKIBidlovskaya, Zipa & husbandDonashevitzky, MoisheMenlovskaya, BaysaWeber, RashaWeber, SheinaWeber, ShipoireWISHTINETZ [VISHTINITZ]Markovskay-Aksnyanskaya, ChayaMarkovsky, DovidZARASAI [BZHERHNI-ZARAHAI]Lintup, DoivSURVIVORS IN LITHUANIA TO WHOMPACKAGES WERE FORWARDED BY THEAMERICAN FEDERATION FOR LITHUANIANJEWS IN 1945'KAUMAS [KOVMO] Alexander, MaxAbranovicius, Dr. Jacob Blunbergaite, Ester CheinThe list was published in the March 1945 edition of"Lithuanian Jew."LiSTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS447Braason, GitaBrandvain, RufaBrikas, GirsaaBuninBurbubakyBursteinas, yokubasDeitsb, S.Pacrtorof sky , TeveFain, Itcbak or MirjanFeldstsin, AdaFlierisne, BasiaFrunkiniene, Dr. E.Gavronskyte, R.Girsavicius, MarekGoldbergiene, FrunaGontovnik,Racbel Strunovskaya (21)Gordon, CbainGrodbinsky, LeabGurviciene, Dr. Fruna BraudeIntriligator, Boris«Jof£ui , Tevel iuiKaganas, BerelisKapelesnikLernerniene, A.Lunciene, Z.MakauskaiteMeerovicb, LibaOsri, EfrraimPerk, KalnanPreiskelioRabinovicius, Y.Ribinaite, SaraRocbnaniene, EannaRosenzweigaite, R.Rubinas, DavidasSegalovsky-SbapiroSbapsSlezbergiene, RacbanaVILVIOS [VILMA]Abranovic, DinaBerlcnanas, EFralnBlunental, ZenaHotnanaite, Racbil FroincbikKaplan, VeraKleinstein, EstberKovarski, Dr. Goraci OsipovicLazar, CbainLevin, BorisMarnut, BasiaPaleskyPruzan, M.Rozin, S.Stein, CbainVIEVIS [ VEVIYA]Atlasaite, BiruatePaulauskiene, TeklaALYTAOS [ALYTA] (Apskr)Gordoniu, JoseluiGLOBOROJEGitelzon, BenjaninPAMBVBZYS [POMBVBZ)Reznieki, BasiaSeskin, Dr. JacobSneider, L.BIRZAI [BIRZH]Shusbyte, YadvygaPERSONS IN LITHUANIA WHO WERE SENTMONEY IN 1945*KAOHAS [KOVBOjAbranovicius, Dr. JacobasAbransoniene, RosaliaAleskovinie, Ann or son CbainAlexander, Abraban [Kosberrestaurant]Arnovicius, AronasBaikoviciene, Mina, or son ZalnanBalosber, AbaBarkin, Minna, Meeroviante orhusband MicbelBemsteinas, Moza, or wife MarijaBernsteinas, VitaBieliackinas, SinonasThe list appeared in the March 1945 edition of"Lithuanian Jew.”448UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBlochl«nie, Cbane Basi«Bugana», It*ik or AbramasBurlohmon, Sarah LaahChalmaonaa, MozeCbajetovicius, IeraelieCorfae, Ruvlm, wife Fanla Donas,Chalmae, or wife cipeDworeckie, IeaacElkes, Dr. ElchanonElkee, MariFainae, Zelmanae, or motherFaivueiene, Mara, or motherFeldsteinae, Dr. CemachasFinkelsteeiniene, Dr. PayaFlscher, Meyer, or Chaya-ZipeFriedland, Nieon or LlcaGarfunkeliene, LizaGefenas, JeikasGerskoviciene, Hady<laAJbrameonait.eGereteinas, Dr. LeonasGireavicisu, Dr. Agr. Zalman, orwife EvaGlikmanas, Ruvimae, or DoraGoldbergae, L.Grodzinski, Leah (RabbiGrodzinsky's daughter)Grodzinskie, Rabbi AbrameHeimanlene, Berta or AbraehaHirschbergiene, Fanny DagmayIppas, Dr. IsaakasJatkunski, MotelJatkunski, SoniaKaganmaniene, FeigeKaghan, Moses or AlexanderKanas, Beras, or wife ChanaKaplan, EugenKaplan, LeoKatz, Chazkel or TaubaKisenisky, Girsas or wife DobreLesbaKucesvski, Hertz or BailaLazersonas, Diktoras VladosLevin, RafaelLevitanas, NachumasLleliaoginas, Simonas (AdvoRatas)Lippman, Chaim MeirMacas, BerelisMarcus, Samuel or ChaimMaskancas, Itzik or daughterEstherMatis, Dr. EliasMatis, Dr. MoiselMincas, Pinchas, or wife CivujjaMitkowskis, YankelNadel, David or NisenOguzas, Moze, or wifeOlkenitzki, Samuel or ChaimMarcus or Eliyohu01konitzky, Mesha or JudithPakelniskis, Rabbi Yankelor RonePercikavicius, DoktorasAronas or wifePollackas, Moshe or FelgaPoretzki, David or LeahRabinavicius, MolsejusRabinoviciene, SofiaRabinovicius, Dr. EfimRabinovicius, Dr. Efraim or wifesofiaRabinovitzclus, Izia SulamitSalamonas, Deuelis, or wife AnnaSapiro, GutmanSchocbat, HanaSchulman, Mrs.Schwartz, Meyer or MinaShapiro, Dr. NachmanShapiro, Rabbi BerSlezbergiene, RacbamaSonas, Noclmmasspigelglazas, LevaSulmaniene, Chaja MereTereslskinas, Mose® or ChanaVersvovskls, Jekel, or daughterDr. Sonia VersvovskiteVinikas, MeilachasVolfas, RafaelisVolfas, SulimasVolockis, Solomonas, or wifeWilliamowsky, Rabbi Jacob MeyerYavslcas, Brocha-JacobasYochelson, VeraZalkowicius, AronasZisman, Feibel or BlumeVILHIOS (VILMAjBaruchson, SophiaBlumovitz, Dr. Adolf or wifeJevgeniaBomchil, MariaBrewda, Leah or daughter Zlata,Baranowicze(?)Bixrstein, Berta or HelenaEbin, Boris or wife AmaliaFialka, Seine, or son LewGerszuni, Yankel or RochlaKlnkulkiniene, SoniaPerevozkiene, RaselPrszedmeiska, SophieRozentalis, MaksimSalit, ChanoALYTOS [ALTYAjAbramowltch, Schimon or NoumaSereiskis, SimonamJSKxa [ahishok]Prudz onene, FredaAHYKSCIAI [AHUCSHT]Kowalskaite, Ester-LajaRatner, Shimon or wife CharnyBIRZIAI [BIRZH]Katz, Pere Reise or SbolomKatz, Samuel or LeahRubin, Chaim LeibDOTlfOVA [ DATNUVA ]Kushelevskis, Rahbi Mausas AronasGRIHKISKIS [GRIHKISBOK]Mecas, Rabinas M.GRODNOYangelevitz, Gisha or HershLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWSAAQ■ I jrHOLSZANY [OLSHAHY]Bojarsld, Saausl or wife ChasiaJURBARRAS [ VTJRBORG]Berzanerine, It,®lPeisachson, LlbaRALVERIJA [RALVARIA]Kaganivicius, s.Kovalsky, Moses or DvoraKAXSIADORYS [KOSHIDAR]Feldnan, ZaligKAZLU RUDE [RAZLOVA—RUDA]Goldoftas, Benjaminas or JoselisSegals, Mausa or KazrielisKEIDAIHI [REXDAli]Kurlandcick, Simon or LeibelYudelson, MoiseKREKENAVA [KRAKINOVA]Goldaan, SoniaMovsas, Rabinas BinjoeinasKUDIRKOS [MAISHTDT—TAVRIG]Esterzonas, BerelRURSHENAI [RURSHAN]Schuster, EtaMALTAI [MALIAT]Sochar, JekelMARIAMPOLEDob z ansky, SlomaFridraan, MaxGoldov-tas, MayerasGrodmaniene, Taraara or ZalmanLevin, YankelHogin, MyerStradansky, SamuelVeiseiskis, RapbaelMERKINES [MERKINE]Radauskas, Girsb or BerlHAUMIESTIS [NAISHTUT-PONEVEZH]Kacef, PereNIEMENCZYN [NIEMENTSHIN]Geller, polaOBELIAI [ABEL]Beinartiene, Cbaja or busbandAbramasCbaje-tovicius, Ovaiejus or ItaLe jaSolominas, Geselis or GeniaPANEVEZYS [PONEVEZH]Fisbmanas, Abrabam or Chane orLeibe Cbaim or TalinkeGelfaniene, Seina LejaGurvicbes, Lipa or EtelGurvitcbenie, EtbelRalmanas, Rabinas Baranas oserisKatz, WolfLandau, BenrikasLicbtinas, Uriel or HennaReicbeliene, Cbana or SmuelRoz anskiene, Gise or OsipPILVISHRI [PILVISHOR]Kovenskie, Rafael or BlumaPRIENAI [PREN]PO jurborsky, Etbel or CbanaRAKISKIS [RAKISHDK]Reznikovicius, Cbaimas or wifeLisaROGUVA [ROGOVA]Gutman, MonasSAKIAI [SHAKI]Gitelman, BluraeGitelson, NatbanGoldovtas, SmulkaVilenciukasSANCIAI [SHANTZY]Levitan, SoniaSATAISvarcas, David-OserSERIJAI [SERHAI]Rravchel, MotlahSIAULIAI [SHAVLI]Hoffenberg, PincbosReznickiene, Base GrodmanaiteRozowskis, Dr. UriYankielevic, NacbamaSIDLOVA [SHIDLOVA]Kloaznikine, NecbeSIMNAS [SIHNA]Miskucas, Mendel or DavidRadauskaite, Dentist AnnaSIRVINTAI [SHIRVINT]Berman, Freidel or busband ChoneBermanus, ChonasBlindman, Mosbe or son IsaacCbiefetzes, Samuel or wifeGrosbordus, Rabbi Abrabam or wifeSusteris, Abo or wifeYok, Avrobom or uncleZumanas, Meiris or GutelSMARGONIE [SAMARGON]Laskow, Kios or Fruma-GoldeSTAKLISKES [STOKLISHOK]Pitlukas, Rebeka or David LeibURMERGE [VILROMIR]Baron, Bune or husband YudelKreer, Basie or busband BerelGelvaniPais, JakobSegal, Sora or GersonSerene, Cbaya or busband Zalman450LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESYor«, NftiHtelTAORAGB [TAVRIG]Schrag*, Olga or Cteana ivkaVASRAX [VASHKX]Galun, Mo'talVBLXOMAX [VIIiOM]Levirmon, NotaVILARA [VXUCI]Kagan, soloaon or OlgaVXLIAMPOLIAI [SLOBODRA]Oarl, BfraiaVolfas/ Paula or MarYAMOVAJmttm, Tavya or wife BrinaNovichoviciena/ TaibeYONXSKBLXS [YAMXSEKBL]Dall/ Sora or Mo-telKrecaer, LeaB or SlomaTuretz, ChanaZAGAJRE [ZHAGER]GutJcinaite, BeileSusnanovic, PaulaTcerochesaite, SaraZARASBY [ BZHEREMI—ZARASAI}Trager, Mary-*Rosel or YoselZXZMORXAI [ZHBZMXR]Grinbergiene, BasjaREMITTANCES THAT WERE CANCELLED*KAOMAS [KOVMO]Balosher, AbaBernsteinas, VitaChaiasonas, MozeChajetovicius, IsraelisCorfas, Ruvia or FaniaDr. Leonas GersteinasElkes, Dr. ElchananFaivusiene, MaraFriedland, Nison or LizaGarfunkeliene, LizaGefenas, JeikasGlilcmanas, Ruviaas or DvoraHeiaaniene, Abrasha or BertaIppas, Dr. IsaakasJatkunski, MotelRaganaaniene, FeigaKaghan, Mosas or AlexanderKisenisky, Girsas or Dobre LeshaLaazersonas, Dr. VladoLippean, Chaia MeirMarcus, Saauel or ChaimMatis, Dr. MoiseiMincas, Pinchas or CivujaPollackas, Moshe or FeigaShapiro, Dr. MachaanShapiro, Rabbi BerSonas, HochuaásYavsicasYochelson, VeraEK>LSHAMY [OLSHAMY]Bojarski, SauuelVXLMIUS [VILHA]Boachil, MariaKinkulkiniene, SoniaPerevozkiene, RaselPAMEVBZYS [POMEVBHZ]Fishaanas, Abrahaa or ChaneGelfaniene, Seina LeyaRalaanas, Rabinas, Barana OseriKetz, WolfLandau, HenrikasKRBKEMAVA [KRAKEMOVA]Goldaan, SoniaMovsas, Rabinas Bin^oainasZAGARB [ZHAGER]Gutkinaite, BeileYAMOVAJaffe, Tevya or BrinaSEXRXJAX [SERHAI]Kravchell, MotlahPublished in the March 1945 editíon of "LithuanianJew."LISTS OF UTHUANIAN JEWS451LITHUANIAN JEWS WHO SURVIVEDTHE HOLOCAUST AND WERE FOUND INLITHUANIA, FRANCE, ITALY,GERMANY, SWEDEN & PALESTINE*FOUND IN LITHUANIAAbel»ki, IcikPonevezhAncel, FeigeKrozhAbelski, MoisheBazilianAncelyte, ZeniaRovnoAbelski, MoishePonevezhAnolik, K.MariampoleAbir-Kalienkowitz, Chyene PaninonAntupickaja, LiubaKovnoAbraaovitz, DinaAntupickaja, MeraKovnoAbraaovitz, Dr. JakovKovnoAntupitzky, LiubaAbramskaja, FriedaKovnoAntupitzky, MyrilAbransky, SeniaKovnoAperiash, A.KelmeAbranson, BertaKovnoAperiash, RuvenKelmeAbramson, GitaYurburgArbeiter, Chanah EthelAchbar, MoishePosvolArnstein, A.Achbar, SoniaShakiAron, Cvi (Hirshl)Adelson, SinonVilnaEzhereni-ZarasaiAinig, DinaAronbergene, z.Aisikovitz, BorisAroniene, FradaSkudvillAizikovit.z, EtLlPonevézhArsh, Elimelech Radishok-BirzhAizikowitz, BorisMariampoleAtlas, BrachaKovnoAkselrod, BliumaVilnaAufnan, MashaPrenAkselrod, BraineAverbuch, MalkaShavliAkselrod, ShnuelVilnaAvidonis-Gutman, MalkaKovnoAlberstein, Ch.L.Azband, Rabbi EisakAleksandrovitz, EsterBaitz-Green, RivaKovnoAleksandrovitz, Sh.ShakiBalbeishki, BeileKovnoAlperovitz, S.KovnoBalberiski, JafaKovnoAlsfainBaltman, FannieAlshwang-Rantor, PereKretingaBank, MinnaKovnoAltshuler, A.KovnoBankaite, SaraAltshuler, RivkaKovnoBaron, BelaAmaler, ChajaShavliBaron, Yoche & ShlomeAmaler, FaivelShavliBaron, Yochel & ChayaAmaler, ShmuelShavliBaronaite, IdaSapizishokAmolskiRadvilishokBaronaite, R.E.VilkomirAmolskytu, RivkaBaronaite, SoniaUtianAmsterdamski, ChajaKalvariaBaronene, LibeChaviadanThe list was issued in 1946 by the AmericanFederation for Lithuanian Jews, Inc., 1133 Broadway,New York 10, New York, I. Rozovsky, ExecutiveDirector. Whenever possible, town names have beenaltered to conform with Appendix 1. However, incases where the town was not in Lithuania or thespelling on the 1946 list was not easily recognizable,the original spelling was retained.452LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESBaaiuJcaviciu-te, A.AlytaBaaman, BroniaVilkomirBasaan, FradavilkomirBeder, «JosephBegak, Frida G.KovnoBeigelene, zinaKovnoBelii, BaseBeloetocki, ChajaVilkovishkBene, ChaiaBerger, Israel ChaimKovnoBerghaus, Est.erKovnoBerk, BliumaKovnoBerkman, cilaShavliBerko-Tarko, LoteBerkovit.2 , LiubaShavliBerkovitz, ShlomoKovnoBerman, BertaBernatein, BelaKovnoBerns-tein, LeoKovnoBernstein, NinaKovnoBernsbein, K.S.KovnoBemstein, RivaKovarskBerz, Ichok Dov Eshereni-Zara&aiBerzak, DeborahVilnaBidaite, Lah D.Bin, SaraShavliBinder, Peshe & GeleBinder, Yisroel & SoniaBinstein, ChaiceYeznaBirgerBirgeris, IliaKovnoBirman, G. & AbeKovnoBlank, SoniaTelzBlank, TamaraBlat Dr., with wifeTelzBlecher, Ester & MushaLuknikBlecher, RachilBliuman, Sh. B.Bloch, ChalelBloch, FridaBloch, FrumaBloch, Golde & ChasiaBloch, I.M.Bloch, IdelKrazaiBloch, IliaShavliBloch, MnuchaBloch, Mnucha & MosheBloch, SheineKupishokBlochas, SimkaBlochas, ZailikBlock, SimonRasinBlumber, N.YanovaBogorod, SterneBogorod, Zinger, ShtiraKovnoBogoslavskaj|a, Z.KovnoBorkovski, Ch.KovnoBorochov, RachilBoruchov, J.BoruchovitzBoruchstein, M.M.Bovilski, David &wife AniaKeidanBrachman, BelaRasinBramson, GitaBrandwein, RufaBraude-Gurvitz, F.KovnoBraudene, BatiaKelmeBrauer, MiraBraun, B.KalvariaBrava i t« , ChanaJaBravaxrman, Miria»Bragtr, GdalieBranneriene, chajlaBraslavslci, Chana, saraBreznik, LeizerVilko»irBrik, Binka (Zina)KovnoBrik, BuniaBroido, N.s.MerechBrutzkus, Teme & ChaimBudnicki, AbrahaPolangenBudniov, SaraBunies, DinaSlobodkaBunim, E.KovnoBurgin, JechielKovnoBurstein, JakovKretingaBushkanetz, F.Cerniak, P.J.Cesler, M.VilkomirChackeles, ElenaKovnoChaet, GindaChai, SholomSemilishokChaitovitz, ChasiaTelzChasman, ChazeChazan, Leah FullerChazanovitz, Rachil,Kovnodaughter & son ZeevChazanovitz, Shlomo,Alytawith wife DinaAlytaChemiak, PereKovnoCherniaJcov, Yudel & wife KovnoChien, sh.M., wife& 2 sonsShavliChlamnovitz, TamaraChobotene, L.Cholok, JakovvilkovishkChudin, JakovChyat, EstherChyeniene, BasiaCigan, JacobCingaus, IreneCipienene, BraineKovnoCises, GrishaCotler, MereKovnoCukerman, DinaAkmianCvangaite, DoraKelmeCveigorn, RashelKovnoCvi, FaniaRovrtoDaitz (a child)Daitz, Boris, wife IraMemelDaitz, Mendel Ezhereni-ZarasaiDaitz, S.Danski, Icik, withwife & childButrimantzDavidavitz, ShlomoDavidova, M.UtianDavidovitz, GoldaKretingaDavidovitz, MiriamDavidovitz, RachelShavliand husband MeirDavidovitz, RivaDesler, NiutaKovnoDeutch, Mendel Ezhereni-ZarasaiDilion-Ltmc, ZinaDiner, Naum with wifeDiscant, RivaKovnoDislerene, MeraKovnoDobrison, CilaDragadski, B.ButrimantzLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS453Duberstein, 7.Duk8tulskaja, HadiaKovnoDusbnicka)a, LizaDualmicki, Sapir, S.M.KovnoDualmiclci—Gink , M.with childKovnoDvagovslci, Moahe, withwife & childButrittantzD2Íaitrovska^a, Olga,aistar cjf D.A.KovnoElnan, D.I.Epatain, E. (dantiat)Epstainaita, MiaaEpatainaita, RevekaEpatainiana, DoraEpatainiane, Seina, DvoraEvenatein-lCatz ataky , ChanaFaidelaan, Dohe & SarabTalzFain-Fan, EstharAnikshtFainaita, E.KovnoFainbarg, DavidKovnoFainbarg, FeigeVilkovishkFainbarg, FaniaKovnoFaingold-JacovskeneVilkoairFainatain, M.ShavliFait, EliashKovnoFaivusb, MoisheShavliFaivtish, PesselFaivushene, D.Faktor, CiporaAlsiadFaktor, Izrael, wife& 3 childranAlsiadFaktor, JosifAlsiadFaktor, Meir, withwife & childAlsiadFaktorovski, R.Farbar, HenechKaaaiFarber, Rabecca (Kat z erginski)Feige, DonFeldberg, ShnuelKupishokFeler, Dr. A. withwife & 2 childrenKovnoFelariane, MiraKovnoFeller, líerucho*Feller-Zvi, BeileShavliFilc, Aron, I.ShavliFinkelbrand, ManiaRasinFinkelbrand, SaraVackshnaFinkeliene, RashelFinkelstein, DinaFinkelstein, Dr. FeniaKovnoFinkelstein, LiaAlytaFish (Fisaita), RosaKovnoFish, Assia (child)KovnoFisher, LaizarLikaFishkin, JochelAlsiadFlauaiana (Lichter), zisleFlax, YosalKrozhFleisher, Judah DovFlarena, BasiaF1iachar, RivaKovnoFloia, Zisle, withhusband David Sh.Fogelaan, VolfFrank, HenieShavliFreidene, DT.Frenkel, A.Frenkelstein, BerelKovnoFrankalyta, EaaFridkovski, ChanahFridlib, I.XopchevaFridaan, ChajaFridnan, CiliaPilvishok& EkusialFridnanaita, BrigitaPilvishokFriadaan, ChayaFriadaanana, PeaiaTolzSt TsharniaFronan, Nisan,Skudvillwife & childVirhalnFunt, and wifa & childKovnoFur, SaraShavliFuraanene, AnnaShavliGabajus, Dr. A., 3 childran KovnoGafanovitz, AbranEzbarani-ZarasaiGalfar (Halfer)Libas Pasba & sonPonevezbGaaus, IliaSkudvillGandlar, SoniaKovnoGantfulis, A.VllkonirGanz, Sonja PanashishokGar, JosifGar, Rachal, husbandKovno6 childGarbar, RishkaKovnoGarson, M.Gabart, Arthur, wifaKovnotk 2 children vilkovishkGeceviciene, B.Gefan, J.Gaiaan, BertahGalmanaita, MaraGalparnaita, RinaZhusliGendler, NecbaKovnoGans, BarlVaviyaGernanskyta, F.Sh.KovnoGarshovitz, MotelShavliGarshuni, RivkaGartner, JosephKupishokGertnar, ShainaKuplshokGarvish, Riva LizaKovnoGasseus, G.YurburgGilda, Rina (a child)Gilis, I.KovnoGilisene, MalkaTalzGinaita, Sara & husbandKovnoGink, Mair, wifa & cbildGinsburg, M.I.PonavazhGinsburg, MoshaGinzbarg, BaliaKupishokGinzburg, Gadas & daugbtar KovnoGinzburg, M.D.Ginzburg, NasiaKovnoGirshovitzGirsbovitz, Jona& wifa Sara EtaGitalnan, Abran,Kovnowifa ChanaGitalman, David,Yanovawifa LizaVanovaGlago, MarcusShkudGlas, Fraidl, 3 childranKovnoGlas, M., sistar RivkaKovnoGlax, ¥osal, with brothar& sister & daughtarKrozhGlaz, FridaKovnoGlaxer, L. Kovno-Sanco454LÍTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESGlazotr, M.Glick»an, Dr. IsaacGlikas, IsaiGoblicki, Sbulaait:AnikshtGodrov, Vulf & RacbelVevlyaGofaan, MashaGofaan, RozaGolcbarg, S.TavrigGoldberg, Bela wlthhusband Boris & childKovnoGoldberg, Dr. Jakob,wife & 2 childrenShavliGoldberg, JacobPilvishokGoldberg, P.J.ZhagerGoldberg, RachelPilvishokGoldberg, Rina (a child)KovnoGoldberg, S.G.Goldberg, Zahava(a chiid)KurshanGoldbergene, Fruna &granddaught.er VilkovishkGoldenhei», Dr. Boris MarianpoleGoldin, P.M. & husbandKovnoGoldschaidt, LiubaGoldschaied, Linda& notherShavliGoldstein, DobeGoldstein, DoraGoldstein, R.Goldstein, Shlonowith wifeKovnoGolub, Abraha»LazdaiGontornick, RachilGordon, Chai» with daughterGordon, FishkeBirzhGordon, JosifYeznaGorin, BenchlGoron, FainaGoss, EliaGovshovitz, LusiaPonevezhGreen, SaraKovnoGreenberg, FriedaKovnoGreiedorf, ReizlPonevezhGrilichesKovnoGrinberg, FridaMe»elGrinaan, Josif, wife& 4 children Ezhereni-ZarasaiGrodnik, Jakov with wifeShavliGrodski, IliaKovnoGrodzenski, SheftlGrodzinski, LeaKovnoGros»an, L., son & daughterGrosaan, s.Gruzd, Keile (a child)Gudinski, JubaKovnoGurviciene, IdaKovnoGurvitz, Braude B.KovnoGurvltz, EtlKovnoGurvitz, RachilGedrovitzGurvitz-Zonder, MalkaKovnoGut, B.KovnoGutkin, SaraGutaan, Efrai» with wifeKovnoGut»an-Kore»,Rochel Kovno-Shant z yGzanski-Friedlander,EllaShadovaHillelson, Gershon& ItzchakSudargHof»an, Rosa, with sonAba & daughter RachelIevenski, BenjasinKovnoIncurene-Jalovitz, F.Ipp, I., wife & childKovnoIvlan, JuliaKovnoJablon, M.F.PilvishokJakushekYanishokJakushek, M.U.,5 chlldrenZhaiaelJalovltz, IndureneKupishokJanorver, MosheKel»eJanoveraite, Pa.Janovski, Zisel,wife & son StoklishokJar»ovski, Zisl,with wifeJasvinas VilkovishkJasvonskaja, OliaKovnoJavnaite, Miria»Kel»eJavnite, M.B.ShavliJofe, Chai», wife, childKovnoJofe, Julia Dr.,husband Leiser & childJofe, MinaPonevezhJofe, Niuta, withdaughterKovnoJofe, Tuvia, wife,4 chlldrenYanovaJofe-Abra»ovitz, ElaYanovaJoffe, s. & RachaielJordanova, RosaJoselevitz-Vainberg, InJosephine, IdaJosephson, TaniaJosaan, Berl, son& daughter Ezhereni-ZarasaiJosaan, G.Judel, RachelDarblanJudelevitz, Abra»KovnoJudalevitz, DavidKovnoJudelevitz, JosifKovnoJudelevitz, Pesia,husbandvilko»irJudelevitz, Saul,wife, sonYanovaJudelevitz, T.KovnoJudlovitz, I.M.,wife, 3 childrenPilvishokJurevitzene-Kalinaxiskl,A.Pane»uneKabaker, C., wife,daughter, sonKovnoKac, ChajjaKupishokKac, FaivelisKac, IdelKac, LeaKovnoKac, N.Kac., S.Kacaite, C.Kacaite, Feige Leawith sisters Chana,Itta & brother Sholo»Kacene, Batla R.,with childPonevezhKacanalenbogen, M.KovnoKacerginski, sh.I.Kacev, Gershon withwife GitaShavliLISTS OF UTHUANIAN JEWS455Kacherginski, RosaKadishene, Dora Dr.,busband AbrahaaKaqan, BatiaRaqan, Berl KovnoKagan, Gutia KeidanidanKagan, K. KalvariaKagan, MalkaKagan, Perl & RachilKagan, Riva, 2 children KovnoKagan, Rosa KovnoKagan, Shaloa PonevezhKagan~Alkenit z ki,Basia VasilishokKaganiene, ZlateKalinkov, Zelda,with Zagava KovnoKalaaniene, M. (Hinda) KelseKalstein, DeborahKalvariskaja, F.E.,with child KovnoKalvashnik, RivaKanber, Mania with child ShavliKaaberis, MarkusRaaenez, ChajaKaatzon-Berelson, Sara ShavliKanaite, E.L., with sister KovnoRanowitz, SaauelRantorovitz, A. Dr.with wife KovnoKapeliushnik, Dora KovnoKapeliushnik, Grisha,wife & child KovnoXaplan, Benjamin (child) KovnoKaplan, BerthaKaplan, Celia LokeKaplan, Elia 6 family YurburgKaplan, Frida, 2 children KovnoKaplan, Lea with brotherKaplan, M.B.vilnaKaplan, Sh. 1.ShavliKaplan, ShulaaitKaplan, VeraShavliKaplan-Fras, BasiaKeidanidanRaplan-Gordon, RachelKovnoKaplanaite, Ch. & brother AlytaKaporaite, SaliaKaporas, Dr. BprisasKaporiene, MinaKarabelnik, CipeKarabelnik-Zas, JudesKarabelnikaite, M.,with sotherTavrigKarklin, SholosSapizishokKarnovskaite (child)Karnovski, Judit.,2 childrenKeidanidanKarnovski, M.KeidanidanKarpaite, MalkaAnikshtKarpulyte, ChanaPlungianKarpus, BennoKatashanov, SoniaKovno& fatherKovnoKatavishnik, MosheRenegolaKatavushnikene, R.Katchelnik-Yankaite,KovnoBlumeYasvinKatinskaja, M.Katz-Bloch, TaibaKauf»an, FeniaKaufsan-Finkelstein,MiroslavFannyMiraslavKazlova, Riva with ChanaKazlovski, JosephPoshvitinKernerene, A. & brotherKalvariaKez, EliezerKiharski, ChainKovnoKibartene, SaraKibucas, Z.L.Kibutz, Z.L.Kirpicnik, RosaKirzner, Deborah &Chana EtlShavliKisenishki, B.Kivart, Sarah(born Moses)Klackin, S.Klas, SaraKlass, EljahVilkovishkKlebanski, WolfKovnoKleinstein, EsterVilkovishkKliacko, PerecKliuc, SaraKober, HenieKobkin, HenechKodes, DenaKovnoKogan, GeleKurshanKogen, Gerl with wifeKovnoKoleski, MirianRolodni, Eta, notherLazdai& 2 childrenKopelevic, GitaKopelianski, X.ShavliRopelov, AniaKopelovene, Ch.Korbnan, CipeKovnoKorbnan, MichaelKoren, E.GorzhdKornanaite, CiporaTelzKorner, FridaKotinski, M.Rotler, F.B.PlungianKovalskin, MotiaKovarski, Dr. GoracButrinantzKovarski, MordchaiKrakinovski, M.Kravcuk, HirshKravec, Ruven withMemelbrother JakovKovnoKravec, SinonRravicieneKreingel, GoldeKrivand, RebeccaKovnoKrokaite, ReleRakishokKronane, P.I. with child RasinKronik, Fania, husband& 3 childrenShirvintKrost, XdaTavrigKubitzki, XsraelKulbakaite, Faige,Meretshwith childKovnoKuler, EstherKuler, JoninaKulgovski-Turetz,AlytaBashe & daughterKovnoKuper, Esther & JackKovnoKurickaja, ChaasiaKushnerzickaja, FridaShavli456 LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESKveskln, OllaSlobodkaKvesko, Rachel,VilkoslrKvlnt, Dora, Etl,RebeccaLabanovskaja, ChajaVendzhigolaLabanovskl, Melr,wlfe & 4 daughtersKovnoLachowitz, BluseKovnoLaepert, LeonVilkosirLancsanene, N.SlobodkaLandau, ZaliKovnoLandnene, AnnaKovnoLanivitz, SaraLaurinaitene, SofiaTelzLavitiene-Krepko, RiveMariaspoleLazarskene, D.RasinLazarskene, D.RasinLazdan, BasiaLelbovitz, AbeKrozhLeibovitz, RuvenLelbovitz-Rovirt, KeileLeibowitz, RachelLeibowitz, ReubenKelmeLeibush-Levine, BlunaKovnoLeondene, Liza Kovno-SlobpdkaLevas, A.KovnoLevi, FaniaKovnoLevi, I.S.Levi, NachunSkudvi11Levl, Rachel,2 daughters & sonMemelLevi, T.S.Levik, FridaGedrovitzLevin, BliusaKovnoLevin, BorisKovnoLevin, Ch.TzltovianLevin, ChononVilnaLevin, Dr. NlsenZhusliLevin, GirshKovnoLevin, JuhuditKupishokLevin, LeibOranLevln, LeibaSventzionLevin, Maxin & wifeKovnoLevin, RozaLevin, Sara with childKretlngaLevin-Liarie, FradkeBirzhLevina, Lea, husband& childKretingaLevina, R.A.Radvi1ishokLevinaite, D.A.Levinaite, EsterBirzhLevinas, A.R.KovnoLevinas, E.R.KovnoLevinas, G.F.Levinas, Judel M.KovnoLevinas, R. , wife & child KovnoLevine, Leah& daughterDivinishokLevine, RachelLevine, TinaLevine-Binder, ChayaKrakinovaLevinene, AdasaLevinene, LidaLevinene, RachelPilvishokLevinson, L.I. & wifeLevinstein, IchokDatnuvaLevinsteinas,Isaas Datnova (Keidan)Levit, BrainePonevezhLevitan, Eta, husband& sonShavliLevltan, K.Levitan, K.Z.YurburgLevner-Melnick, FriedaAnikshtLiatzkovitz-MeyrowitzAlytaLibsan, P.R., 2 children KovnoLichtenstein, SheinaLickaja, ChassiaLiebersan, BerlKovno& wifeMariaspoleLintup, Dov Ezhereni-ZarasaiLiovas, EsterLipecene, L.YurburgLipkind, Sara B.Lippaan, LeizerPonevezh& brothersKeidanLipshes, RachllLipshes, Sharmia,Slobodkawife & brotherLipshitz, AaronLipshitz, Chaja L.Llsiene, Ch.(Rochel Lea Bloch)Lison, JosephLiudvinovski, L.,Slobodkawith daughterLoaianskaja, Mirias,brother & sisterLopianski, Cvi, wife& childMariampoleLunc, ZinaLunz, Zina BasheLurie, David, wifeKovno& 2 childrenLurie, G.ShavliLurie, GitaLurie, JosifLurle, SimonPonevezhMac, Dvora (a child)Macene, Chaja F.Macht, FaniaRovno& father JakobKovnoMaerovitz, Ch.Magid, Berger Sinchawith childKovnoMaister, JudelYurburgMalzelis, Nau»Makovska ja, IraKovno& brotherKovnoMaler, RachilTavrigMalinker-Zeidel, ZeldeShavliMankevitz, LeaMargolene, LiubaKovnoMargolis, ShnuelGedrovitzMarkushevitz, NathanMaskancaite, EstherMatusevitz, Molshe& nephew ShayeKretingaMauber/ RozaMauberyte, Rebecca (Re^inaValeseviciene) AlytaHazlivter, Tzlpa ErzhvllkyMedalskl, Joseph & sonMeklenburgene, L.J. MarlaspoleMekler, RebeccaMelaaed, Ch.Melamed, MereMelcene, GeniaKelneLISTS OF UTHUANIAN JEWS457Melcene, M.KelaeNurak, IdaMelnik, GindaOguzaita, siaaGedrovitzMelnik, Josi£Kovno01eiski, ChenochKovnoMelnik, Sara Ezhereni-Zarasai01itzkaya, D.D.S.Melt.z, H.Olshvangaite, ZlateMelt.2 , SaraShukianOrdaan, ChanaMendelene, Genia (Babo)Osherovitz, GirshPonevezhMendelevitz , JoaJ.fSlobodkaOstrauskiene, SofiaKovnoMendelis, FaivusasOstrinski, NoachVeviyaEpsteinasPailaniene, DushiaMendelovitz, RivkaPalcmki, SiachaKovno& EliezerKelaePegir, M., wife IdaMendelson, GilelPeisachovitz, Leib& wifeZhagerPer, Golda, husbandMendelson, SaraShavli& 2 childrenKovnoMerriash, ChajaPer-Stender, Ro z a& brother & sister& childKovnoMessie, LiovaPerelstein, AlyaMiakininas, Ch. L.Peres, ChajaMiasnikene, Dvora & 2& sister BeileKovnodaughters & grandaughter KelsePeres, Leizer, wifeMicelsacher, Dr. B.T.Vilna& childrenKovnoMichelson, Oskar,Perkulis, Saloaonwife & childPerski, ShauelMichelson, SischaPerski, Sinai& sister LernereneKovnoPesachovitz, SaraBirzhMichnovski, Velvl & ZevLazdaiPet, Feige, with childVilkoairMickevitz, K.Petuchovska j a, ManiaMil, C. Ing. with wifewith childShavli& childKovnoPile, A.J., with wifeMileris, M.N.TavrigPilnik, PerlMiller, FreidelKovnoPinkus, ChaiaKovnoMiller, Malka (nee Ribak)KovnoPodriatchik, JosephMiller, Yente,Pograaanski, MordchaiChais, ChanaPolovin, Meir & wifeMiller, Zalnan Kovno~Slobodka& childShavliMilleriene, MinnaShavliPoluksht, Riva & LiubaKovnoMilner, Ch.Portnova, DinaKovnoMilner, chayaPortnova, G.L.KovnoMilner, LeaPortnoy, Dr. M.KovnoMilnerite, LeaPozner, M. & brotherKovnoMishelski, LiubaKovnoPranculiene, L.S.MishtovsXi, S.KovnoPreiskel, s.KovnoMoritz, M.Preiss, HillelHoses, LeibPreiss, Rachel & YudesMozeson, G.N.Pres, ZalaanKovnoMuller, SaauelutianPress, DobeSiadMunic, Ben CijonKovnoPruchne, MinaYanishokMushkat, Itaan,Prussak, Batia & LiubaLazdaiChana LeahKovnoPulerevitz, BeileYurburgMusikant, c.ch.Purto, GisiaVilnaMussel, MashaEzhereniPurvin, IzraelShavliNaimaniene, ShevaKelaeRabinovicene, AnnaNatanovich, Paike& daughter MashaShantzy(Katz)YuzhintRabinovitz, Jalcov,Hechaandiene, Feigelwife & childKovnoNeieraan, s.KovnoRabinovitz, L.L.Neisark, LizaKovnoRabinovitz, MashaNeacinski, ChayaRabinovitz, RashelKovnoNeaecinski, E.M.Rabinovitz-Frankel,Neuaan, Beile &BerenstenKovnosister RashelZhidikRaches, Rachel & daughter RovnoNeviazeskaja, Gariet,Rachail, Sara2 childrenKovnoRackauskas, ChazkelisSerhaiNoiberger, Ch.KovnoRagoler, S.Noik, M.T., wife &Raping, ChajaAlyta3 childrenBazilianRapport, AnnavisokidborNotinger, GitaKovnoRapport, M.Ch.VilkoairNovoaaiski, HindaKovnoRash, Fannie458LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESsUMthai«l, S.B.Sagal, JacobGrodnoRaudan«kaja, ChavaSegaliene, BasiaRaxanaki, R. 6 8h.Shavlisagalovskajja , EvaXovnoR»hi, ItJc«BirzhBenior, Efrain & MalkaKovnoRaaigoltkaja, M.Sasoilis, s.Reaigolalca ja , MnuchaShabs, Masanal, wifa& 2 síataraRovno& childrenRovnoRa«inkovit.2, RlvHa &Shachnovski, Lokia,ShainaRakishokwifa & 2 childranKovnoRaanit.2kiShavliShaefler, RaisaKovnoRaznik, CiliaShapirana, LuhaShavliRaznik/ RachalShapiro, Ch.& huahand MairTrishikShapiro, ChainBirzhRatnik/ ShifraShapiro, ElchononRitova& ftlstar DoraButrimantzShapiro, EliazarRignant/ PaulaBirzhShapiro, LiubaRitov, ChanaShapiro, G.E.Kovno6 daughtar SaraTelzSbapiro, GitaRitov/ EstarTalzShapiro, KasrialVaviyaRodaa, J.Shapiro, LaaBirzhRogaita, TaihaPilvishokShapiro, MatlaRolnik, M.XovnoShapiro, MandalZhusliRon, FimaXovnoShapiro, TanarShavliRoaanovfltki, Banjaain,Shaps, Ghana, 2 childranSalokwife & 2 childranLazdaiSharkanski, M.XovnoRoaas, I.XovnoShavel-Helison, CeliaRosonbarg, R.Shavl, ShainaTalzRosenberg, RachaShaffar, RajaRosanherg, zlataShain, I.VilkonirRosanblataita, AnnaXovnoShain, JosifPonavazhRosanhliun, ManiaXovnoSheinberg, F.A. & ctoildRoaana Ch. & sonKalnaShainbarg, Fania,Rosangartan, FriadaXuzshanhusband & sonPonevazhRoaankranc, Ing.Shainkar, TavkaButrinantzRoaanatain, TaubaTavrlgSbarRoaantal, LiabaKovnoShar, ChayaRotenfudet, BallaShar, Mira & childXovnoRotanstain, T.I.Shar, SarahGordzhRozaairin, AniaKovnoShar-Habalis, BasaShavliRuhin, BrainaBirzhSheraiteRubin, EntaSharbakov, MoshaMarianpolaRuhin, RuvenKovnoSherman, MyarinBirzhRUbinaite, EsterXovnoShaskin, Dr. JaRovRubinas, DavidShavz, MirianPosvoltt sistar SaraShifarana, Taiba & sisterRUbinov, RodaShifnan, MoshaShavliRubinaon, Sara & MishaKovnoShilingovskaja, Ch.XovnoRubinstain, BanjaminKalvariaShilkinar, ChavaSlobodkaRubinstain, chaia, Ruben GorzbdShinbargas, H.Ruhinatain, JuditShinalavitz, EthalKovnoRudashovski, P., wifeShimkovitz, FriadaXovno& 2 childranShinkovits, FriedaMflurianpolaRudkevitz, EstarShkliar, ChavaRudnik, L.Shlapobarski, M.Rufaite, IraShla z bargana, RuchamaRutstain, S.E.MarianpolaShlomovits, RachilXovnoSacharaite, ShainaKupishokShlonovitz, RivaSack, MoishaShnit, TaaSadarvitz-Rodzinski,Shmitas, R.V.HanaPonavasbShnuklar, EsterSadov, WolfShnuklar, GutaXovnoSa»uniskaita, I.H.AlytaShnukler, R.Sandlar, Chaiw& 2 chlldrenPonevezhsandlar, ChanaShn\iklar-Nurokana, IdaXovnoSandlarana, KlaraKovnoShnulevicene, BartaNanokshtSarpinavits, AbrashaShnulovitz, BartaSarvar, Zorach & wifaRakishokShnaidar, ChayaShadovaSegal, BlunaPonevezhShnaidar, GoldaXovnoSagal, Chais & ZlataXovnoShnaidar, Ida & daughterShavliLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS459ShneideT, LeibShneider, LeibeShukianSbneider, MasheNevaranShneider-Klein, MasbaNevaranShneider-Luksiker,Shlove & DavidShochat, Leiba & wifeKovnoSbochat, Meir, son& 2 daughtersKovnoShochat, N.KovnoShogam-Etkin, SoniaKovnoSholomowitz, SaraKovnoSbomer, TaniashavliShotland, L.utianShpakas, Berl, wife& childKovnoShperling, B.L. husband& childKovnoShperling, JuditVilkovishkShubitz, ChassiaDarbianShugam, CbajaTelzShulcene, LeaShulgaser, Liova& P. & B.KalvariaShulman, Ghaja,3 childrenSlobodkaShulman, GitaShxister , A.KovnoShuster, RivaKovnoShuster, Vulf, wife,2 children & sisterKovnoShusterene, RachelZbagerShwarz, BertaKovnoSimonaite, Roza &2 sistersMemelSirot, MeirKovnoSlepak, NaftoliKovnoSneg, MalkaKupisboksoloveicik, R.I.KovnoSoloveitchik, S.,Ch. & wifeZhezmirSolski, Calel & LeibYanovasolski, Chackel, wlfeYanovaSpan, G. (Retzky)Spevack, Lea & 4 chlldren KovnoSrednitzkl, Chaya& husbandSteimanas, S.PonevezhSteinas, IchokvilkovisbkSteinas, L.M.,Raissa & 2 childrenSteinmanene, Dr. BsterStern, FeigeLatzkovaStokol, R.VilkomirStoler, Chaya (Meshkup)Stolerls, AbelisStolov, BmaKovnoStrashunaite, GoldaStraz, BsterSubocka;)a, Bronia & sonKovnoSudarski, F.L.Sudenski, BphraimshnipishokTacas, Chaim LeibRasinTaft-Rubinstein, ChanaShakiTamshe, A.Tamshene, EtaKovnoTarlovska}a, Li.I.KovnoTartak-Paikski, MeriKovnoTchernovitch-Rosenherg,IdaTeimanaite, EsterKovnoTeinovits, MeirKovnoTeitelbaumaite,NiutaVilkovishkTelerant, Hirsch& ChanaTkacaite, LiaKovnoTkacikaite, ZinaVilkiTodorovitz, NaomiKovnoTodresher, YitzchakToker, PoliaRadvilishokTonene, EsterTraub, DoraKupishokTraub, MoisbeKupishokTrigubov, OvseiMazhaikTrockéne, EsterKovnoTru&kanove, G.Tubianskaite, soniaTubianskaja, BebaKovnoTubiash, JuliaUpnit2kaite-Rodene, R.Upnitzki, Hoisha & F. KaidaniUrin, Sara Kovno-Pan«»unVainer, P.I.Vainerman, Asia & mothar KovnoVeicman, B.Veitc, Tauhe KupishokVerbovski, I. AkmianVeri, Bei ShakiVerovitz, TaniaVidis, A. KovnoViducki, Liuba & Miriamvias, Malka & daughtarvilenski, Nechama &brother & sister ShakiVindzberg, Samuel & wife KovnoVisgardiski, Jeina,wife & child KovnoVishnia, SheinaVistanetzki, Ichok & wifeViukerene, B.J.Vladislavski, Fruma& 2 daughtersVolpe, Alexander KovnoVolpe, Ch.Volpe-Mendelson, ReiselVolpert, R.Waksena, Sonia KovnoWaldmanene-Mackenaite AlytaWarshavskaja, P.Warshavski, Leib VilkovishkWashkievich, Nicholas& daughter Sonia RasinWeiner, Chanab ShadovaWeiner, Chanah Vilkomirweiner, IdaWeiner, Matle BirzhWeitzer, RachelWidliansky, MargolaWinkelstein, IsaacWo1fberg, SanchaWunzberg, BerthaYaknelevitz-Kirch, LeahYankelevich, RachelYanovitz, RoneYarmovski, Zisel withwife & sonYelenevicius, N.MYelenevits, N.KovnoYanovaLÍTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNJTIES460Yo*alevicÍ6n«, BarthaVosefaon, S)mayaZablud, LaibZacepinski, M.I.Zakene, Cbaeeia-Zake < Chaia & brotberZakeene, ShuliaZalcaan, DavidZaaan, F.Zarchite, P.Zavilevitch, RachelZeider, RachelZelbovitz, A.L.Zelbovitz, B.A.Zeleaskaja, Dora,aother & sisterZelezniak, Sh.Zelikovitz, MachaanZilber, AnetZilber, EvgeniZilber, IsraelRovnoAlytaVeviaVilkoairVilkoairVilkoairRovnoKovnoVeviyavilkovishkZilber, Rachel Ezhereni-ZarasaiZilberg, IsaacZilberg, Sonia& child PonevezhZiIbergene, LiubaZllbergleit, I.Zilberaan, Ch.E.Zilberaanene, D. Ch.Ziaan, FeiceZiaan, Josef &2 childrenZiaelevits, ChaselZiason, Natan & EsfirZinghaus, Ireneziv, Dora & sister LokeZiv, JoninaZivene, E. with childPosvolPosvolDarbianHauaiestisRasinRurshanZlot, MinaZnatzki, RivlZundelevitz, B.ShavliFOUND IN FRANCEAbraaavicius, JacobKovnoAbraaovitz, CiliaKovnoAbraasonas, MadaaeKovnoAizaanas, PinchusAlkovitski, BernardAaarant, LiliAaisfeldKovnoAasterdaaski, E1iasAronovitch, R.MariaapoleAronovskaite, RosaAronsonasAvrach, B.VilkiBabkasBairoviciusBaras, AliceBejsleches, Dr. N.Belt, LubaVilkovishkBencel, JacobShavliBendel, YakovBender, Moses & AvraaBentzel, JacobBergson, M.Bleiaal, Mae.Blochas, JosephBluabergShavliBober, Micole (child)Borek, Peret (child)BoulavkoBrinskinaite, sizanRakova(child)KovnoBriskinas, MichelBrudnoBursteinCentnersveras, RudiChakoff, EssaCharaasse, VeraKovnoChveidonas, S.Codikov, Chackel(child) KovnoDidier, Mae. AlbertDiner, Nochua KovnoDobjanskiDobjianski, Abraa MariaapoleDonskis, MarieDOUlitChiDovidaanDranas, MarcelDreysinDworjetski, Dr. MarcDykzsteynEckhau z, Suz anne(child)EdkovskiEgline, HarryEichenbauaElias, Mae.Elperin, SoniaFain, Idel (ehild)Feferkorb, Mae.Feinberg, Helene (child)Feinberg, Irina (child)Fingerbrenas, Charles VisokidborFisasFiscber, RayaondFreinkelFrucht, Denise, Mireille,Michel (children) vilnaFrydaan, Michel (child) RogovaGaaburgas, Jacques(child) Geffen, SoniaGelaanGershounVilnaKovnoKovnoKovnoLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS461Garst, NissenMalasantGexrtznanMarkusGevis, SarahMarkusevitch, NathanKovnoGinsburg, BorisMatlovskiGleizerMatorine, ftee.GliRsan, E.Medaiska, BarbaraGnoutcheff, Sophi«Meisel(nee Shacbnofsky)KovnoMeleras, BaseYanovaGoldberg, B.Meleras, CecileYanovaGoldberg, Chaja (daughterMeleras, DoraYanovaRabbi Epstein)SuwalkiMeleras, HersanYanovaGoldberg, HaxMeleras, Mae.Goldingas, RebekaMeleras, NathanYanova(nee St.olit.sky)MariaspoleMelkasGorbik, HaxAlytaMelkas, ZelsanAnikshtGorfinkel, MireilleMelser, Charles(child)Melser, LouiseGorfinkel, Therese (child)Meshkup, LuibaKovnoGotsan, JosephMiasnikasGrinblattas, JacquesKovnoMochkovitchGrinholtz, LeonMulleras, AnnieUtianGurvitch, SoniaNechosasGutnanNodelHelaschovitz, MarcelOguse, Dr.Itskovitch, IsaakOksenhendler, Mme.Jaffe, kbeOlshwang, Abrau & ElaTelzJakubson, FriedaOrlinski, MoniaKovnoJancovici, SoniaPavlovski, Mne.KovnoJappu, S.M.PerelnanJaretsky, MarijaPieteski, Dr.JatskanPlotkin, RoseJoffee, Charles (child)PodzelverJoffee, Rosa (child)PouleverJoselovitch, BenoPozniakGrodnoKaceliene, R.PurinsonKaganas, Mr, & Mrs.Reinish, LydiaKaplanas, JacovusRosenbis, Mne.Karabogassian-KapitasRosenblat, SaauelOnaRosenblatt, GitaKare, JosephYanishokRosenthal, Dr. PaulaKatz, Moise RubinKovnoRosovasKitaieffRubinRochavi, Mr. & Mrs.Rubin fanilyYurburgRopelovitchRubinovitch, CeclleKretingaKuc, GeorgesRudeman , M>e.Kupferberg, RachelRzodkiewich, GeraldLac, BoleslavRakishokSal2/ BerthaVilnaLanditenas, AnnaGorzhdSanuel, stepkaLeikin, SinerSandlerLencnerSandler, JacobLernerSaslavsky, Mne.Levin, AsieVisokidborSaxeLevinaite, EsfiraSchapiro, H. Ezhereni'ZarasaiLevitz, WolfScheichetLewenson, RivkaScherman, Mr. & Mrs.LewiSchifrineLewin, AlsaSchulnan, ChainShavliLewin, W.Schuster, Mne.Lichtamacher, GabrielSchusteraan, EdnondSalokLichtenstein, MendelKovnoSchusteraan, HenrySalokLigus, LizaKovnoSchvartz, Mne.Liubauskaide, E.Schwarz, Mne.Loos, RaphaelSventzionSeferisLourie, Cecile (child).Segal, A.Rachel, LilianeKovnoSegalovicius, IvarLulinski, Felix(child)KovnoLurie, Sacha (child)KovnoSesoilis, EliasRogovaMainin, R.Sesoilis, FrunaMakuseviciusShalit, Gershon & MiraPonevezh462 LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES8h«igai, EliasTachaasno, AnyaSbugaraanShavliTawataiaff, VaraSilbarasVarancaa, MarcelUtianSilbara-troaVaiahran, EliannaYurburgSiaona, StavanVikatanaaa, SoniaSirovint, Haa.ViaotchakSlchapiro, Moisa (child)KovnoVolochas, IraneSlodovniR, Maa.MaingartanSaatniR, Liba VilkovishkWaraus, Mna.SaittaaYappu, S.M.KovnoSoloaon, SachariaYatakan, MoisaKovnoSolovait.chik, NataahaKovnoYouchnovatski, Dr.Sonkinaa, BertaPanimonYourdan-Elias, ElaneKovnoSonkinaa, IaaakZablotskiSonkinaa, MaxZanditanasSparoZaldoffStainar, LaopoldZlguelbaunSundaliovitch, D.Zilbar, ShloaoSwiadosz, FridaZolot.nit.ski, Dr. SarySzaakinaZusipa, WillyTau - brotharaZvirbliartski, HenochTaitalaa, Joaaf MayarZysnan, L.FOUND IN ITALYAbramowitz, MendelLuknikBrick, HirschKovnoAbraaowitz, MordchaiLuknikBrik, AronAcik, Gabrial, wifaSrednikBrik, LubaAdlar, LaaKalnaBro, MaxShavliAgulnik, YosifKovnoBrodowka, LubaRakishokAlparovicz, RivaLlgnlanBrown, JacobKovnoAronowicz, LejbMapuBuo, MalrKovnoAronson, SisonKovnoBurgin, SanuelKovnoBarisznik, MosasVilnaChaitin, DoraShavliBasicki, MichlaKovnoChaitin, MichelShavliBasicki, RivkaKovnoChalozln, LubaKelneBaskin, Aj|zikKovnoChazkin, ChanaKovnoBagak, YarachnialKovnoChenoch, T.KovnoBailis, Oshar YudelKovnoChernes, FaniaRovnoBailis, YahudaKovnoChodosas, BorisVilnaBakar, AbaKeidanidanChodosas, TaubaVilnaBar, cirelShavliChoner, JochewedponevezhBar, HirzShavliChudin, ChawaKovnoBar, ZelikShavliDen, ChainTavrigBarknan, BatshavaTalzDinantovit2, IsaaxBernstein, LaoShkudDiner, AbranKovnoBarnstain, PasiaVilnaDiner, RozaKovnoBesicki, MichlaDaugDircktorowitz, Dr.Bindar, ChaiaPranGersronSzauluBirgar, DanialKovnoDolnicky, AnaBirgar, FridaSlobodkaDolnicky, Dr. SinonBirgar, HilalKovnoDolnicky, RafaelBirgar, RozaVilnaDzinitrowski, AbranKovnoBirgar, SiraKovnoDzinitrowski, CiliaVilnaBirger, SulaKovnoEglin, lcikVilkiBlecher, ParlVabolnikEinbinder, RozaBoruchowitz, Shole*SbavliEinstein, ChajaVilnaBrauda, MayarTavrigEpstein, LazarBrecka, ChanaEsterovitc, SholonVilnaLISTS OF UTHUANIAN JEWS463FaJctor 3 poopleKatzas, JoselisKovnoF«ig«l# Mot«lSventzionKeksejte, SaraMashaikFeinberg, ChanaVilnaKekst, SaraFttldsan, FiahelF«ld>an, FishelAlytaKewkowsky, SamuelKibart, CilaShavliFine-Bargtr, MiriaaKovnoKirzner, CiporaVilnaFinJcels-teinKovnoKlawanski, AbrasKovnoFinkelst«in, Dr. ChaiaKovnoKlawanski, SaraKovnoFinkels-tein, ElieserKovnoKlawanski, TeiceKovnoFinkelstein, JereaiasKovnoKloner, BerlKovnoFinkelstein, LalaKovnoKnaster, LouisFiecher, AicikShavliKobelkowsky, MordchaiYurburgFlorence, Maite2hidikKonwoi, Zalman, MosheKovnoFrenkel, ShauelKibartKowarska, ElkaVilnaFridberg, BerkKovnoXreaeraan, ZaleanKelseFridberg, GirschKovnoKwartowski, Henny,Fridaan, BrigitaMeselEsteraShavliFridaan, EliashMeselKwieskin, MiriasKovnoFridaan, EtaRitovaLandssan, (Poisner)Fridaann, YochewedRitovaHodaVilnaFriedaan, BerelKovnoLandssan, WolfKelseGafanowitz, MinaPonevezhLazar, ChaisPonevezhGafanowitz, TirzaPonevezhLazar, ChasiaGelberg, DoraKovnoLeibenson, ChajaKovnoGlaz, ChaiaLeibenson, IsraelKovnoGlaz, EsterLeibenson, SaraKovnoGlaz, MichelKovnoLeibowicz, YuditShevliGlickaan, XsaakKovnoLeizerson, MosheVilnaGoland, M.ShavliLespert, MeyerRadviliehokGoldberg, EliezerKovnoLerner, AsnaGoldberg, FaibaKovnoLev, ZelikChekenovaGoldfuss, LeibeLevin, XserDuksht& DavidLoykuvaLevit, MikaShavliGoldstein, MeyerVilnaLewi, SalosonShavliGoldstein, SalaaonYurburgLewin, Boruch, EsiaShavliGoldstein, TaaaraShkudLewin, Shloso, ChayaVilnaGolub, AbraaKovnoLewinson, ZeniaVilnaGolub, PninaKovnoLewinzon, Yosef, DawidShavliGolub, ShulaaithKovnoMariaspolski, ChaimVirbalnGorfinkel, LeibKovnoMazavietzky & brotherShavliGotz, SawelShavliMeller, PeisachVilkovishkGreenstein, IsaacRasinMeller, RachsielVilkovi»hkGrin, MaxShavliMeserowitz, JosefRakishokGurvicz, ChajaLigeianMichelson, SischaKalvariaHolzerMilchiker, AbrasVilnaHolzer, SoniaMilchiker, CivjaVilnaIlaan, NechaaaMilkowitz, ShlosoVilkovishk«Jasaite, RochelYurburgMilner, AbrahasEishishokJaswen, RosaKovnoMilner, JosefKovnoJerushalai, EliezerShavliMitkovskiene, RozaKovnoJerushalai, JosefShavliMitkowski, ZelizKovnoJerushalai, MarkusShavliMost, ShoshanaTavrigJerushalai, SaraShavliMozes, LeibPrenJudelewitz, SusanaShavliMurik, BerlKovnoKan, BerlMurik, MosheRasinKan, RajaMusel, RosaAbelKantor, Paris, SaralCretingaNadel, EfraisKovnoRantorowitz, TaibaVilnaNadel, LeibKovnoKaplan, Boris,Naiwidel, SholesKovnoChaya, XserKovnoNeuersann, ChaisSavanoriuKaplan, Xser & ChajaPonevezhNeusark, Mus jaAleksatKarabelnik, MelkaTavrigNirke, YozefShavliKatz, BerlNusenbauB, MirjasSzapenaKatz, ChajaOnje, SzserlShavliKatz, FaiveKovnoOrlin, RajaKovnoKatz, JoselKovnoOszer, DawidKelseKatz, Michel 6 HirshSkudvillPaletz, SesuelYanovaKatz, Moshe, Bencion,Patasznik, MaxVilnaMoses, Hode, ChajaTavrigPatasznik, YoselVilna464LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESPeras, CaliaSviadoahit sShloaaberg, ChaiaPeraa, EljaazKovno& laraalPetliski, MalaShavliShulaan, ChaiaSapisiahokPatliski, SaaualShavliShwars, LubaPlotl, U)kaShavliSilinaki, BarShavliPortnow, JacobSilinaki, ChaiaShavli& EstharYurburgSoloaon, AhraavilkoairPupko, S.VilnaSpaktor, DinaLingnianRabin, SaaualSalantStein, Mendel, ShloaoVilkiRabin-Kirsh, TaubaShavliStein, SalaaonKovnoRabinowits, Taniastiart, LuaikKovnoRabinowits, YakonStilar, LajhKovnoRabinowits-London, DworaSzildar, LajbShakiRac, RinaKovnoSsloabargShavliRaichal, LaibS sloaberg, SchaulShavliRaichal, RiwkaKov.noSsulkin, TaubaShavliRainaa, LaibaKovnoTainowits, MajarvilkoairRapaport, MailachVilkoairTaaaba, DavidKovnoRapaika, AvraaBirshTaaahe, laaKovnoRaichaa, JehudithKovnoTaaaha, RochalKovnoRaichas, RochalKovnoTanchal, DawidShavliRibak, EliasarLasdaiTaic, RaahalTelzRochsa, EtaYurburgTelaak KovnoRoshanaki, Dr. VahudaVirbalnTuhin, BaaiaRutahaiaki, FaigaKovnoVilenaki, NadjaKovnoRywkind, AbranVilnaVilenaki, YakobKovnoRywkind, SsaaralVilnaViahniab, Balla & aiatarSalsaan-Rutsaiaki,vitko, JoaephYurburgFaigaKovnoVolk, Hinde & RivkaPokroiSandalovaki, SaraVilkoviahkVolpe, ltsik & wifeSanowaki, HojsieKovno(Celia Kagan)Sapiro, YakobKovnoWerahhowkay, JakobKovnoSarfinovits, AbraahaShavliWerahbowsky, PeaiaKovnoSarfinowits, AbraaShavliwidokler, 12 chokVilkoairSat, LejbVilnaWinkelatein, JoaephvilkoviahkSchapiro, ChanaShavliWinkelaztejn, JoaefVilkoairSchapiro, MosesSh&vliWolfe-Funk, RivkaNauaiestisSchapiro, YakobKovnoYafe, AbraaVilnaSchain, FaiwalGrodno-KovnoYafe, AnaVilnaSchulaanZaidtaan, BeileSagalaon, AriaKovnoZalcberg, ChaaiaKovnoSagalaon, ElchononKovnoZalcberg, RochelKovnoSagalaon, RajaKovnoZilbernan, BerlD&ugilisokSagalaon, SiaonKovnoZiskind, SaulKalaeSaaicki, BindaKovnoZol, AronShavliShaws, GaniaZolin, HachuaRasinShloaowits, MejarKovnoFOUND IN SWEDENAronovftky, GrunjaBoJc«rlt«, RacbelB«r«kit«, JudithBerkowiti, RiwaBirow»ka*Kowavnka, IdaBl&9oclaw«nsky, J«imyCvi (Zvi), TaniaDiraktorowitsch, BadaaaDuaont, AlcuvaDuaont, JosafK afarJoarainaiJoarainaiSalantVilnaTal-AvivKovnoTal-AvivDuaont, Leib VahudaEwrebin, Cbiana KovnoFaiwuach-Podlaa, Mary KovnoGafanowitach-Eiaiachki,Anna SaaaraGafanowitach-Eiaischky,Chaja VilkoviahkGraia, Rachala SamargonGraia-Cuckaraan, Cira SaaargonLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS465Grudzinsky,Rifka Hekor-Cbajim Pal.Gurwitscb, ScbuljaVilnaGurwitsch, 1?irzaHaifaJewelson, Jitta,geb. AbramowiczBoruaJuzint, Heier,SbadovaKagan-Widetzky, CbasiaKovnoKamcin-Bravo, CbanaJalokeKaminer, Roza & HiraKaplisky, Zelda, geb.GempelKovnoKarnowsky-Genkind,FannyTel AvivKascbenewski, JakobOszynaKlacko, H.Kliot-Kikojen, VeraVilnaKocin, Fanny Feige Ester KovnoKremer, Cbaja,BenjaminaPal.Kriv, KreneOcbsenzollKriv, HeriKovnoLan, LeizerKovnoLatz, CbajaUtianLewenberg, HennyvilnaLicbtenstein, GeniaLifscbitz, RacbilJerusalemLipscbitz, Weiner BelaBirzbLobzovska, FellaHerene, SaraKovnoHines-Burgin, HindeTel-AvivHueller, Baron LjubaKovnoHueller, SaraKovnoNejfacb, HicblaSamargonOzur-Blinder, TaniaPaversky, PerlaVilnaPerkin, HirjamVilnaPlasta-Gordon, HuscbePuchard-Grinblat,VilnaFridaKovnoRobinson, ChaimRosenblum-Gordon,NaumiestisRachelJerusalemSchimscher, SalamonSbavliScbuster-Bor, RywaSilkiner, Hirjam,Haliatgeb. HilcbikeVilkiSimeliiis, AbrabamTartakorky, GordonKovnoAdino AdaButrimantzTworecka, SaraWeiner-Lipschitz,vidzeBellaWeinstein-Grejs,JerusalemNachama SamargonWidezky, ChasiaWislizky-Scbura, Scbifra KovnoWyszmonska, RozaYuzint, H.VilnaZwieson, FriedaKovnoFOUND IN PALESTINEAbraxaov itcíi, CheanehAzgud, HindeBabin, Ij.Barit, BinickBeder, PincbesBereXovitz, EtaBerelovski, CbaimBlocb, HascbeCboilin, Sbloaa GrusDeul, HissFelman, EstberFelman, HindaFreidman, HenecbFrus, XsraelFurman, CbavivabGail, EstberGail, XserGail, HiriaaGail, HosbeGansler, RocbelGarbel, BennoGladon, HeyerGlazer, DovGlin, Cb.Goldberg, YitzcbokGoniondsky-Gutman, R.Gratz, BeatriceGreitzer-Napolion, HalkaHartman, HosbeHocbaan, CbanabXserlis-Zak, Ya£faKacév, DaveKagan, RivkabKatz-Xdelson, LottaKatzev, DovKratzer, YochevedLazman, HannahLevin, DaveLevitan, PninabLevitan, YebudaHankevitz, SiaaHanushevitz, BuniaHelamed, HiriamHelamed, YosefHisbakerHittelman, Hiriam & DanielHeimark, Aaronorlin, DeborahPolanski, JacobRapayk, LeibRod~Upnitzki, Rocbel & daughterRodzinsky, Dr. YebuaRosenberg, Cbaya HuselRotbstein, HasbaUTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES466Ruthst«in, Nosha, ZviBtíhmr, iraSchn* i darovskl, RapluialS«gal, Dr. B.Sliapiro, JuliaSbar, IralaBhmr, SarabSbuJLaan, MiriaaSilbaraan-Raibaan, RacbalStainharg, EsaleialStainbarg-Baron, DanaStainbauar, Dr. L.Tabatsinaki, EstharTraub, YahudaTrup, XaraaXVald, JosaphVolk, RosaVolk-Asirlanaki, Raiza GitalWaiaa, Mollyffaiss, SholoaYurbaraki, Dr. MayarZalking, Dr. FloraZarnowar, EaaZaidalbuay, ciporaFOUND IN GERMANYAbalaa, OusiciVilnaAnolik, BenzionKovnoAbalaki, BorajiaShavliApolion, FalgaShavliAbalaohn, JakobShavliApolion, LiubaShavliAbalaon, JakobShavliApriaski, JakobYurburgAbir, JosafKovnoAranoa, LeibeBatabakAbir, StaulKovnoAranowic, LaibAbraaovich, Abt, RivkaVilnaAranowitz, Chaji»VilnaAbraaovich, DinaVllnaAranowitz, SlioaaKovnoAbraaovica, JosalKovnoAranowaRi, JakobAbraaovicz, MaiarVilnaAranowtiz, JakobShirvintAbraaowicz, DawidKovnoArbas, MaxKovnoAbraaowicz, JakovViaokidborAranhaaaar, SchauelKovnoAbraaowicz, JojnaKovnoAronovich, KailyavilnaAbraaowicz, SaaualPonavazhAronovitz, HirachvilnaAbraaowitach, WolfRovnoAronowicz, HirachVilnaAbraaowitz, ChackalShavliAronowitz, BailaShavliAbraaowitz, HirachKovnoAronowitz, MiraShavliAbraaowihz, JankalAronowitz, SoniaShavliAbraaowitz, Mia & aotherAronowaki, BeralAbraaowitz, SapsalShavliAronowaky, JakobShavliAbraaowitz, SaualShavliAronowsky, JankelKovnoAbraaaon, AronVurburgAronsohn, MauschaVilnaAbraason, ChaiaYanishokAronson, RafaalKovnoAbraaaon, ChajiaYaniahokAronson, SchnuelAiaanat.ain, MotalAtlas, JakobKovnoAkaalrod, RozaKovnoAtschik, GabrilSradnikAlakaandrovic, OacharAuatrich, DawidKovnoAlaXaandrowitz, OscharKovnoAxaltrod, AbranKovnoAlkonit.zkaya, AnnaVilnaBadanowsca, TauhaVilnaAlparowitz, ChaiaSaaargonBadanowsky, LeibvilnaAlparowtiz, AronKalvariaBadowaky, LalbavilnaAlparvich, DinaVilnaBaiter, BarShavliAltaan, KopalKovnoBaiter, JoaefShavliAltaann, DawidKuriaaBaiter, NoachShavliAaalar , Ma jiarShavliBak, BraaDtianAaparias, RozaBak, HarryMaaalAnalik, LibaVilnaBaklin, Kaaber, N.KovnoAnikscbt, AronShavliBakatansky, LeonShavliAnikat, AronRratingaEMúcstansky, NaunShavliAnikat, LaibShavliBalin, FalweRitovaAnikat, MotelVilnaBalavaig, LeiserKovnoAnilovich, Bamstain,Bank, IaakKovnoMacbaaaVilnaBar, SoraVilnaAnoli ChaiaKovnoBarakos, BartaShavliLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS467Baranow, HirsBerzantr, LeizerBarchkir, SiachaBidmpm. Sa.KovnoBarel, BanachBik, LeibeBirzhBarisnik, HctasVilnaBikowicz, AbramLitowiBArit, sholaaVilnaBilakher, BenjjaminvilnaBarkan, IcekTavrigBiliet, BorokSarkyBaron, HirshlVilnaBiliot, JakobSarkyBaron, JankelVilkomirBin, SmuelBaron, JoaelShavliBinder, ChaimPosvolBaron, ShleineVilnaBinder, RivaCechocireJcBarysnik, HozasVilnaBirger, ChaimKovnoBaschkir, simchaKovnoBirger, DavidKovnoBaskin, AjiykVeckshnaBirger, GutolKovnoBassan, NauschaTilzitBirger, LeibBau*, IzraelBirger, MendelPlungianBaver, ZalsenKovnoBlacher, LeizerKovnoBatofen, NotelVornaBlacher, OscherKovnoBedek, AbrasKovnoBlacker, WulfKovnoBeder, JudithMariampoleBlank, ChanaShavliBeder, LeibaShavliBlanket, MinuchimBeders, SsuelShavliBlat, MaxYanovaBeer, DoraShavliBlatt, LeibaBe9ak, RachmielKovnoBlazer, AbramvilnaBegak, SliomaVilnaBlecher, AbramGorzhdBegan, BenjaimKovnoBlecher, BenzelShavliBeker, AbeKovnoBlecher, BerelKovnoBeker, AbeVosvinsBlecher, BoruchBelavocki, AlterVilnaBloch, ChajimShavliBemel, DawidKovnoBloch, E1jeShavliBenjaminowitsch, Ph.KovnoBloch, GerschonShavliBer, AbramShavliBloch, Jochel, LeibaKovnoBer, CireNaumiestisBloch, Mirian & RivkaTelzBer, DowidShavliBloch, SaleShavliBer, DvoraShavliBlocher, ChaneKelmeBer, EfraimShavliBlotstein, ZalmanKovnoBer, HauscheshavliBlowodskl, JankelSchulenBer, wolfShavliBlumberg, JudelBerelowitz, lsakMemelBlumenau, BenjaminKovnoBerelsohn, Mosz ekShavliBlumenthal, EpsteinVilnaBerenstein, CviBlumenthal, Peregal,Berenstein, JosefKovnoDoravilnaBerenstein, HejarTavrigBlximkin, JakobKovnoBerent, ChaimVilnaBlumkin, SchlomaKovnoBerg, ChaimShavliBlumstein, SallyBerger, AbeKovnoBobrovskaya, GenyaVilnaBerger, AlterBod, VelvelShavliBerger, Hirs zLubenBod, ZalmanTelzBergman, MiriamMemelBogatcick, SajaKovnoBerkman, AvrichKibartBolRin, DawidBerkmann, Ro jaVilnaEk>lnik, MozesPodzhelveBerkovicz, AbramShavliEk>mchowitz 6 daughterBerkovicz, MosesShavliBor, PesiaShavliBerkovitz, LeibaVilnaBornstein, MaxVilnaBerkowicz, SzlomeEishishokBorovik, LenaVilnaBarkowitzBorstein, EljaszKovnoBerkowski, IzraelKovnoBorstein, IsakKovnoBerliant, SchmielVllnaBorstein, MaksKovnoBerlitz, GabeVilnaBoruchivicz, SamuelShavliBerlowitz, isakMemelBoruchovitz, ZiselKovnoBerman, LeibShavliBoruchowicz, SchmajaKibartBarman, MoseLarasaiBoruchowltz, SmuelBobtBermann, GittaShavliBosak, Chaim NanachemVilnaBermann, TaniaShavliBotvlncki, JenjavilnaBerne, JudelNaumiestisBrafmann, HercvilnaBernstein, AnnaKovnoBrafmann, HerzVilnaBersin, MaftalKovnoBraines, JechielPonevezhBerter, BenoShavliBrajer, LejaWargowaBerter, NatanShavliBrajter, JosefShavliBerwitz, SimonRastowBrand, AkivaVilnaLITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES468Branda, SoniaBr«s, LipnanVilnaChaitin, DoraGha^et, ConaSuvalkiBrauds, BoruchPlotalchajet, HirschKovnoBraude, HotalPlotelChajat, IsakKovnoBrauda, SaloaonTavrigcha 3«t, JankalVilnaBrauda, ZalnanTavrigChajiat, LaihaBraudo, NeiarShavliChajat, MosesBraun, SaloaonKovnoChajjtowitz, AhrasKovnoBraun, SlazUzgorodChana, MosesShavliBraus, JaJcobRigaCharak, ChiasShavliBraua, HosesZhagarCharich, ElijaKovnoBrax, LipaShavliCharoziczki, IsraalShavliBragaan, JakobKovnoCharoziczki, MojszeSbavliBrsgaan, ZalaanKovnoCharosiczki, SouraShavliBragaann, MaksvilnaChaschenischok, IsikKovnoBranaisan, caiat.sk®!VilnaChaskalawicz, MayarKovnoBranar, DavidKovnoChaskielewicz, BanVilnaBranar, DawidKovnoChasaan, JosafVilkonirBranar, ZalaanKovnoChatowicz, AbranKovnoBrannar, IsraelChavkin, FaiwelZhagarBrannar, IsraalShavliChazan, SandarKovnoBrannar, Salnen, InakKovnoChejtowitz, SulenKovnoBrasingar, MendelShavlichinas, HirschBrinb, IcikShavliChinas, IzraalZhidikBrinb, SaloaonShavliChines, MalkaShavliBrinb, SinonShavliCholan, El}aKovnoBro, MojscheShavliCholok, JankalvilkiBro, MosesKovnoChoronsitzky, MosesShavliBrudar, FawelShavliChoronzickis, BorisShavliBru’tcicu», BoriaPolangenChoronzickis, IzraalShavliBug, FaivaShavliChoronzikis, SainaShavliBugai, ChajinKovnoChosid, EllaYanovaBukanc, AbaKovnoCiankalavic, GitaBuJcanc, BancilonCicalski, MauschaKovnoBukanc, MosasCicas, LaibKovnoBukans, IsakKovnoCigan, JacobvilkiBukents, lsaakKovnoCinarsan, Judal Ezharani-ZarasaiBurgin, AbranKovnociiartan, TeresaVilnaBurgin, EichielVilnaCipin, GarsonBurgin, SchsuelBurkak, ChoneKovnoCipin, MicbelCodikov, AbrahamKovnoBurnchtin, SaulShirvintCodikov, AbraaKovnoBurstein, IsakKovnoCodikovas, ManasKovnoBurstein, MandalKovnoCodikow, AbranKovnoBurstein, NaftaliKovnoCornowski, DawidKovnoBurstain, SandarCuchar, ChiasKovnoBuschkanatz, AbrahanCukeraann, PeracKovnoLaonShavliCweigoa, SaaualKovnoBuschkanat.z, IzraelShavliCypin, ChoneVilnaCap, SinonVilkoairCzamanan, LipoKovnoCapawski, JakobCzarnowski, DavidKovnoCarny, HarryDalfon, SinonKovnoCedikov, LaibDalton, ZelnonKovnoCakanowitz, IsraalKovnoDanha, MichelKovnoCerniakov, JudalShirvintDaniani, LuisiKovnoCarniavski, ChainSloniaDanaigar, CbackelCarniavski, DavidPilvishokDanlal, IcikShavliCertok, ZalnanKovnoDanilovskaya, Rudner,Cas, AronShavliSonyaVilnaCas, SalanonShavliData, JakobKovnoCaslanska, MarjaVilnaDavid, WulfKrakinovaCess, ArpnVilnaDavidovicz, BoruchKovnoCass, SalononVilnaDavidowitz, BoruchRovnoChackalavic, MaiarChadab, DavidUtianDawid, DawidDawidawitzChaijonivic, AhaAhalDawidowicz, JoselVilnaChaijonivic, NosenPonavazhDawidowicz, LazarKovnoChainowitz, AbranRasinDaling, GitaShavliChaitin, ChanaShavliDan^BVSki, Cha jinShavliLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS 469Désovic, MaftalD«utJich, HirschMusnikDiaaant, AkiwaKovnoDiaaant, JahudaKovnoDiaaant, JosafKovnoDisant, AbraKovnoDiaihs'tain, FaigaVilnaDindas, MosnVilnaDinar, AbramKovnoDiraRtor, C3iackalSbavliDistal, chonoShavliDisbal, MataVilnaDistal, ParazShavliDolinskaya, Erasner,BlunaVilnaDoab, AronRadoaDonsashavitzky, MoishaVilnaDonushavskaya, PaulinaVilnaDoveltov, DobaVilnaDreipul, JosefKovnoDraispul, ElijaschKovnoDreispul, EllasDraispul, RuvinRovnoDrujan, BorisKovnoDrujan, Dr. DawidShavliDruskanov, EmanualDrutz, MosnVilnaDruzin, MotelRistavaDubin, AbraaKovnoDubrovic, ChoneKovnoDunija, MordcheShavliDursaschkin, FannyVilnaDurmaschkin, HennyVilnaDurst., £cekVilnaDuschata, HirschVilnaDuschitz, JakobKovnoDuschkas, CalalKovnoDuschkes, DavidKovnoDuschkes, EljeKovnoDuschnit.zki, DodekKovnoDuschnitzki, JosalKovncDuschnitzki, JosaphKovnoDusnicki, JosefDusnitz, 3alosonKovnoDyraktorovicz,Dr. HirschShavliEdelsan, MosesKovnoEdelsohn, Jochl1YalokEdelsztajn, AltaShavllEqlin, IcikEideJson, ChajisLukshiEife, EchezkalVilnaEilig, lsakKovnoEinbinder, GdaljeShkudEinig, IsakKovnoEisenfeld, ChayaVilnaElijaschewitz, FruaaKovnoElkes, HirschKovnoEllezrt, DawidNausiastisEllert, HeiniNausiastisEllart, XsraelNauaiestisElstain, BanoKovnoEngar, DavidVilnafingelstern, KeizarVilnaEnglander, NochesEnoch, JoheneschonKiurburgEpstein, AlikVilnaEpstain, BabaVilnaEpstain, BetyaVilnaEpstain, FaiwalShavliEpstein, JakobShavliBpstain, JudolShavliEpstain, Mozas,SbavliEpstain, RivavilnaEstein, AbrahasKovnoEstain, AbrasKovnoEvin, RachsialBirshFahelinsky, DawidShavliFaiarbrowski, JakovVilnaFain, AbraFain, SalosonKovnoFain, SsualFain, NulFShavliFainas, Sarge-SsuelsKovnoFaisus, MauscbaKovnoFaivus, SoineFartsann, MosesShavliFeigin, JakobKovnoFain, AzrialFain, EsterKovnoFain, FraidaVilnaFein, IdalKovnoFain, KaganaShavliFein, LilyaVilnaFain, LinosinVilnaFain, MendelKovnoFainbarg, HarschalVilnaFainganbarg, Dr. Meishe VilnaFainganbarg, MaitaVilnaFainganbarg, SlavaVilnaFainstain, Jalcon-BencPolanganFainstain, SundelShavliFaldhais, RocbalFaldsan, EfraisVilnaFaldsan, PanyaVilnaFaldsann, UsarKovnoFilipowska, CbajaFilipowski, AbrasShavliFin, RafelKovnoFingarbran, BoruchShavliFingarhut, ElijaShavliFingarhut, GecelShavliFingarhut, JosafNowo-SvenclFingarhut, LiabNowo-SvanclFinkal, MatisUtianFinkelstein, AronKovnoFinkalstain, FischalFinkalstain, LoliaKovnoFisch, AbrasRadosFischar, IsakSalokFischar, JudithKovnoFischar, NochiaKovnoFisar, EllaKazanFishar, BanjasinShavliFisher, FischalHerijspolFlas, JaxdcialKovnoFlasin, AbranFlassin, AbrasShavliFlat, GanochKovnoFlaiscbar, BorisKovnoFlaischar, SliosaVilkosirFlaischar, MalwalFlink, BorisKovnoFloch, DavidRakishokFogalson, MosasFrank, LaibaVilnaFratkin, MichaalK ovnoFraidalsann, JakobMargnuschow470LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESPr«izing«r, HoachKovnoGarber, JosefRovnoFrelsingar, CalelKovnoGarber, oscberRovnoFrcmicel, HermanRovnoGarfunksl, LoonRovnoPranlcal, LazarKovnoGarland, cbaya EtaVilnaPranlcal, SaiimarKovnoGarson, Jomzescb GiecbanowitzlFrenlcel, SelmannKovnoGarum, BencelKeidanidanPridalnd, BunieKovnoGarua, KopelYanovaFridberg, BorieKovnoGarum, simonYanovaPridberq, GrigorijaKovnoGamn, HindaKodainiaiFridland, JechezJcelKovnoGdut, Ber, MellacbVilnaFridland, LiubaSbavliGebman, DawidRovnoFridland, MiobelKedsiniaiGec, LejbaRovnoFridman, Et:t.aRitovaGechil, RafaelRovnoPridman, JocbaRitovaGeimer, AronVilnaPridman, LeibaKovnoGelser, SubiRovnoPridman, LeibaFridman, MauscbeKovnoGelcer, SchubiGelman, JosefRakishokFridman, MojseSlaukiaiGelmann, MauscheZavasaFridmann, ElijasKretingaGelmann, WulfRovnoPridmann, JosefBa joralGempel, BerlRovnoFridmann, JosefKovnoGempel, CbajimRovnoFridmann, JudelKovnoGempel, MotelRovnoFrieVilnaGempel, NatelRovnoPried , AxrturGempel, SzmuelYurburgFried, GoldeSbavliGen, JakobRogovaFried, IdelSbavliGens, EfraimFried, IeraelGeselswitz, JosepbRovnoFried, SalamonGibraltar, BerelRovnoFried, SalomonSbavliGibraltar, BerlRovnoFriedberg, BerlKovnoGibraltar, IsakRovnoFriedberg, Gerszon,KovnoGibralter, RafaelRovnoFriedland, AbramKovnoGidalewitz, ScbeinaShavliFriediander, JankelSbavliGldanky, JakovMemelFriedler, HirscbYanovaGierscbow1tscb, Z.VilnaFriedm IdelGilinska, Aya, BelskayaVilnaFriedman, HirscbRovnoGilinsky, LeibVilnaFriedman, IzraelRovnoGinburg, WladimirRovnoFriedman, MoneacbKovnoGinsburg, EsterRovnoFriedman, MosesSchagaroGirsovlc, JoninaRitovaFriedmann, AbramGitman, simaVllnaFriedmann, BeniscbKrakinovaGitolevic, CbjenaRovnoFriedmann, BerlRovnoGitolevic, DoraRovnoFriedmann, CbiamKrakinovaGlazman, DoraVilnaFriedmann, ElijabuGlazman, IsaacVilnaFriedmann, EsterGleizer, LeibVilnaFriscbman, MaksRovnoGlick, DawidRovnoFrismann, RivinRovnoGlik, HirscbShavliFrolmtscbik, SolemGluck, FoleVilkomirFrumlcin, AronRovnoGluck, NusymRovnoFrumkin, SimcbaRovnoGod, RuvinRovnoFubrmann, DavidSbavliGodovic, LeibaRovnoFuks, HaryVilnaGoland, DavidSbavliFuksman, YoselVilnaGoland, RachelShavliFunk, AronGold, HorszRovnoFunk, SeineGold, NaumVerniaiFurmann, CbajimSbavliGoldan, MozesSbavliFurmann, DawidSbavliGoldansk, JosolRovnoFurmann, LiubaSbavliGoldberg, JakobSbavliGafanovic, CalelRovnoGoldberg, NegudaVilnaGaidel, PireBitzkowGoldberg, PeisacbRovnoGakmann, IcokRovnoGoldblat, LejzorRovnoGalabki, MaksRovnoGoldblat, LeoRovnoGalpern, CbaskialVilnaGoldblatt, ScbliomaRovnoGalpem, DavidRovnoGoldsmid, SepselRovnoGalpern, FalvelKovnoGoldstein, JosefPoltavaGalpem, HirscbGoldstein, Kisai, BerRovnoGalzman, YakovvilnaGoldstein, LazarNaumiestisGan, AbramGoldstein, WolfVilnaGandz, LeibSbavliGolperln, MotelLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS471GojrtovniJc, shaulVilnaHecht, SalononGorbotak.aya, AvidanvilnaHechter, GeniaShavliGordon, AbrahaaShavliHechter, Mozes,AnikshtGordon, AbraiKovnoHeller, RubinAlytaGordon, ElijaBenevezysHemann, OscherGordon, HirachKovnoHerzensohn, IcikKovnoGordon, BischKovnoHilkowic, MaxGordon, IcikVilnaHilkowitz, MaxKovnoGordon, JakobKiurkiaiHinelshein, BtnaSkodalGordon, JosefKovnoHirsch, GhaikelShavliGordon, LaisarShavliHofnekler, MichelKovnoGordon, PasiaRadvilishokIcikovitz, MendelShavliGosch, ElijaTavrigIcikovitz, SliomaGosch, HauscheTavrigIcikowitz, Jankel~Got-tliab, GhainShavliMendelShavliGo'ttlieb, JosafKovnoIcikowitz, JudaKovnoGottliob, SalononGotz, JUliShavliIcikowitz, SnuelIndurski, IlijaKovnoGotz, LazarKovnoIpp, LeibKovnoGrad, SoniaShavliIsaak, MauricoShavliGranat, DotkaKovnoIsorlis, MosesShavliGranat, MeilschKovnoIvenski, SajaYanovaGrazutis, GhainKovnoJabzen, CenachKovnoGrazutis, GhonaKovnoJakobs~Goldwein,Graenatein, RozaVilnaFleriHannoverGreiser, MauseLuckJakobsohn, MiraRovnoGreise, LiebaGreisus, OdaljeKovnoJakuhowsky, SeidkeJalowcer, ChainVilnaGrenadir, BrochaVilnaJalowzer, GhainVilnaGrenemann, MosesDisnaJanbro, MuleGresenstein, MironvilnaJankel, HirschSchaukenaiGriachowitz, SalKovnoJankelevic, HirschShakiGr inberg , <JakobJankelevitz, AronShkudGrinberg, MajerKovnoJankelevitz, EttaKovnoGrinblat, JankelKovnoJankelevitz, SprincaRretingaGris, ChainKovnoJankelewitsch, LeaKovnoGroidanz, BeilaVilnaJankivski, JakohKovnoGrossnan, AbranJanover, LeihaShavliGrossnan, GhainJanover, MauscheShavliGrun, MaxGruner, SeligRoikJarowski, MoscheJas, DoraNauniestisGruntwagen, ChayaVilnaJaskuner, JosefKovnoGrutz, JakobKovnoJawnolowicz, JonasKovnoGruzin, ChainKovnoJawnolowitz, SanuelVainutaGruzin, IsakKovnoJed, IdelKovnoGruzin, IzraelKovnoJeruchanovic, GirschKovnoGruzinski, BervilnaJeruschabnik, LeiserShavliGubin, AbranKovnoJezner, EfrainTavrigGurland, ZiselVilnaJodwab, LeoKalischGurorer, VaranavilnaJoels, BenjaninKovnoGurvic, IzraelShavliJofe, AbkeKovnoGurvic, MozosKovnoJofe, GblauneSventzionGurvich, AhranVilnaJofe, ZundelKovnoGurvich, BertavilnaJoffe, AbeGurvich, EshaeVilnaJoffe, AdaKovnoGtarvich, Peretz, IsraelVilnaJoffe, MotelShavliGurwitz, tfolfKrozhJoffe, RachnielPonevezhGustein, JekelY\urburgJoselevic, SloinaShavliGustnan, Rabhi XsraelVilnaJoselevitz, ManiaKovnoGutnan, IzakKovnoJudelewitz, SchliomaShavliGutnan, IzraelTelzJxidelnan, LeoShkudGutmann, JankelKovnoJudelowicz, WoltKovnoGutstein, MauscheYurburgJudelowitsch, IsekKovnoGutstein, MichelYurburgJudelowitz, SlonaKovnoGuttmann, JakobKovnoJudelski, OserVurburgHaid, PercyKovnoJung, GerschonChaviadanHaida, AbranBendzinKac, BoruchHaiflink, JudkaKac, EljaszVilnaHalperin, AronLoykuvaKac, SahsaKovno472 LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESKac«t, CalttlLuknikKada«clMwit:s , LaoKovnoKadiaavlc, LeoHenelKagan, AronOschaianlKagan, BíroiaShavliKagan, ChaiaKovnoKagan, DavidShkudKagan, HirscHYanovaKagan, HirachZhagerKagan, XcikKovnoKagan, JosefShavliKagan, MauscheVilkovishkKagan, HaxBarziaiKagan, NechaaiaSbavliKagan, Oraey-BerShavliKagan, SlioaeVilnaKagan, WulfKovnoKaganski, AbraaKovnoKahn, SchaerelSapizishokKahuecho, ChajaShkudKalanski, RuwinVilnaKalner, SiloaaKanerasch, JakobShavliKan, LeibLinkovaKana, ChajinKovnoRanowibs, SaauelKovnoKanterowi,tz, Is»akVilnaKap, BerelUtianKapil«mski, SlioseKovnoKapit, BerlKovnoKapit, LeizerKovnoKaplan, BorisKovnoKaplan, BoruchShavliKaplan, Cha jaVilnaKaplan, DanielKovnoKaplan, DavidKovnoKaplan, IserKovnoXaplan, JakobShavliKaplan, JakobZhusliKaplan, JosefAlytaKaplan, SaauieKaplan, SlioneKovnoKapuch, JakobShavliKapuch, Lieb-BoruchKovnoKapulski, LejbaKovnoKapulski, HosesKovnoKarklin, LeibShavliKarklin, PinkusVilnaKarklin, SaloaonVilnaKamowski, GedalaKovnoKarnowski, SisonKovnoKarol, ChajjinLayazhovaKarol, JosefKovnoKarol, RochaVornaKarpuch, HichelShavllKarpul, ChackelAlsiadKaslnow, silenKovnoKasper, AlterKatatuschnik, HirschKovnoKatcz, AhrahamShavliKatowus 2 nik, HosesKovnoKatzKovnoKatz, AbrasKovnoKatz, BencelTavrigKatz, BeneKatz, BoruchSiadKatz, ChajaTavrigKatz, ChajisShavliKatz, DavidShavllKatz, DovidPokrolKatz, Dr. NachuaKovnoKats, GrischeKovnoKatz, HirschKovnoKatz, JosefKatz, JuliusKovnoKatz, LiebKovnoKatz, HauschaTavrigKatz, HauscheKovnoKatz, HirljasVlstyteKatz, OdoTavrigKatz, SliomaZhidikKaufaan, BerVilnaKaufaan, ChaskielKovnoKaufaan, JakobKovnoXaufaan, JankielKovnoKejunas, WolfKeaachaann, SenderKovnoReaelgar, HirshKovnoKemelger, SajaKovnoKessel, BenjaainShavliKessel, HejerShavliRessel, SmuelKettler, ElleShavliKibor, IcikShavliKibor LiebaShavliKibos, KalmanShavliKicbel, HichaelKichel, ZalmanTrashlcunKigsoh, Ber-HerschKovnoKirsch, HajerLuknikKlrschner, MauscheShakiRirschner, SamariasVilnaKlackow, WolfRlein, LazarKovnoKleinberg, HauscheKelmeKlioner, ChoneShavliRlonar, BeroCharkowICnehel, ChoneSapizishokKobelkovski, AronKovnoKobelkovski, HotelKovnoKobelkovski, RubenKovnoKoblenz, HeerKovnoKohn, BenjaminLubauKomai, AbraaKovnoKomasch, HendelKoverakaiRonorag, ZelaaonKovnoKoonin, JosefRovnoKopelman, RubinRasinKopelovitz, HaUscheRopolovitz, LeibaKornovski, SimonVileikaKosovski, HichaelPonevezhKowalski, LeserKowenski, RafaelVilnaKrafcii3k, ElijaKovnoKrakonarski, ChaskielKovnoKrakurowski, SzlameKovnoKrasnovski, AbramVitebakKrasnovski, IschokSiauiaiKrasnowski, AbramKovnoKraufi/ ChaimKovnoRravec, EwmjaminvilkomirKravec, LejbaKovnoKrawczuk, HirszKovnoKremer, DeizerYanovaKremer, IcikKovnoXremer, OdalijaKovnoRremerman, DanlelShirvintLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS473Rresner, HendelKovnoLeibsohn, IsaakShavliKr igsoim , MoteTavrigLeichter, HazeRriieraan, ZalaanKelmeLeikin, EllaVilnaRristall, sinonLeit, DavidShavliKris<tanski, LiebaKovnoLejbowicz, RuvinShavliKrupnik, AronVilnaLe jserowSki, Cha jimVilnaRrut, HotelKovnoLenson, SalomonShavliKrutz, JakobKovnoLenzner, PinchasVilnaKulgowski, Ben zienLerner, HejerKovnoRullmann, GedalleLesner, HichimKovnoKulpianicki, AnzikVilnaLev, ZalmanVilnaKulvienski, IzraelKovnoLevin, AronRakishokKurzer, CalelKovnoLevin, BenjaminKovnoKurzer, HichaelKovnoLevin, BoruchKovnoKvartovski, EsterVilnaLevin, ChaimKvartovski, HeneVilnaLevin, ChajimKovnoKvart-tovski, FriedaVilnaLevin, DavidKovnoLaan, HauscheLevin, Efraim, LeibVilnaLaban, RubimVilnaLevin, JankelPolangenLafranovitz, BencijanShavliLevin, LazarKovnoLahu, Horitz,KovnoLevin, HanuschaLajewitz, IcekVilnaLevin, HauscheKovnoLam, BelaLevin, VulfTomoshLam, LyayaVilnaLevinski, DavidKovnoLam, WolfVilnaLevinski, VolfSuvakisiLam, YashaVilnaLevinson, AbramAndijavaLampert, LeoLevinson, DavidShavliLan, BencelLevinzon, JakobBaumisstisLan, TewjwKovnoLevinzon, JosefVilnaLancman, FischelKovnoLevinzon, NachemLancman, KasrielKovnoLevinzon, ZalmanLibauLancman, Laz arKrazelLevitan, AbeLancman, RachileKovnoLevitan, AlterKovnoLancmann, HirsLevitan, ChaimShavliLandsman, HosesKovnoLevitan, GirschViduklaLandsman, MoszekKovnoLevitan, MaxShavliLange, ChackelLevitan, SilomaKovnoLangmanKovnoLevitan, VladesShavliLangnas, SalomonKovnoLevitan, ZiselViduklaLapinski, GirschKovnoLevy, AsierlKovnoLapp, HosesLewi, JosefKovnoLas, LiebaUtianLewi, RywaShavliLasar, AronStocaweLewikowicz, JeruchemLodzLasar, WolfStocaseLewin, GeselLaskin, JakobKovnoLewin, ZalelKovnoLaucmann, WulfKovnoLewinsohn, JosefKovnoLavrenovitz, AbeShavliLewison, LeibKovnoLazar, IzraelLewner, Ivochen, GenochKovnoLazar, LeibSchauienLewner, MeyerKovnoLazar, LiebaLewnestein, NikolaiMemelLazar, ZeligKovnoLewry, RiwaShavliLazaron, PercKeidanidanLibes, MauscheShavliLazarov, ChajimRadvilishokLibes, MendelShavliLazarov, ChjeneRadvilishokLibovitz, JosefShavliLazdunskaya, RaiziaVilnaLichtenstein, LoikLeay, SalowojKovnoLidovsky, ChononVilnaLebiusch, HeirShavliLieb, LlubaShavliLehmann, AronVilnaLiebovitz, SoulVilkomirLehrmann, HihailKovnoLiebsohn, StonnKovnoLeib, ChajaShavliLimianski, SliomeKovnoLeib, LeaShavliLinkimer, SenderLeib, HozesKovnoLinkovitz, AbramKovnoLeibenson, NoachShavliLinkovski, RivenShavliLeibischkis, AbramKovnoLinkowski, BbrahVilkiLeibiskis, HendelKovnoLip, RuvunLeibovitz, JudithShavliLipengal, MichaelVilnaLeibovitz, HotelKovnoLipkowitz, F.Leibovitz, RuvimShavliLipsches, LeiserKovnoLeibowitz, JosefShavliLipsches, MotelKovno474LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESLlpsches, SunderKovnoMailup, MiszaVilnaLipsclJÍtz , BarlKovnoMaisal, Isak,KovnoLipschifcz, BuniaShavliMejarovitz, BerelPolanganLipschi'tz, DavidMajarovitz, ChonaVurburgLipschi-tx , GarschonKursanalMekler, S1iosaKovnoLipschitz, israelKovnoMalasad, JosefKovnoLipschitz, LiebShavliMalasad, MichalLipschitz, NauscheShavliMalasad, SaloaonVilnaLipschitz, NaxMelcar, VulfShavliLipschitz, MichalMalar, JankelKovnoLipschitz, ParazShavllMalar, RachsialKovnoLipsic, GadaljoMeller, PajsachKovnoLipzar, SiaonKovnoMalzar, £sakKovnoLosasch, JakobKovnoManasavic, MendelLubatzki, MironKovnoMandelav, ChajiaShavliLubatzki, SchsarisaKovnoMandalovic, HarriLucovski, SijaShavliMendelovic, IsraelLudgin, JankalMenijas, JakobKovnoLurio, AbrasKovnoMeras, RuwenKovnoLurje, ChajisKovnoMereina, LeibKovnoLurja, HirschKovnoMeris, ChaisKovnoLurja, LeibVilnaMerjano, JohachisvilnaLurja, MandalKovnoMeschkup, MotelKovnoLurja, MosasKovnoMeser, ArjeShavliLurja, MotelYanovaMetk, IzraelShavliLurja, SisonKovnoMatk, JakabShavliLurja, SlaisaKovnoMetk, MozasShavliMac, SnaljerKovnoMetzik, NachsanVilnaMagid, NaftallBirzhMiasnik, WulfKovnoMagidel, LibaOssenaMichalowitz, MandelZhagarMaiz, ChajisShavliMichalsohn, LeibKovnoMajar, MonasMichelsohn, MosesKovnoMakowski, BarlVilnaMichelsonMalan, BartaMichles, JakohKovnoMalk, IzraelShavliMichles, JoselKovnoMalk, JakobShavliMichles, RuvinKovnoMalk, MauschaShavliMicig, BerelSaradzialMalnik, BfraisMiestnik, WolfKovnoMalnik, GarsonMilecik, AbeZhaiaelMalnik, IsaakKovnoMilecik, MauschaZhaisalMandal, ChajisShavliMiler, LilaShavliMandal, ChianKovnoMiler, MnuchaShavliMandalbergar, LavShavliMilikowski, GedaleVilnaManavitz, BarVilnaMillar, JoselKovnoMarciunski, SainoYanishokMillar, ZalsanKovnoMarcunski, DavidZhaiselMilner, AronMasalMarcunski, LeizerZhaiselMilnar, BarRasinMarak, MauschaRasinMilner, ElljaShavliMargolis, SasualKovnoMilner, JosefLlnkovaMark, BarShavliMllnar, JosalShavllMark, BerelMilner, JudelShavliHark, BarlShavliMilnar, MauschaVornaMark, IsaakShavliMiIner, NachaMark, RouraShavliMincz, SalsonShavliMark, VulfShavliMinda, AbrasPlungianMarkal, MozesKovnoMinda, JakobGorzhdMarkalavitz, ssulaKovnoMinda, JosafPlungianMarkow, LeibeKovnoMindal, ArnaKovnoMarkow, LajhalKovnoMine, BanjaminVilnaMarkowicz, MosasHidorasarsMlnik, AronKovnoMarschak, ChonaMinor, LaibShavliMarszak, ChunaVilnaMinsbarg, SasuelMartusxmsky, DavidZhaiselMinzar, BorisYurburgMatasatyk, DawldShavliMirsan, JosafMusnlkM4tis t RuvisShavliMischaiski, WulfKovnoMauschaKovnoMischalski, WulfGoselMauze, IsaakSakanaiMisajavski, NaftoliVilnaMahal, PinkusKovnoMisaricar, AbrasMechanicki, LaibOschalenyMiskar, BaiShavliLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS 475Mizerertz, PeisachVilna02ek, SarahMofsiowitz, JakovShavliOzinski, E1jaszKovnoMoskovitz, IzraelShavliOzur, SepselKovnoMostovich, IschokVilnaPajurski, IcikTavrigMoveschawitz, LeihKovnoPajurski, SeineTavrigMovschawitz, IsraelPakelzik, PesachKovnoMovsovic, AivischKovnoPakus, SelneKovnoMovsovic, IsikKovnoPalec, SamuelYanovaMovsovic, HauseKovnoPalukst, MaltaShavliMovsovic, MeisePapilski, ChajimKovnoMowschowitz, JakohShavliPapilski, MichaelKovnoMowschowtis, JoelKovnoPavlovski, BoruchMemelMozes, LeihKovnoPawlowski, SimonShavliMozikant, VigdorKovnoPeis, AhramVilkomirMudrik, MuszaKovnoPeis, JakohKovnoMudrik, SchjLoimaKovnoPeis, JakobVilkomirMudrik, SlionaKovnoPeisschovic, ChajimShavliMujiersky, GecelShavliPeisschowitz, LeizerShavliMuler, JudelKovnoPejsakowicz, WolfShavliMuliarsky, MeryShavliPenkinski, LeihMulk, CalelShavliPercykowicz, AronButrimantzMuller, AhramKovnoPerecmann, BerZhagerMuller, GitavilnaPerelmann, IcikMuller, IsaacVilnaPeres, 11jaKovnoMuller, JakohKovnoPerezman, JakohKovnoMuller, ToihaVilnaPerlou, ChuneKovnoMuzikant, JeineMuzikant, NochumKovnoPerlow, MeerPeschkis, MaxGorzhdNachimen, ChajimKovarskPesis, AhramLuckNachimovic, ChajimRemigolaPesis, GruniaRadvilishokNachimovic, PeisechPonevezhPessin, ShceinaShavliNachinson, DovidPikeleik, IsraelKovnoNachomovic, JakohPonevezhPimstein, LejhaKovnoNadel, JosefChaviadanPimstein, MoneKovnoNadel, KalmanShavliPinkaswetsch, ErichWienNaftalowitz, MejerKovnoPinsker, ChaimVilnaNarunski, AhelYanishokPitum, SiliomaHarunski, MauseYanishokPlotkin, MayerKovnoNarunski, ZalmanYanishokPodkowicki, JanJcielKovnoNatas, HerszPolan, IsakKovnoNauchowic, HireKovnoPolanski, MOsesKovnoNauehowitz, AheKovnoPolichovic, LiebeNeinebaum, JosefKovnoPonak, SimonKovnoNeuherger, HirshKovnoPort, MeierNeuman, SmerlKovnoPort, MojzeschKovnoNewiaski, SerachNiczurski, IzraelVilnaPort, SanuelPortenej, PejsachVilnaNiselovic, KalmanPonevezhPosel, AhePumpianNissenhaum, JosefPossin, ChaslaShavliNissenbaum, MosesPotlicka, MinaKovnoNol, LazarPotruch, AhrahamShavliNovik, MozesKovnoPozeicer, DovadKovnoOgus, LusjaVilnaPozeicer, NobhemKovnoOkmianski, MojscheKovnoPreib, HirschKovnoOkun, MosheKovnoPreis, Elias01kenicki, NearPreis, MauscheKovnoOnje, SmerelShavliPrenzinger, GetzelShavliOpolsky, JuliaKovnoPress, GersonOppenhaim, EnachemKovnoPruchne, AhramOppenstein, AronOrdmann, WulfPruchne, SamuelPuke, AbramKovnoOrekowitz, AronVilkomirPulda, AhramAbelOrelovic, SaulVilkomirPulde, AhramAhelOrlinskiKovnoPulde, ChoneAhelOscherovic, Saja6vekaniaiPupkin, FaireKovnoOserovic, SamuelSvekaniaiPurvin, IzraelOvec, SamuelKovnoPutruch, AbramShavliOvsejovic, WulfRahinov, MalkavilkovishkOwitz, NechamaKovnoRahlnovlc, HirsPlungian476LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESR&binovic, IsaakRovnoRosenblua, WolfKovnoR&binovic, Moni«kW&rschauRosenboldz, ChainVilkonirRabinovibz, PruaoSiadRotenherg, MoritzBialystokRabinovi-ts, TrunkaSiadRotman, WigdorTavrigRabinowich, FriedaVilnaRotstein, BenekiRabinowich, GavrldVilnaRotstein, BenzienRabinowich-Banch«wskaya,Rozen, MejerKovnoGitaVilnaRozenhergSudergisiRabinowicz, Jos«fVeckshnaRozenberg, XsaakKovnoRabinowicz, L«ibaVilnaRozenblat, BenjlaBÍnKovnoRabinowitsch, XsaakRovnoRozenfeld, OvseyKovnoRabinowitsch, JakobKovnoRozenlcranz, GirsKovnoRabinowitsch, SchnuelKovnoRozental, NchenjaKovnoRadz«yla, JochaVilnaRoznik, SleiaeShavliRa«sichocki, LipeKovnoRubachin, JozefRovnoRathaus, MozesKovnoRubachln, MaxKovnoRatner, IsaakRauf, LeibPilvishokRubinob, LiebeRubinsteisachs,VilkovishkRaudf, LeibaKovnoJechielReibnan, XzchokKovnoRucaiski, AbranKovnoReibstein, SalkinRudnicki, KalnanKovnoReichel, LebaKovnoRudniczky, KarnenKovnoReicher, LojbaKovnoRudnik, TaaaraVilnaReif, ElijaShkudRugain, DovidKovnoReif, OviShkudRuazin, XzraelKovnoReif, SaraShavliRutenberg, BorisPopllanReit, SaraShkudRutnann, DowidVilnaRei z , «JudaShavliRywkind, AbranVllnaReiz, NehenjlaShavliRywkind, Sner1VilnaRepeika, SzynonKovnoSabasewitz, Aren-JakobResch, AbranKretingaSach, J.VilnaResewski, GersonSachner, MorizAknoniskiaiReskovic, AlterVilnaSachnovic, ElijaVilkovishkResnik, Dr. NaftaliVilnaSadewic, IzchokGelvanReszanski, SznajaVilnaSadov, MausaRovnoReznicki, DovidKovnoSadov, VulfKovnoReznik, Abran-*PerekKovnoSager, ChainZoskiReznik, VulfShavliSajevic, MotelKovnoRiasanski, ChlanShavliSa jewicKovnoRibek, EliezerKovnoSajewicz, MotelKovnoRic, AbrahanSaklinski, AheKovnoRichnan, JaJcobShavliSakrajaski, EfrainKovnoRichnan, JankelShavliSal, JoineShavliRierkindShavliSalinski, HirsKovnoRinber, Jakob Ezhereni-ZarasaiSalit, DoraVilnaRiner, AbeKovnoSalitan, LeoRiner, AsnaKovnoSalkinski, GersonKovnoRiner, AsneKovnoSanes, JizchokShavliRiner, ChajaErzhvilkySanes, LeibKovnoRiner, ChaseKovnoSandler, BajaYanovaRiner, IdaErzhvilkySandler, HenachKovnoRines, SanuelShavliSandler, RojaKovnoRintovic, AronKovnoSandler, RuvinRintovic, ColelKovnoSaplro, EfnainVilnaRintowicz, AronKovnoSapiro, XcikKovnoRivkin, GirsShavliSapiro, «JudelShavliRizikovitz, LeaSapiro, LeoKovnoRochnann, SalononSapiro, SnuelsKelneRogalin, VolfKovnoSapiro, TanchunKovnoRon, BerlKovnoSapiro, ZalnanVilkiRon, XI jaKovnoSapoznikov, BerlRon, IsackKovnoSarakhan, PeisachVilnaRon, JosefKovnoSarpris, soelShavliRonanov, ChainSaulkin, MausaShavliRosenberg, JefinKovnoSaulkin, ZalnanShavllRosenberg, JefinKovnoSchalit, GersonRosenberg, MendelShavliSchalitan, ScheftelRakishokRosenblatt, S&lononKovnoSchapira, TatchonKovnoRosenblun, HirschKovnoSchapiro, JakobUSTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS477Scbapiro, JosefSer, BerlKovnoScliapiro, JudelMazhaikSer, OscherSchaT2, BasaVilnaSer, VulfKovnoSchauchel:, JaresiasVirbalnSerman, IzraelLodzSchaukler, MeschulesShafer-Shmukler, EsterVilnaSchecbat., JulieShafir, EstervilnaScheer, WolfRovnoShapiro, BoruchKovnoSchejsan, MojsieBuselotaiShapiro, MulyaVilnaSchenker, SaulKovnoShapiro, ScholemShavliScher, IcekShavliSheinker, SoraVilnaScher, WulfKovnoShelkhter, ChvalyaVilnaSchilanski, ChanaShavliShemyavich, MoishaVilnaSchillanski, LeaShavliSher, AnnaVilnaSchillanski, LiebShavliSher, IraVilnaSchlafik, PejseachKovnoSheres, TeveVilnaSchuidt, JakobKovnoShimmel, ChaimVilnaSchnidt, LeibKovnoShklovsky, MironVilnaSchmundes, LeaVilnaShklowskaya-Greenstein,Schneider, IsakUtianRozaVilnaSchneiderowski, HeierKovnoShliamper, GoldaVilnaSchneiderowski, RuwinKovnoShneider, GrishaVilnaSchocher, ChoneKovnoShovendanz, AbraaVilnaSchocher, IdelKovnoShufyan, Levin, FelyaVilnaSchocher, JakobKovnoSiderer, LiebSchocher, PejsachKovnoSidrer, FaiwelGardinaSchpitainik, ChoneKovnoSiegel, FeigeNelipenoSchubicz, MarkusWlikawiskenSifris, MarjaseSchuliaann, AbraoSilberfi, KalmanSchulmann, AbranKovnoSilianski, ChajaShavliSchulmann, ChiamKovnoSilianski, ChonaShavliSchuster, ChaiaZhezmirSilianski, LeaShidlovaSchueter, ElijaSilianski, LibaShavliSchuster, GerschonSillanski, BerShavliSchuster, Le jbaZhezmirsimanowich, Torf, SoravilnaSchwaro, MeiseSimlewicz, SalomonKovnoSchwarcz, LeibKovnoSimon, JankielKovnoSchwarz, BabaVilnaSimons, HirschKovnoSchwarz, ChajaVilnaSivelevlc, PineKovnoSchwarz, SonjaVilnaSivelevic, SleimeKovnoSchwarzaann, Sasue1KovnoSkibelska, RajaShavliSculman, ChiaaKovnoSkorbianski, AbramKovnoSegal, AheShvekshnaSlapek, BerVilnaSegal, AnnaVilnaSlapoberski, MordechajKovnoSegal, CbaceShvekshnaSlapobierski, DawidKovnoSegal, E1jasMariampoleSlawianskis, AbramKovnoSegal, MendelKovnoSlchachmundes, SamuelVilnaSegal, NochiaKovnoSlchuster, ChaimKovnoSegal, simonKovnoSlez, BerelKovnoSegalevic, IdelSlez, IcikKovnoSegall, JudelShavliSliosberg, SajaZhagerSegalow, JehudaShavliSlisin, AbramShavliSegalsohn, EliaKovnoSlisin, MichalShavliSegalaohn, SaauelKovnoSlominski, JosefKovnoSegalson, ChoneKovnoSlonimski, JosefMariampoleSegalson, MosesKovnoSlonimski, SamuelSegelson, LeoKovnoSlonimski, SamuelKovnoSegelson, SamuelKovnoSlucki, AbramKovnoSegenkehn, JakobMemelSlucki, MauschaZoaliaiSeifer, NochemKovnoSlucki, RachmilKovnoSein, FeiveKovnoSluzberg, ZecVilnaSein, JizchekKovnoSmejakis, DovidKelmeSein, SimchoKovnoSmigl, PeisachShavliSeiniuk, MinaShavliSmilig, JakobKeidanidanSeinker, IsaakSmilig, PeisachReidanidanSek, lcikBirzhSmul, MausaShavliSelski, ChajimKovnoSmulinski, NorbertHeydekrugSelski, FischelKovnoSmuskovic, MendelSelski, LeibSneidrowsky, JamerRovnoSelzer, AronVendzhigolaSneidrowsky, RubinKovno478LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSnÍAg, SaamelKovnoTaicznann, LeibKovnoSnocki, BoriaKovnoTainowicz, KusielseleliskiSocha't, Ari}aShavliTaitz, SinonKovnoSochat, DovidBirzhTajczmann, LeibKovnoSochat, LeoMokiskisTanache, DawidKovnoSochat, Mau>MarianpoleTansche, FajwelKovnoSolonjak, RachmiolSventzionTarlov, HirsChaviadanSoltz, MoiahaVilnaTatarski, KopelKovnoSpei, ZvulunShavliTauch, HirachSpiawak, LiuhaSinauliaiTeinovic, CharzkelVilkomirSpigal, HellaNelipenoTeitelbaun, xcikKovnoSpitz, BunraShavliTeitelbaun, JakKovnoSpiz, DavidKovnoTeitelbaum, MayerKovnoSrebnlcki, JonaTeitelbaum, SizehokKovnoStarte, JehudaKovnoTeitlboim, GenyaStarovolaki, MauachaKibartTeizok, HirsKovnoStarowolaki, MoaesKovnoTelerant, EnmaStein, ChainVilnaTelerant, HirshSheln, JakouVilnaTelzak, AbramStein, SleineVikijaTelzak, BerlKovnoSteinbach, SalomKovnoTelzak, ChajinKovnoSteinnan, ZalnanShavliTelzak, IsaateKovnoStelnan, AbranKovnoTelzak, LeibKovnoSterling, BerelShavliTense, AbranKovnoSterling, DovidBetigolaTense, DovidKovnoSterling, PaivelShavliTenchel, DovidZhagerSherling, MejerShavliTenchel, JonasZhagerSterz, LeaVilnaTeper, SanuelKovnoSterz, MeryVilnaTeper, ZalmanSt.il, wolfTerniavsky, IsraelKovnoStolper, BerieTischkewitz, JankelShavliStolper, RuvinTisnan, JakobVilkomirStrawolaki, ChainBialyatokTisnen, JerachmielVilkomirstraz, FiachelVilnaTkatsch, BeneschKovnoStraz, LiebaVilnaTobris, AronVilnaStraz, SleineKovnoTodres, Cha jinKovnoStrez, ScheinaVilnaToibes, HirschShavliStrynaki, AronGrodnoToibes, PeiseteShavliStuczki, Herz1KovnoToker, DavidKovnoStulaaf t, ManuscheKovnoTrateuzin, HirshStupel, AbranKovnoTreger, ZeodaSubotnik, GirachaLibauTretzky, ShnuelSudaraki, IaaakTuch, JoseteShavliSukateliakia, ElijaaVilnaTurez, SanuelVilnaSunoliakia, DanielKovnoTuriskin, JehudaRovnoSunacher, HirachZhagerUnaler, JanerShavliSuraakia, ChajimKovnoUpnicki, MosesKovnoSuster, BerelKovnoUpziickis, MausaKovnoSuater, IzraelTelzUrison, MnelkKovnoSuater, LipeBirzhUrison, MuloKovnoSuater, SolemKovnoVainberg, JakobKovnoSvarcmenRovnoVainer, BorucbSvarin, JankelKovnoVartovski, DavidNaumiestlsSvarz, LlebaSvarz, LiebaKOvnoVechter, ChajimVeiner, BorisSveicer, ChajimVeiner, FalweKovnoSvirakaya, MinaVilnaVeizer, IcikKovnoSviraky, ElyaVilnaVeler, MotelKovnoSwiraki, XdaPonevezhVelikalius, JanteelStalingradSzajewicz, AbranVilnaVelt, AbeTauvianSzien, BaruchKovnoVic, ColelKovnoSzna3derowaki, RafatKovnoVic, DovidKovnoSzynkowaki, LejbaKovnoVic, RachmielKovnoSzyakind, BerelVilnaVilenski, NchenpaSekialTabria, BraineShavliVilentschuc-Eier zac ,Meri KovnoTabria, ChaneShavliVinckur, AbranKovnoTabris, SneijerShavliVinicki, FaiweKeidanidanTabriaki, LiebeTae, AbrahamVinik, BarouchVinik, HirselKovnoLISTS OF UTHUANIAN JEWS479Vinkelat*in, DovidVilkovisbkZaks, JosefVoraaVitevskiZal, AronShavliVitkon, Jos«fYurburgZal, LiebeKelseVisgardiski, IcikRovnoZalcsan, PajeacbZbegerVjuker, ChaijimRovnoZar, MausaVjuker, JudaKovnoZar, MosesKovnoVojcik, EfroiiiAlytaZaresbek, YakovvilneVojin, JeineSbavliZ aresbek, AbrasRovnoVolecki, DavidVilnaZaresbok, AbrasvilkiVolbenstein, AJbeRovnoZaresbok, MendelVilkiVolfavic, MeyerRovnoZavelt GezVolfson, JakobRovnoZeidel, MotelvilnaVolk, JankelShavliZeidel, RuvinVizbonVolean, BinenSbavliZeisanovic, JosefRovnoVolocki, BerVilnaZeliksan, Izroel, sonvilnaVolpe, LeizerRovnoZeliksan-Aronowskaya,Volpert, MaxRovnoCbaneVilnaVolpert, SaloaonRovnoZelikovic, Mene KovnoVorebev, JehudaRovnoZelitzkaya, AdelitaVilnaVulfovic, AbraeMeselZelkind, TasaraVilnaWarschbowsky, LeiserVilnaZelsanovicb, FaivlvilnaMebralinski, SaauelVilnaZeresba, YakowVilnaHeiner, SawRovnozilanski, SsuelRovnoWeiscbbelowski, RajaKovnoZilbersan, JozefWeller, LeibSbavliZilberstein, lcikShavliWeraan, ZzraelKovnoZilinski, ChajisSbavliWiker, LejbavilnaZisen, JankielKovnoWilezyuski, BenRovnoziris, LeabVilnaWilker, LiebeVilnaZiris, MicbleVllnaWinik, IdelRovnoZiskin, BerelWirgardiski, SzaulKovnoZiskovicb, ElyaVilnaWisgardiski, IsakRovnoZlssan, BerKovnoWisgardiski, SchaerelRovnoZiv, DavidRovnoWislicki, FannyRovnoZlatkin, DavidWitelson, AronKovnoZnocki, BerelWitten, David KovnoZrelsan, SisonKovnoWolfberg, RacbsilKovnoZretzkaya, CbanavilnaWolfer, MosesPlungianZuckersan, AbrasvilnaWolfert, GerbardMeselZuckersan-Wersatskaya,Wolpe, DavidKovnoSbifravilnaWunc, IzakKovnoZxxkersan, lzcbokVilnaZablotzkaya, BvaVilnaZukersan, MotelVilnaZabor, FajwelRovnoZukersan, ZakZagorskaya, GitaVilnaZuzan, BuniaSbavliZaks, CbajisZyiber, ZeligVllnaZaks, lcikVorna480LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESJEWISH SOLDIERS FROM LITHUANIAINJURED DURING THERUSSO-JAPANESE WAR 1904-5*The following is a translation and transliteration of namesfrom the Hebrew list by Lithuanian towns. Key: w =wounded; k = killed; * = dates other than 1904-5, asappeared on Hebrew list.Avanta - Beblis, Abrahan, w. OcL. 2, 1904.Birzli - Posevoltzky, Eliahu, w. Feb. 21, 1905.Bobt - Garber, Hoshe, w. Feb. 14, 1905.Dusiat - Zilber, Abrahan ben Shmuel, 1907*.Ezherani-Zarasai - Arni-tzky, Yitzhak, w. Feb. 22, 1905/ Barza, Yisrael,k. Feb. 22, 1905/ Beek, Hoshe, w. Feb. 22, 1905; Bogokolovsky,Shlomo, w. Feb. 22, 1905; Dubinovsky, Yisrael, w. Feb. 24, 1905;Einhorn, Abrahae, w. Feb. 22, 1905; Farber, Chanoch, k. Feb. 22,1905; Frolen/Prolen, Yisrael, w. Feb. 22, 1905; Ginzburg, Moshe,missing, Jan. 13, 1905, Goldshtein, Shmuel, w. Feb. 22, 1905;Gordon, Yisrael—David, w. Feb. 22, 1905; Gras, Yosef, w. Feb. 22,1905; Xsaacsohn, Yitzhak, w. Feb. 25, 1905; Olman, Yitzhak, w.Feb. 19, 1905; Pleksman, Leib, mlssing Feb. 25, 1905; Sahr, Yosef,w. Feb. 22, 1905; Schneider, Leib, w. Feb. 22, 1905; Schneider,Natan, w. Feb. 22, 1905; Stedelkon, Shmuel, missing Feb. 25, 1905.Girtigola - Auguston, Yosef-Dov-Baer ben Hirsh, w- 1902*.Gorzhd - Shaul, Yitzhak, w. June 2, 1904.Kelme - Mal/Mel, Yakov, w. Jan. 12, 1905.Kllkul - Frauman, Fiemer, missing, June 2, 1904.Rovno - Dimant, David, w. June 2, 1904; Dryshpol, Moshe, w. Sept. 24,1904; Forman, Moshe, k. Feb. 11, 1905; Meltzer, Yitzhak, w. Oct.3, 1904; Milshtein, Noah, w. Feb. 22, 1905; Moshkotinsky, Meir,w. Feb. 26, 1905; Reiblatt, Abrahaa, w. Feb. 19, 1905; Yaglin,Yitzhak, mlssing, Aug. 20, 1904.Latzlcova - Fisher, Moshe, w. Feb. 24, 1905.Laxdai - Gordin, Zalman, w. Feb. 24, 1905.LinRova — Blumberg, Leib, w. Nov. 2, 1904; Shneur, Yosef, k. Jvrne 2,1904; Turbah, Yitzhak, w. June 2, 1904.LoyKuva - Sharnovitz, Abraham, w. Feb. 20, 1905.Mallat - Rafes/Raps, Shmuel, w. Aug. 15, 1905.01knik - Becker, Mordechai, w. Feb. 20, 1905.Pakon - Sahr, Abraham, w. Aug. 23, 1904.Polcroi - Abilov, Shlomo, k. Feb. 27, 1905.Ponevezh - Erlich, Shlomo, k. Aug. 18, 1904; Lazarov, Shlomo, w. June2, 1904; Naimettor, Yisrael, w. Jan. 1905; Pollak, Yehoshuar w.Feb. 22, 1905; Shvatz, Yltzhak, w. Feb. 21, 1905; Smilga,Mordechai, w. June 11, 1904.Poon - Blitman, Dov-Baer, w. Feb. 16, 1905.This list was compiled by Shlomo Katzov, PetachTikvah, Israel, based on the book of M. Usov: "Jewsin the Army of Russia."LISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS481Posevdl - Try»*an, Yakov, w. Sept. 28, 1904.R*«in - Fe-tz /Petz, Yakov, w. Feb. 22, 19057 Gutaan, Yo£a, k. Feb. 24,19057 Rlsel, w. June 2, 19047 Harcus, Felvel, aisslng, Feb. 15,19057 2elikovit*, Meir, w. Feb. 22, 1905.Sbatt * Batenis, Aaron, sissing, Feb. 25, 1905.Shavli - Isiksohn, Padok, k. Aug. 23, 19047 Yabushkar, Hirsh, w. Feb.20, 1905.Shjtud - Ralman Eliahu, w. Feb. 22, 1905.Targin - Eliash, Yos®f, w. Aug. 17, 1904.Tel* - Sheff, Eliezer-Aharon, w. Jan. 4, 1905.Troki - Abraaovitz, Yitzhak, w. Feb. 17, 19057 Hayerovite, Binyaain,w. Feb. 15, 1905.Ushpole - Yuselevitz, Kalman, w. Feb. 22, 1905.Utian - Shuster, Dov-Baer, w. Feb. 22, 1905/ Zimin, Fishel, w. Feb. 22,1905.Vainuta - Feinstein, Leib ben Yosef, (1890)*.Vilkomir - Feivsohn, Shevach, w. Aug. 18, 19047 Kliatzko, Birtyamin, w.Feb. 16, 19057 Meltz, Meir, w. Aug. 18, 19047 Morshik, Yisrael,w. Feb. 22, 19057 Yaffe, Mordechai, w. Sept. 24, 1904.vilna - Abramovitz, David, w. Sept. 28, 19047 Benzel, Aaron, w. sept.29, 19057 Elperovitz, Vulf, w. Aug. 18, 1904 7 Gonsh, Yitzhak,miSsing, June l, 19047 Goss, Binyamin, w., Aug. 18, 19047Kovarsky, Vulf, w., Aug. 17, 1904 7 Lantz, Dov-Baer, w., Sept. 28,19047 Mikhaelsky, Noah, missing, Sept. 29, 19047 Mirsky, Yitzhak,w. Feb. 21, 19057 Orish, 2elkind, w. Dec. 9, 19047 Rablnovitz,David, missing, Feb. 26, 1905; Rai*, Shmuel, w. June 1, 1905 7Shechman, Shmuel, w. Sept. 28, 19047 Shiller, Hirsh, w. Aug. 17,19047 Shuktalsky, Yakov, w. Sept. 29, 19047 Shtashrov, Haim, w.Feb. 20, 19057 Yehiel, Huna, w. Oct. 1, 1904.Yanishok - Choromansky, Pinchas, k. June 2, 1904.Yevia - Shmukler, Yakov, w. Aug. 19, 1904.JEWISH FAMILY NAMES TAKEN FROMLITHUANIAN TOWN NAMESIt is generally taken for granted that the family has a lastname. It is the Levy Family or the Abramovich Family, theChayats or the Aniksters. One tends to forget that mostRussian Jews actually had no last names until sometime intothe 19th century.Before they had official family names, they got alongwith their first names and some other identifying feature, likeIsaak the Levite, Isaak son of Abraham, Isaak the tailor orIsaak from Aniksht.Later, when sumames were required, the title, father’sname, occupation or town may have taken on a new form.482LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNTTIESIsaak might have become Isaak Levy (Levite), Isaak Abramo-vich (son of Abraham), Isaak Chayat (tailor in Hebrew) orIsaak Anikster (from Aniksht).The use of a town name for identifícation often meantthat the person had relocated to a new town but was referredto as Isaak-the-fellow-who-came-here-from-Aniksht.The town name can be a good clue for fínding genealogi-cal information although the same town name may appear inseveral different countries (and in fact several different placeswithin a single country). Of course, it cannot be assumed thata person with a particular Lithuanian town name as a lastname had a connection with that town. Nevertheless, thefollowing last names may have been taken from Lithuaniantown names:SurnanaAbalovAnik&h<ter, Anlxter, OnlkstBalberishkyBolnikDauqalaDeugovtisDubnik6odlevskyKalveriskyKeidanskyKelaansky, KelszkyKlbarskyKopcbovskyKovarskyKrakinovskyKrukKursbanLaidinLeskovMariaspolskyMemelstelnMeviaserPikelner, PikelnyPlungianskyPonedlarPonerPosvolskyRagolerRaisnerResigolskyRogov, Rogover, RogoffRossbiskySalant, Salanter, SolenderSkudvilerTrockUsbpoleVilensky, VilnerVilkinVirbalinskyYanoverTown MameAbelAniksbtBalbirisbokBolnikDaugalDaugDubinikGodlevaKalvariaKeidanKelmeKibartKopcbevoKovarskKrakinovaKrukXurshanLazdaiLisbkovaMarianpoleMemelPonevezhPikelnPlungianPonedelPonarPosvolRagola or AyragolaRasinRenigolaRogovaRoesbisbokSalantSkudvillTrokiUsbpoleVilnaVilklVlrbalnYanovaLISTS OF LITHUANIAN JEWS483Yezner or JeznerZager and Zagar&kyYeznaZhagerYAHRZHEIT DATES OF LITHUANIANJEWISH COMMUNITIESThe yahrzheit dates for the massacres of the Jewishcommunities in each town, as set forth in Volume 4 ofYehadut Lita, and additional or conflicting reports issued bythe (a) Chamber of the Holocaust (Martef HaShoah) onMount Zion in Jerusalem, (b) Information ífom Y. Shohat,the shamash of the Kovno Synagogue who brought theinformation with him to Israel, and (c) The book Slaughterofthe Masses in Lithuania :JLbel - 8/25/41: 2 Elul; (8/10/41 -a-).JUcelan *• 8/9/41: 16 Av.Alerandrovol - June 1941.Alsiad - 8/14/41: 21 Av, 8/30/41: 7 Elul, 12/24/41: 4 Tevet.Alyta - 6/23/41: 28 Sivan, 13-8/31/41: 20 Av-8 Elul , 9/9/41: 17 Elul.Anilcsift - June-July 1941, 7/28/41: 4 Av, (8/29/41 -c-).Antaliept - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.AnisHuk - 9/30/41: 9 Tishri.Anushishok - 14-8/15/41: 21-22 Av, 8/25/41: 2 Elul.Avante - 8/29/41: 6 Elul.Ayragula - 9/3/41: 11 Elul.Baisigola - 9/5/41: 13 Elul, (9/2/41 -c-).Balbirishuk - 8/27/41: 4 Elul, 9/1/41: 9 Elul.Barshtitz - unknoun; probably killed in Mazhaik.Bat.uk - 9/16/41: 24 Elul.Basilian - 10/2/41: 11 Tishri.Betigola - 8/27/41: 4 Elul.Birshtan - 9/9/41: 17 Elul.Birzh - June-Aug. 1941, 8/8/41: 15 Av, (8/19/41 -b-).Bobt - /17/41: 22 Tannuz, 8/27/41: 4 Elul.Bogoslavishok - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.BolnJJc - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Boy<3 - unknown (apparently killed in Pren or Mariampole).Butrinantz - 8/12/41: 19 Av, 8/21/41: 28 Av, 9/9/41: 17 Elul, (8/26/41-b- ) -Chaiklshok - 9/3/41: 11 Elul.Chaviadan - 6/29/41: 4 Tannuz, 9/16/41: 24 Elul.DabeJJc - 8/29/41: 6 Elul.Darbian - 6/29/41: 4 Tannuz, 8/24/41: 1 Elul, 9/22/41: Rosh Hashan&h5702.Note: The Hebrew year is 5701 unless otherwise stated484LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESDairsbunisbok - 8/15/41: 22 Av, 8/28/41-9/2/41: 5-10 Elul.Datnuva — 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Daug - End of August 1941 (beginning of Elul)? 9/9/41: 17 Elul.Dauien - Unknown.Dubinik - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Dusiat: - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Bx*staiVllky - 9/14/41: 22 Elul.Eztaereni-Zarasai - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Gaura - Unlcnown.Gttdrovitz - 8/7/41: 14 Av, 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Gelvan - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Girtlgola - 8/21/41: 28 Av.Gorztad - 6/24/41: 29 Sivan, 9/14/41: 22 Elul.Grinkistaok - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Griskataud - 9/16/41: 24 Elul.Gruzd - 8/6/41: 13 Av, 10/2/41: 11 Tistari.Gudleva - 8/28-9/2/41: 5-10 Elul.Gudzhon - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Intaorik - 8/29/41: 6 Elul.Raltinan - 9/16/41: 24 Elul.Ralvaria - 7/9/41: 14 Tammuz, 9/1/41: 9 Elul.Kanai - 8/15-16/41: 22-23 Av, 8/25/41: 2 Elul.Reidan - End of June 1941, 7/23/41: 28 Tammuz, 8/28/41: 5 Elul,(8/31/41 -b-).Relrne - 7/29/41: 5 Av, 10/2/41: 11 Tistari 5702, (8/22/41 -b-).Ribart - 7/10/41: 15 Tammuz.Klikul - 8/9/41: 16 Av.Rlovian - Probably 8/4/41: 11 Av.Koktistaka - 8/29/41: 6 Elul.Kool - 6/29/41: 4 Tammuz.Kovarsk - July 1941, 5.9.41: 13 Elul.Rovno - 6/25-26/41: 30 Sivan-1 Tammuz, 6/27/41: 2 Tammuz, 7-7/8/41:12-13 Tammuz, 8/8/41: 15 Av, 8/18/41: 25 Av, 9/26/41: 5 Tistari,10/4/41: 13 Tistari, 10/29/41: 8 Ctaestavan 5702, 11/16-12/15/413/10/42: 21 Adar I 5702, 2/4/43: 29 Staevat 5703, 3/27-28/44: 3-Nissan 5704, 7/12/44: 21 Tammuz 5704, 7/16/44: 25 Tammuz 5704.Kopcheva - 11/3/41: 13 Ctaestavan 5702.Krakinova - July 1941, 8/17/41: 24 Av, 8/24/41: 1 Elul.Kretinga - 6/26/41: 1 Tammuz, 6/28/41: 3 Tammuz, 11-7/18/41: 16-23Tammuz.Rrinctain - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Krok - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Rron - 8/15/41: 22 Av.Krozta - 7/22/41: 27 Tammuz, 9/2/41: 10 Elul.Kruk - 10/2/41: 11 Tishri.Kruki - 7/16/41: 21 Tammuz, 9/4/41: 12 Elul.Kupistaok - 6/58/41: 3 Tammuz, and Sept. 1941.Kurlkli - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Kurstaan - 7/16/41: 21 Tammuz, 10/2/41: 11 Tistari 5702, (20-7/21/41-c-) .Rustaidar - 8/28/41: 5 Elul, (8/26/41 -c-).Laipoon - 9/11/41: 19 Elul, 9/24/41: 3 Tistari, 9/26/41: 5 Tishri.LatzRova - 8/3/41: 10 Av, 8/9/41: 16 Av.Layazhova - 8/9/41: 16 Av.Lazdai - 11/3/41: 13 Cheshvan.Lidovian - 8/15-16/41: 22-23 Av.Ligum - Beginning & middle of July 1941, and during second taalf of1941.Lilion - UnJcnown (probably killed with Utian Jews) .Lingmian — UnJcnown (probably killed with Utian Jews).LinJcova - 6/30/41: 5 Tammuz, 7/3/41: 8 Tammuz, 7/23/41: 28 Tammuz.Liodvinova - 9/1/41: 9 Elul.Loykuva - 8/30/41:7 Elul,15-7/17/41: 20-22 Tammuz: 7/19/41: 24 Elul.Luknik - 7/23/41: 28 Tammuz, 8/30/41: 7 Elul, 12/24/41: 4 Tevet.LuJcshi - 9/13/41: 21 Elul.Maisiad - Second taalf of July 1941, end of July 1941, and 8/15-16/41:22-23 Av.Maliat - 6/28-29/41: 3-4 Tammuz, 8/29/41: 6 Elul.a <«LISTS OF UTHUANIAN JEWS485Mariaapole - 7/3/41: 8 Taaauz, July-Aug. 1941, 3- 7/13/41: 8-18 Tamiauz,9/1/41: 9 Elul, (11/15/41 -b-).Hashlcutz - Beginning of July 1941.Haurotsh - 8/28/41-9/2/41: 5-10 Elul.Hazbaik - 8/3/41: ÍO Av, 8/9/41: 16 Av.Medingian - July 1941.Heretsh - 6/24/41: 29 Sivan, 8/8/41: 15 Av.Hiroslau - Unltnown (prrobably Rilled wit-h Alyta Jews).Musnik - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Haisb-tu-t-Ponevezh - 8/24/41: 1 Elul.Haisbtu't—Sbaki - 7/1/41: 6 Tammuz, 16.9.41: 24 Elul.Naisbtut—1Tavrig — 7/19/41: 24 Tammuz, 9/20/41: 28 Elul.lei—Radvilisbok - 8/8/41: 15 Av.Nemoksbt - 7/24/41: 29 Tammuz, 8/18-22/41: 25-29 Av, (9/16/41 -b-).Hemunaitz - 8/13-31/41: 20 Av-8 Elul.Nevarao - 7/15-17/41: 20-22 Tammuz, 8/30/41: 7 Elul.Oran - 8/12/41: 19 Av; 8/17/41: 24 Av; 9/9/41: 17 Elul.Pabirzba - Unknown.Pacbinel - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Pagir - Unknown.Pakon - 8/28/41-9/2/41: 5-11 Elul.Panimunik - Probably killed with Rakishok Jews.Pansisbok - 9/30/41: 9 Tishri.Payura - 9/16/41: 24 Elul.Pikeln - 8/9/41: 16 Av, (8/19/41 -b-).Pilvishok - 8/29/41: 6 Elul, 9/15/41: 23 Elul.Piniava - 8/24/41: 1 Elul.Plotel - End of June 1941, 8/30/41: 7 Elul, July-Nov. 1941.Plungian - 7/15-*16/41: 20-21 Tammuz, 15.7.41: 20 Tammuz.Podzbelve - July-Aug. 1941, 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Pofcroi - 7/10/41: 15 Tammuz, 8/4/41: 11 Av.Polangen - 6/22/41: 27 Sivan, 6/30/41: 5 Taramuz, 8/24/41: 1 Elul.Ponevezh - Mid-July 1941, 7/21/41: 26 Tammuz, 8/24/41: 1 Elul,July-Sept. 1941.Ponidel - 8/25/41: 2 Elul.Poon - 9/9/41: 17 Elul.Popilan - 7/18/41: 23 Tammuz, 10/2/.41: 11 Tishri.Poshelat - Unfcnown.Posbvitin - 10/2/41: 11 Tishri.Posvol - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Pren - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Pumpian - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Radayk - 8/20/41: 6 Elul.Radvi1ishok - 7/12/41: 17 Taramuz, 10/2/41: 11 Tishri.Raitarada - 8/29/41: 6 Elul.Rakisbok - 8/15-16/41: 22-23 Av, 8/25/41: 2 Elul, July 1941.Rasin - 7/29/41: 5 Av, 8/29/41: 6 Elul, (8/13/41 -b-), (8/30/41 -b-).Raudona — Unknown; probably killed with Jews of either Yurburg orRasin.Remigola - 8/21/41: 28 Av.Ritova - 7/15-16/41: 20-21 Tammuz, 8/29/41: 6 Elul.Rogova - 8/24-25/41: 1-2 Elul.Rozalia - 8/4/41: 11 Av.Rudamin - 11/3/41: 13 Cheshvan.Rumsbishok — July—Aug. 1941, 8/29/41: 6 Elul, 9/4/41: 12 Elul, (9/2/41—b- ) .Salant - 7/10/41: 15 Tammuz, 7/20/41: 25 Tammuz, and July 1941,(8/24/41 -b-).Salat - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Salok - 8/9/41: 16 Av, 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Sapizisbok — Middle of August 1941; 9/4/41: 22 Elul.Semilisbok - 10/6/41: 15 Tishri.Serhai - 9/11/41: 19 Elul.Sesik - 7/1-2/41: 6-7 Tammuz, 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Sbadova - Mid-August 1941, 8/25-26/41: 2-3 Elul.Shaki - 7/5/41: 10 Tammuz, 9/13/41: 21 Elul, (10/1/41: Yom Kippur 5702—b— ) .Shatt - 8/28/41: 5 Elul.Sbaudina - 7/5/41: ÍO Tammuz, end of July.486LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES&havlan - 10/2/41: 11 Tlahrl 5702-Sbavli - 6/29/41: 4 Tanuz, June to »id-July 1941, 9/3/41: 11 Elul,9/6/41: 14 Elul, 9/10/41: 18 Elul, 9/12/41: 20 Elul, 9/13/41: 21Elul, 10/2/41: 11 Tlahri 5702, 11/5/43: 7 Chashvan 5704.Hmhvill - «July-Aug. 1941.Shidlova - 8/15—16/41:22—23, Av, 8/21/41: 28 Av.Shllel - 7/7-8/41: 12-13 Tamauz, 9/16/41: 24 Elul.ffliiakaicb - Unlcnown, perhaps lcilled along with Jews of Rasin.Shirvint - 9/18/41: 26 Elul.Shlcud - 6/29/41: 4 Taaauz, 6/30/41- 7/2/41: 5-7 Taaauz, 8/15-16/41:22-23 Av, (6/26/41 -b-).ShuRian - 8/29/41: 6 Elul, 10/2/41: 11 Tishri.ShveJcshna - 6/27/41: 2 Taaauz, 7/19/41: 24 Taaauz, 9/22/41: RoshHashanah 5702, (9/20/41 -b-).Siad - End ot 1941, 7/3/41: 8 Taaauz, 8/9/41: 16 Av.Siauna - 9/12/41: 20 Elul.Skopiehok - 8/15-16/41: 22-23 Av.fflcudvill - 7/21/41: 26 Taaauz, 9/16/41: 24 Elul.Skunian - 8/29/41: 6 Elul.Srednik - 8/28/41: 5 Elul, 9/3/41: 11 Elul.Stokllshok - 8/27/41: 4 Elul, 9/3/41: 11 Elul.Subotush - July, 1941.Sudarg - 7/5/41: ÍO Taauauz, end of July, 1941.Suvianishok - 8/15-16/41: 22-23 Av.Sviadoshitz - Probably around July 1941; and 8/10/41: 17 Av, 8/20/41:27 Av .Targin - 8/29/41: 6 Jlul, (8/28/41 -a-).Tauvian - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Tavrig - 7/2/41: 7 Tannuz, 7/3-10/41: 8-15 Tannuz, 9/16/41: 24 Elul,(7/27/41 -a-).Telz - 7/14-15/41: 19-20 Tanuz, 7/15-17/41: 20- 22 Tannuz, 8/30/41: 7Blul, 12/24/41: 4 TeVet.Tirkshla - 8/9/41: 16 Av.Trashkun - 8/23/41: 30 Av.TrishJJc - July 1941, 10/2/41: ll Tishri.Tumont - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Tver - 8/30/41: 7 Elul.Tzitovian - 6/25/41: 30 Sivan, 8/12/41: 19 Av.Upina - 8/29/41: 6 Elui; (9/16/41 —b—).utian - 7/31/41: 7 Av? 8/7/41: 14 Av; 8/29/41: 6 Elul; (8/31/41 -b-);(7/9/41 -a-).Ushpole - 8/29/41: 6 Elul.Uzhvent - 7/30/41: 6 Av; 10/2/41: 11 Tishri; 12/8/41: 18 Klslev.Vabolnlk - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Valgova - 7/29/41: 5 Av, 10/2/41: 11 Tishri.Vainuta - 7/20/41: 25 Taonuz; end of Sept. 1941.Vaiyver - 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Varzhan - 7/16/41: 21 Tannuz; Sept. 1941.Vashlci - July 1941; 8/26/41: 3 Elul.Veckshna - 8/5/41: 12 Av.Veger - 8/9/41: 16 Av.Vendzhigola - 7/3/41: 8 Tanmuz, 7/17/41: 22 Tannuz.Veviya - 10/6/41: 15 Tishri.Vidlshok - 9/5/41: 13 Elul.Vldukla - 7/24/41: 29 Tanmuz, 8/22/41: 29 Av.vilki - 7/15/41: 20 Tanmuz, 8/28/41: 5 Elul.Vilkonir - 7/4/41: 9 Tannuz, 7/10/41: 15 Tannuz, 8/1/41: 8 Av, 8/19/41:26 Av, 9/5/41: 13 Elul, 9/26/41: 5 Tishri.Vilkovishk - 7/27-28/41; 3-4 Av, 9/24/41: 3 Tishri, 10/13/41: 22Tishri.Vilon - July 1941, 9/3/41: 11 Elul.Virbaln—Ribart - 7/10/41: 15 Tammuz, 7/29/41: 5 Av, 9/11/41: 19 Elul.Vishay - 11/3/41: 13 Cheshvan.Vishinta - Probably killed with Jews fron Kupishuk.Vishtinitz - 7/14/41: 19 Tamnuz, 9/9/41: 17 Elul.Visokidbor - 7/5/41: ÍO Tammuz, 9/30/41: 9 Tishri, 12/14/.41: 24Kislev, 2/4/42: 17 Shevat.Vizhon - 8/7/41: 14 Av.Vorna - 7/16/41: 21 Tannuz, 8/31/41» 8 Elul, 12/24/41: 4 Tevet.USTS OF UTHUANIAN JEWS487Yanisl>kel - 8/26/41: 3 Eiul.Yuiiahok - Beginning of Aug.1941, 8/27/41: 4 Elul, 10/2/41: 11 Tishri.Vanova - 7/12/41: 17 Taainuz, 8/14/41: 21 Av, 8/28-9/2/41: 5-10 Elul,9/11-12/41: 19-20 Elul.Yelok - July-Aug. 1941.Yesna - 8/16-18/41: 23-25 Av, 8/28/41: 5 Elul, 9/3/41: 11 Elul.Vosvine - 8/28/41 - 9/2/41: 5-10 Elul.Yurt>urg - 7/3/41: 8 Tannuz, 7/21/41: 26 Tannuz, 8/1/41: 8 Avr 9/4/41:12 ElUl, 9/11/41: 19 Elul.Yuihint - UnRnown, probably t.aken to Rakishok.2hager - 6/25/41: 30 Sivan, 6/26/41: 1 Tannuz, 10/2/41: 11 Tishri.Zhain - 8/28/41: 5 Elul.Zhainel - 8/8/41: 15 Av.Zharan - 7/23/41: 28 Tannuz.Zheznir - 8/27/41: 4 Elul, 8/28/41: 5 Elul.Zhidik - 8/3/41: ÍO Av, 8/9/41: 16 Av.Zhusli - 8/28/41: 5 Elul, 10/6/41: 15 Tishri, (8/27/41 -b-).APPENDIX 3RESOURCES FOR LITHUANIAN JEWISH GENEALOGYAmerican Jewish Archives, 3101 Clifton Ave., CincinnatiOH 45220. Especially for history of Jews in the UnitedStates and Canada.American Jewish Historical Society, 2 Thomton Rd., Wal-tham, MA 02154. For information about Jews of Ameri-ca.Association of Jewish Genealogical Societies, 1485 TeaneckRd., Teaneck, NJ 07666.• Association of Lithuanians in Israel, 1 Hamelekh David St.,Tel Aviv, Israel. They hold annual memorial services forthe Jewish communities that were decimated in theHolocaust. They have a photo collection, a small libraryand file of a few family trees,Canadian Jewish Congress, 1590 McGregor Ave., Montreal,Canada."Family Finder" computerized list of sumames and locales.For help in finding others researching the same familynames and town. To check this list and to register yourown names and towns, contact the Association of JewishGenealogical Society, 1485 Teaneck Rd., Teaneck, NJ07666. Founded by Gary Mokotoff.490UTHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESHIAS, Location Department, 200 Park Ave. South, NewYork, NY 10003.Jewish Family Name File, Association for the Study ofJewish Languages, 1610 Eshkol Tower, University ofHaifa, 31999 Haifa, Israel. Members may submit fivenames per year for analysis as to origin and meaning.Jewish genealogical societies, chapters around the world. Forassistance in finding the addresses and telephone numbersof local societies, contact the Association of JewishGenealogical Societies, 1485 Teaneck Rd., Teaneck, NJ07666.Mormon Library. The Mormon church has microfilmedPolish records from the late 1700’s and early 1800’s,including Jewish vital records from towns in southernLithuania. Catalog records are by Lithuanian spelling ofthe town name. New material is continually being addedto their collection. The Mormon Library is now calledThe Family History Library. Main library: 35 NorthWest Temple St., Salt Lake City, UT 84150.National Archives and Records Administration, WashingtonDC 20408. For tracing ancestors in America and for theRussian Consular Records which contain many entiies onJews. They have the index to the records by SallyannAmdur Sack and Suzan Fishl Wynne, The RussianConsular Records Index and Catalog, 1987.National Ethnic Archives, Publish Archives of Canada,Manuscript Division, 395 Wellington St., Ottawa,Canada K1A ON3. For information regarding RussianConsular records in Canada.Search Bureau for Missing Relatives, Jewish Agency, POB92, Jerusalem. Their records include lists of Holocaustsurvivors who went to Israel from Lithuania. Also, listsof landsmanschaften and when they hold their annualyahrzeit services.RESOURCES491South Afirican Jewish Board of Deputies, Sheffield House,Main and Kruis Streets, Box 1180, Johannesburg, SouthAírica.Yad Vashem Library and Archives, POB 3477, Jerusalem,Israel. They have memorial books and other informationrelating to the Holocaust in Lithuania.YIVO Institute for Jewish Records, 1048 Fifth Ave., NewYork, NY 10028 (Yidisher Visenshaftlikher Institut). Amassive collection of material on East European Jewry.The Institute was founded in Vilna in 1925 and wastransferred to New York just before World War II. Asthis collection becomes catalogued and indexed, it will bea prime source of material for Jewish genealogists. Alarge part of the Vilna YIVO collection which wasthought lost in the Holocaust has been relocated.Note: The Central Archives for the History of the JewishPeople, Givat Ram, Jerusalem, has been trying toacquire a large collection of Polish Jewish records. Ifthey do so, this will also become a source of informationon Lithuanian Jewry.BEGINNING JEWISH GENEALOGYGENERAL INFORMATIONRranzler, David, My Jewish Roots: A Practical Guide ToTracing and Recording Your Genealogy and FamilyHistory, New York: Sepher-Hermon Press, 1979.Kurzweil, Arthur, From Generation To Generation: How ToTrace Your Jewish Genealogy and Personal History,New York: Morrow Press, 1987.Rottenberg, Dan, Finding Our Fathers: A Guidebook toJewish Genealogy, Baltimore: Genealogical PublishingCompany, 1988.492LflHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESSchafler, Sara, "Jewish Genealogy," Encyclopedia Judaica,1983-5 Yearbook, Jerusalem: Keter, 1986, pp. 68-76.PERIODICALS ON JEWISH GENEALOGYAvotaynu: The Intemational Review of Jewish Genealogy,1485 Teaneck Rd., Teaneck, NJ 07666, quarterly, editedby Sallyann Sack and Gary Mokotoff.Landsmen: Quarterty Publication of The SuwaUá-LonaaInterest Group for Jewish Genealogists, Marlene Sil-verman, Editor, 3701 Connecticut Avenue NW, #228,Washington, DC 20008.Search: Joumal of the Illinois Jewish Genealogical Society,c/o Illinois JGS, 1025 Antique Ln., Northbrook, IL60062.Note: newsletters and bulletins of local Jewish genealogicalsocieties provide excellent up-to-date material in the field.For further information, contact the Association of JewishGenealogical Societies, 1485 Teaneck Rd., Teaneck, NJ07666.ADDITIONAL MATERIAL ON LITHUANIAN JEWRY"Almanach," publication prepared for the 60th anniversarycelebration of Lithuanian Jewish Academicians 1924-1984. Published by the Union of Lithuanian JewishAcademicians, POB 37795, Tel Aviv, Israel. Chairman:Adv. Avraham Tory-Golub.American Jewish Yearbook, volumes beginning 1899. Theyinclude many notes of interest on immigrants to Amer-RESOURCES493ica. Also check the back of these annuals, especially theearly editions, for your family names among the lists ofsubscribers to the Jewish Publication Society. The listsare divided by state.Balys, Jonas, Uthuania and Uthuanians: A Selected Biblio-graphy, New York, 1961, published for the LithuanianResearch Institute by Frederick A. Praeger.Bazewicza, iM.,Atlas Geograficzny lllustrowany, KrolestwaPolslciego, Warsaw.Book of Landsmanschaften, a W.P.A. Project in cooperationwith the J.L. Peretz Writers Verein, 1938.Cohen, Chester G. Shtetl Finder Gazetteer, Bowie, MD:Heritage Books, 1990. Gazetteer of Jewish communitiesffom Pale of Settlement.Dawidowicz, Lucy S. The Golden Tradition: JewishLife andThoughtin Eastem Europe, London: Vallentine, Mitchell& Co., Ltd., 1967. Collection of articles with specialrelevance for Lithuanian Jewry. Includes autobiogra-phies, memoirs, reminiscences and letters that portraylife among Eastem European Jews and how they res-ponded to the enlightenment and emancipation. From thelate eighteenth century, up to World War II.Famity Who’s Who, Jerusalem: The Hebrew University ofJemsalem, 1969-1976, two volumes. These books list thefamily names, and family trees of contributors to theHebrew University endowment fund. Address: 21 HessSt., Jemsalem.Great Soviet Encyclopedia, a translation of the third editionof Bol’shaia Sovetshaia Entsihlopedia of 1978, NewYork: Macmillan, Inc. and London: Collier MacmillanPublishers, 1982.Grimsted, Patricia Kennedy, Archives and ManuscriptRepositories in the USSR: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania andBelomssia, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press,1981. An historical survey of record keeping in the494LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESLithuanian S.S.R. A good adjunct to general Lithuanianhistory and an excellent breakdown of the ways Lithuaniahas been divided by gubernias and by districts.Hundert, Gershon David and Gershon C. Bacon. TheJews inPoland and Russia, Bloomington, Indiana: IndianaUniversity Press, 1984. Extensive bibliography. Twoparts to book: (a) "The Jews in Poland-Lithuania ffomthe Twelfth Century to the First Partition," and (b) "EastEuropean Jewry From the First Partition to the Present. ”Jewish encyclopedias: including the Encyclopedia Judaica,Jewish Encyclopedia, Universal Jewish Encyclopedia andthe Standard Jewish Encyclopedia. They include somearticles on individual Lithuanian Jewish communities.Also see "Genealogy,” "Lithuania," and importantfigures in Lithuanian Jewry.Jews ofSouth Africa, The, Tel Aviv: Beth Hatefutsoth, TheNahum Goldmann Museum of the Jewish Diaspora,1983. Photos and material on the South Alfican JewishCommunity.Kaganoff, BenZion C., A Dictionary of Jewish Names andTheir History, New York: Schocken Books, 1977.Katz, Menke, Buming Village, New York: The Smith, 1972.Poems about the village of Michalishok (not far ífom thepresent Lithuanian border).Kobrin, Leon, The Uthuanian Village, translated by IsaacGoldberg, New York: Bemard G. Richards Co., Inc.,1927. In the chapters "Preparations For the Fair” and"The Fair" he shows how important the fair was in thelives of the Jews.Kurzweil, Arthur and Miriam Weiner, The Encyclopedia ofJewish Genealogy, Northvale, NJ: Jason Aronson Inc.Three Volumes. Volume I, 1991.Levin, Dov, They Fought Back: Lithuanian Jewry’s ArmedResistance to the Nazis 1941-1945, Jerusalem: YadVashem and The Institute of Contemporary Jewry,RESOURCES495Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 1974. (Hebrew withEnglish synopsis).Lite, vol. I, New York: Jewish-Lithuanian Cultural Society,1951; vol. II, Tel Aviv, 1965. (Yiddish)Lithuanian Jew, periodical published in the 1940’s by theAmerican Federation for Lithuanian Jews.Lituanus, a periodical in English about Lithuania, but nothingabout Jews. Index to volumes I-IX in Dec. 1963 edition.Munitz, Benzion, "Identilying Jewish Names In Russia,"Soviet Jewish Affairs, vol. 2, no. 2, 1972, pp. 66-76.Neshamit, Sarah, "Rescue In Lithuania During the NaziOccupation (June 1941-Aug. 1944)," Rescue AttemptsDuring the Holocaust, Jerusalem: Yad Vashem, 1977.Oshry, Ephraim, Churban Lita: A Chronicle of the Des-truction of the Sacred Jewish Communities ofLithuania1941-1945, New York and Montreal, 1951. (In Yiddish,with foreword in English).Rosenstein, Emanual and Rosenstein, Neil, Latter DayLeaders, Sages and Scholars, New Jersey: ComputerCenter for Jewish Genealogy, 1983. Includes listings ofthe biographies in Yehadut Lita of special personalities inLithuania.Sack, Sallyann A. and Gary Mokotoff, Where Once WeWalked: A Guide to the Jewish Communities Destroyedin the Holocaust, 1991.Sack, Sallyann Amdur, A Guide to Jewish GenealogicalResearch in Israel, Baltimore, MD: Genealogical Pub-lishing Co., 1987.Sack, Sallyann Amdur and Suzan Fishl Wynne, The RussianConsular Records Index and Catalog, New York andLondon: Garland Publishing, Inc. 1987. Index ofcorrespondence through the Russian Embassy betweenpersons of Russian descent living the the U.S. andindividuals in Russia, 1849-1926. The records, which496LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESwere translated and microfilmed, are in The NationalArchives, Washington DC.Schwartz, Rosaline and Susan Milamed, A Guide To YTVO 'sLandsmanshaftn Archive: From Alexandrovsk to Zyrar-dow, New York: YIVO Institute for Jewish Research,1986.Shimoni, Gideon, Jews and Zionism: The South AfricanExperience (1910-1967), Oxford: Oxford UniversityPress, 1980.Soifer, Paul Eric, The Bespectacled Cossach, S.A. Bershadski1850-1896 ar l The Development of Russo-JewishHistography, The Penn State University, 1975. Earlyhistory of Lithuanian Jewry. A Ph.D. thesis.South African Jewry Yearbooks, a Who’s Who of SouthAfrican Jewry. Check the early editions in particular.They give the individual’s birthplace, and the majorityare ffom towns in Lithuania. There are also lists oflandsmanschaften in South Africa, e.g. the 1959 edition,p 119.Spath, Manffed, Bibliography ofArticles on East-Europeanand Russian History: Selected From English-LanguagePeriodicals 1850-1938, ed. by Wemer Philipp, Wies-baden, Berlin: Otto Harrassowitz, 1981.Thompson, Anthony, Russia/U.S.S.R.:A SelectiveAnnotatedBibliography ofBooks in English, Oxford, England andSanta Barbara, Califomia: Clio Press, 1979.Weiner, Miriam, "Can You Name Your Eight Great-Grand-parents?" Moment Magazine, vol. 15, no. 6, December1990, pp. 36-41.Weisser, Michael R., A Brotherhood of Memory: JewishLandsmanshaftn in the New World, New York: BasicBooks, Inc., 1955.Wischnitzer, Mark, A History ofJewish Crafis and Guilds,New York: Jonathan David, 1965.RESOURCES497Wixman, Ronald, The People of the U.S.S.R.: An Ethno-graphic Handbook, Armonk, NY: M.E. Shaipe, Inc.,1984.Yehadut Lita, four volumes, published by the Association ofLithuanians in Israel. With brief biographies of rabbisand public figures among Lithuanian Jewry. Also articleson history, and photos of individual communities.(Hebrew). See also Rosenstein, Latter Day Leaders.Zborowski, Mark and Ruth Herzog, Life Is With People,New York: Schocken Press, 1962. An academic por-trayal of shtetl life, using interviews conducted with EastEuropean Jews.Zubatsky, David S. and Irwin M. Berent, Jewish Genealogy:A Sourcebooh ofFamity Histories and Genealogies, NewYork and London: Garland Publishing Co., Inc., 1984.Gives family names for which there are printed genealo-gies and where they are found.GLOSSARYBeit Din - religious court of law. A rabbinical judge in thebeit din is a dayan and the senior dayan is the av beitdin.Beit Midrash - house of study; often served also as a houseof prayer.Bikur Holim - society for visiting the sick.Bilu - first modem movement for pioneering in Palestine;founded in 1882.Bund - Jewish socialist party, founded in Vilna in 1897;opposed Zionism; favored secular Jewish nationalism;Yiddishist.Chayei Adam - society for studying Talmud, named for acode of Jewish law compiled by a Lithuanian rabbi.Chabad - hasidism that found followers in Lithuania. Foun-ded by Rabbi Schneur Zalman of Lyady (1745-1813).Cheder - religious elementary school for boys.Cheder Metukan - modemized cheder; Hebrew schoolsestablished by the Zionist movement.Chevra Kadisha - burial society.Chevra Tehillim - society for reciting Psalms.ChmielniM Massacres - Cossacks in 1648 -1652 killed ahurndred thousand Jews and wiped out entire Jewishcommunities in Eastem Europe.Council of Four Lands (Vaad Arba Arazot) - autonomousruling body of Jews in Polish provinces ífom middle of500LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIES16th century; composed of many kehillot (Jewishcommunities).Council of the Land of Lithuania (Vaad Medinat Lita)ruling body over the Jewish communities (kehillot) inLithuania.Ein Yakov - society for studying Talmud. Named for thecollection of rabbinical parables and ethical sayings fromthe Talmud compiled by Reb Yakov ben Shlomo IbnHaviv in 16th and 17th centuries.Gabbai - an official of the synagogue.Gaon - a Talmudic genius.Gemach (gemilut chesed) - interest-free loan association;aimed at counteracting the anti-Jewish cooperative move-ment.Gubernia - Russian province. The way Russia was dividedfor administration until the revolution. The present-dayarea of the Lithuanian SSR was mostly Kovno Guberniabut also had parts of Vilna and Suwalki Gubemias.Gymnasium - in European school systems, a grammarschool with humanities trend.Haskalah - the Enlightenment movement; the move towardthe cultural renaissance in Eastem Europe in the 1800’s;promoted Hebrew and Yiddish literature.Hechalutz - pioneering society that prepared young peoplefor aliyah to Eretz Yisrael.Hovevei Zion (Lovers of Zion) - Zionist organi^ationfounded in the late 1800 s.Joint (JDC) - Joint Distribution Committee. American reliefagency organized in 1914 to aid Jews overseas.Kehillah or Kahal - the word for both the Jewishcommunity and the autonomous govemment within theJewish community, which administered the religious,economic, social and political affairs of the Jewishcommunity; authoritative body mn by a small, appointedboard.GLOSSARY501Kloiz - small synagogue and study house, especially inHasidic communities.Kollel (also kibbutz) - study group of married students orother young students studying the religious texts.Lamedan - teacher, leamed man.Lehem Aniim - society to give "bread to the poor."Linat Hazedek - society for giving care to invalids.Magdeburg Rights - named for German city of Magdeburg;rights of a city to autonomy in administration and taxcollecting.Maggid - preacher; usually went from town to town drawingan audience and preaching a fiery lesson or a sermon onthe problems of the day.Maskillim - followers of the Haskalah movement.Melamed - teacher in the cheder.Mitnagdim - Orthodox Jews who were opponents ofHasidism.Musar (morals, ethics) - movement started by R. YisraelSalanter (1810-1883); introduced Torah ethics into theyeshiva and other daily study programs.Pale of Settlement - begun in 1791, area of Russia whereJews were permitted to live; concentrated in parts ofPoland, Ukraine, Byelorussia and Lithuania.Parochet - curtain covering the holy ark of the synagogue.Perchei Shoshanim (Rose Blossoms) - young children sorganization; raised money for books or other needs ofthe synagogue and study houses.Pinkas - record book.Shas - a society for the advanced study of Talmud.Shtibl - a room set up temporarily for study or prayer.Shulhoif - the courtyard of the synagogue. Was often thefocus of Jewish community life, with religious andcommunity institutions situated around it.Tarbut Schools - schools for Hebrew education in Lithuaniabetween the World Wars.502LITHUANIAN JEWISH COMMUNITIESVerslaninkis - members of the Líthuanian Verlinkai Tradersand Artisans Association that developed during Lithuan-ian independence; was openly anti-Jewish and worked torid occupational fields of Jews.Vilna Gaon - Rabbi Elijah ben Solomon Zalman (HaGaonRabbi Elijah, 1720-1797); worked to move Bible andTalmud study away from the rule of pilpul and towardmore scholarship and understanding of textual meaning;opposed hasidism.Yavneh Schools - religious school system.Yeshiva - institution for Talmudic studies; also a talmudiccollege for training rabbinical students.Zhamot (Zhmud, Samogitia) - region of northem Lithuania;was a separate area under the Council of the Land ofLithuania.