DAVIDAND SYLVIA STEINER YIZKOR BOOK COLLECTIONSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARYNO. I4247Latvia Memorial BookThe Jews in Latvia1?THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY - NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSTHE STEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARY PROVIDESON-DEMAND REPRINTS OF MODERN YIDDISH LITERATURE©2003 THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY ANDTHE NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERMAJOR FUNDING FOR THEYIZKOR BOOK PROJECT WAS PROVIDED BY:Harry and Lillian Freedman FundDavid and Barbara B. Hirschhorn FoundationDavid and Barbara MarguliesThe Nash Family FoundationHarris RosenDavid and Sylvia SteinerRuth TaubmanOriginal publication dataTITLEIMPRINTDESCRIPTSUBJECTadd'l NAMEThe Jews in Latvia / [Editorial board: M. Bobe and others.]Tel Aviv] Association of Latvian and Esthonian Jews in Israel [1971]384 p. illus., facsim., map, ports. 25 cm.Jews -- Latvia.Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945) —Bobe, Mendel.THIS BOOK MEETS A.N.S.I. STANDARDS FORPAPER PERMANENCE AND LIBRARY BINDING.PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.-Oi -•vA* \/  > ,.V■' :*■' ' O LrTHE JEWS IN LATVIAASSOCIATIONOFLATVIANANDESTHONIANJEWSIN ISRAELEditorial Board:M. Bobe, S. Levenberg, I. Maor, Z. Michaeli©All Rights Reserved by“Association of Latvian and Esthonian Jews in Israel”,Tel Aviv, 1971Printed, in Israel • D. Ben-Nun Press, Tel AvivCONTENTSForeword   9Introduction — Dr. S. Levenberg 11I. Political, Social and Cultural LifeFour hundred years of the Jews in Latvia (A His-torical Survey) — M. Bobe 21The Communal Image of Latvian Jewry — /. Moor 78The Jews and the Latvian Parliament — Prof. M.Laserson 94The Cultural Autonomy and Jewish School SystemsZ. Michaeli 186Jewish Traditional and Religious Life in the LatvianCommunities — A. Godin 217Jews in the Economic Life of Latvia — Dr. B. Sieff 230II. Towns and PeopleRiga — M. Bobe 243Dvinsk — M. Amir 262Jewish Communities in Kurland — Dr. S. Lipschitz 276Men and Deeds — M. Beth 285Esthonian Jewry — E. A mitan-Wilensky . . . 336III. Ruin and AnnihilationThe War Years in Latvia revisited — M. Kaufman 351Afterword 369IV. Bibliography 371V. Index 375Note: The following essays have been translated, with minor changes, fromthe Hebrew Memorial Volume "mao1? rvnn\, (Latvian Jewry):The Communal Image of Latvian Jewry; by Isaac Maor (Meirson).The Jews and the Latvian Parliament; by Prof. Max Matatyahu Laserson.Jewish Cultural Autonomy and the Jewish School Systems; by Z. Michaeli(Michelson).Jews in the Economic Life of Latvia; by Dr. Benjamin Sieff.LIST OF PHOTOSBetween pages :80— 81 Plates 1— 8144—145 Plates 9—16224—225 Plates 17—24320—321 Plates 25—32CONTENTS OF THE PHOTOSI. Political, Cultural and Communal EventsPlate 2. First Committee of the “Society for the Dissemination of Enlightment”, Riga,1898.6. Address of Honour to Cantor L. B. Rosovsky, 1911.9. Latvian General Zionist Conference.10. Convention of Zeirei-Zion in Latvia.11. Leaders of Mizrahi in Latvia.12. Leaders of Agudat Israel in Latvia.14. Convention of the Bund in Riga.15. Representatives of the Baltic Countries in the Jewish Agency for Israel.16. Committee of the Jewish Club in Riga.17. Teachers of Hebrew Fifth Municipality School in Riga.18. Teachers of Yiddish Schools in Riga.19. The Jewish Department; Baltic Ivrit Convention, 1927.21. Physicians of the Bikkur Holim Hospital in Riga; Committee of “Oze”.22. “Maccabi”, Riga, 1932.28. Committee and Staff of the Dvinsk Community, 1921.n. Outstanding PersonalitiesPlate 1. L. Shalit; E. Ettingen; J. Tron; N. Sheinessohn; M. Sheinfeld; W. Lunz;J. Hindin; M. Nurok.2. P. Mintz; W. Mintz; N. Mintz.3. N. Katznelson; J. Shapiro; L. Nisselovitch; E. Gurevitch.4. L. Fishman; J. Landau; J. Heilman; M. Laserson; N. Maisel; J. Hoffman;W. Latzky-Bertholdi; J. Jaffe; H. Wasserman.5. A. J. Kook; M. S. Cohen; J. Rosen; M. Zack; M. Dubin; S. Wittenberg;L. Ovchinsky; B. Z. Dan-Yahia; B. L. Rosovsky.8. Eliyahu, Zalman, Mordechai, Lippman, Tuvia and Nahman Shalit; A. Sobo-levitch; U. Milman; R. Kaplan.23. M. Weinreich; J. N. Steinberg; R. Abramovitch-Rein; M. Lavry; S. Rosovsky;A. Braun (Sergei); M. Jo; N. Aaronson; S. Vofsi-Michoels.24. M. Gertz-Movshovitch; B. Sieff; J. Vinnik. Heads of Jewish Papers.DL Visitors from AbroadPlate 13. Z. Jabotinsky with the Leaders of Betar in Riga.20. H. N. Bialik in Riga.25. Z. Shazar in Riga.26. Ben-Gurion with the members of C. S. in Riga, 1933.27. L. Motzkin with Zionists in Esthonia, Reval, 1929.IV. Buildings, Ghetto, MonumentsPlate 3. Great Synagogue in Gogol Str., Riga.7. Great Synagogue (Die Schul) in Windau; Bikkur Holim Hospital in Riga.29. The Ghetto gates in Riga; The fence round the Ghetto in Riga.30. Monument to the Victims of the Nazis in Rumbuli-Forest, near Riga.31. Monument to the Congregations of Latvia and Esthonia at Mount Zion inJerusalem.32. Synagogue in Cemetery of Shmerl-Riga. Synagogue in Petau Street, Riga(Both photographed in 1969).FOREWORD"THE Association of Latvian and Esthonian Jews in Israel have decidedto publish a collection of essays dedicated to the memory of our martyrswho were exterminated in the Second World War; and in this way to showhow much World Jewry and we ourselves lost by the annihilation of thiscommunity which numbered almost one hundred thousand souls."The essays should give a description of normal Jewish life in Latvia;the struggles of Latvian Jewry as a national unit, its cultural, social andeconomic existence including organisations, institutions, political parties, etc.,from the beginnings of Latvian independence till the end came in theGhettoes.‘The essays should be written, as far as possible, by people who tookpart in public life, on subjects connected with their former communal orprofessional activities.“As most local Jewish Archives perished during the war, these essayswill be of historical value for future generations and will, at the same time,serve as a fitting memorial to a Jewish community that has been almostentirely exterminated.”The above passage is taken from a circular letter sent in connectionwith the publication of the Hebrew memorial volume on “Latvian Jewry”;and it also exactly defines the purpose of the present volume, namely, toperpetuate the memory of Latvian Jewry.“Latvian Jewry” appeared in 1953 and contains a wealth of materialon the political, cultural and economic life of the Jews of Latvia duringLatvian independence, as well as the memories of surviving participantson the early days of public life before the establishment of the LatvianState.Thanks to the Association’s initiative another work entitled: “Chaptersin the History of Latvian Jewry”, by M. Bobe, was published in 1965. Thisdealt with the Jews residing in the territories which united as 20th centuryLatvia, from the Sixteenth Century until the Declaration of Independencein 1918.The above volumes give an almost complete account of Latvian Jewry.Since they are written in Hebrew, however, they cannot meet the require-ments of those Latvian Jews—their number is not inconsiderable—who live9outside Israel, particularly in U.S.A., England and South Africa. Theseare unable, even if they so desire, to tell their children the history of theirimmediate ancestors in the country of their origin.We have therefore decided to publish the present volume on “The Jewsin Latvia" in English. We have tried to give a detailed historical accountof public and cultural life, of various towns and communities; of peoplewho made their mark in Latvia and abroad, and, finally, a description ofthe annihilation of Latvian Jewry.A detailed bibliography is included so that those interested can studythe history in detail.We hope that for Latvian Jewry and their offspring, dispersed in dif-ferent countries of the Exile, the accounts in this book will bridge the gapin their knowledge of the past and will be received with appreciation.We wish to thank all persons and institutions who gave us kind andattentive assistance in preparing this work.Our deepest thanks and appreciation are expressed to those who parti-cipated in preparing the material, writing the articles, editing and publishingthem.Association of Latvian and Esthonian Jews in Israel.INTRODUCTIONby Dr. S. LevenbergDuring my innumerable visits to Israel and Jewish communities in theDiaspora I have encountered many Jews of Latvian origin. The majorityof them, especially those of the younger generation, know little about theirown background. The purpose of this volume is to describe the history ofLatvian Jewry — a story of creativity, struggle, suffering and destructionduring the Second World War. Let the remnant of a great communitylearn something about their ancestry. “And thou shalt relate to thy son...”Latvian Jewry consisted of various elements: The Jews of Kurland,Livonia and Latgale. Each of these groups had its own history. They be-came one unit after the establishment of the independent Latvian Republic(1918-1940). During the Nazi period the community was almost totallywiped out. Only those who emigrated, escaped or were deported make upthe handful who survived the Holocaust. It is their moral duty to pre-serve the cultural heritage of the historic community from which theysprang. Its chequered story, stretching over hundreds of years, has beenvividly painted in this volume by Mendel Bobe, a veteran Zionist leaderand author of the fascinating Hebrew book, “Chapters in the History ofLatvian Jewry (1561-1918)” published in 1965.Latvian Jewry always maintained its special characteristics. Influencedby German and Russian culture and its contacts with the majority of thepopulation, it remained intensely Jewish in spirit and aspiration. When theidea of a Jewish National Renaissance was first voiced, it found an imme-diate echo among the Jews of Riga, Kurland and Latgale.In the Eighties of the last century Hovevei Zion groups were formedin Riga, Libau, Dvinsk, Kreizburg and other cities. Rabbi MordechaiEliasberg (1817-1889), the religious leader of the Bausk Jewish community,played an outstanding part in spreading the idea of Jewish national revival.Two delegates from Latvia were present at the First Conference of the Ho-vevei Zion, held in Kattowitz (1884).Leib Shalit of Riga and S. Zaks of Dvinsk were delegates at the FirstZionist Congress (1897). Soon afterwards a group called “Zion” wasestablished on the initiative of A.M. Teiz, a shoemaker by profession.11The Jews in LatviaAmong its members it had two personalities who played a leading part inthe history of Latvian and World Zionism: Lazar Ettingen and YoshuaTron, both of whom died in Israel. Another outstanding Jewish figure wasDr. Nissan Katznelson of Libau, a close collaborator of Theodore Herzl anda member of the First Russian Duma.Latvian Jewry was represented at the Second Conference of RussianZionists in Minsk (1902). The delegate from Mitau was Rabbi MordechaiNurok who was for a number of decades an outstanding leader of thecommunity, a Member of Parliament, a prominent figure in World Jewryand later in Israel’s public life. He was a National Religious Party Knessetmember* a member of the Government for a time and a candidate for thehigh office of President.A delegation of Latvian Zionists took part in the famous HelsinkiConference (1906). It included Meir Berlin, a Jewish public figure fromRiga.After the collapse of the First Russian Revolution (1905) and the vic-tory of the reactionary forces, Zionist activities became illegal but thanksto the ingenuity of a number of people the work was carried on andyounger elements joined the Movement.The first Latvian Zionists were nationally-minded people who followedthe religious way of life. Later on some felt an affinity with “Mizrahi”;others were General Zionists. But gradually social ideas began to play theirpart in the Movement.In 1897 a Zionist Socialist Students’ Circle was established in Riga.Dvinsk emerged as an important centre of the Poalei Zion. The partyadopted a revolutionary programme. A few years later, in 1901, a groupof Zeirei Zion was formed in the same city and laid stress on personal tieswith the Yishuv in Palestine. In 1912 a similar group was formed in Riga.Its leaders were Zeev Levenberg who was a delegate at the 11th ZionistCongress (1913), and Yerahmiel Vinnik, who later became a leading jour-nalist and a well-known figure in the Labour Zionist Movement. Theformer went on aliya, the second died in a Siberian labour camp duringthe Second World War.In spite of difficulties encountered from the Tsarist authorities andthe hardships and deportations of the First World War, Zionist work wasnever interrupted. It came to new life after the overthrow of the ImperialRegime (March 1917), and especially with the establishment of the In-dependent Latvian Republic (November 1918). This new and gloriouschapter in the history of Diaspora Zionism is described in the present12Introductionvolume by Itzhak Maor (Meirson), a highly respected leader of the ZionistSocialist Party, who is now one of the foremost intellectuals of the KibbutzMovement. In addition, a picture of Jewish traditional and religious life isgiven in the special article written by Abraham Godin.During this period Latvia became an important centre of Jewish life,as depicted in this volume by the essays of the late Professor MattatyahuLaserson, scholar, lawyer, journalist and Parliamentarian who in due coursebecame Professor at Columbia University; and Z. Michaeli (Michelson),a renowned Jewish educationalist both in Latvia and Israel, a leader ofthe “Zeirei Zion” and a founder-member of Hashahar—the Zionist Social-ist Students’ Organisation. The Jewish part in Latvia’s economic life isdescribed by the late Professor Dr. B. Sieff, scholar and journalist, whosettled in Palestine and played an important part in the initial stages of theTel-Aviv University.Jews of Latvian origin made a notable contribution to Eretz Israel.Some of them left their mark on the old Yishuv, especially in Jerusalem;others settled in the country in pre-Herzl days. In 1891 a group of Jewsfrom Riga were among the founders of Hedera. They faced great difficultiesand suffered from many diseases. Some died at an early age but the re-mainder stood the test of pioneers. In 1901 a group of “Zeirei Zion” mem-bers from Dvinsk settled in Palestine.Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook (1865-1935) was one of the outstandingpersonalities which the small Kurland city of Bausk gave to the Yishuv. Hearrived in Jaffa during the summer of 1904 and later served as the ChiefRabbi of Ashkenazic Jewry in Eretz Israel (1919-1935).Pioneers (halutzim) from Latvia made a vital contribution to the devel-opment of the kibbutz movement. The collective settlements which theyhelped to establish on sound foundations include Afikim; Ashdot Yaakov;Kfar Blum; Kfar Giladi; Shfaim; Geva; Kvutzat Kinneret; Mishmarot; EinGev; Ein Harod; Genossar and Glil-Yam. Their members have distinguishedthemselves in various fields including the Hagana and the Israel DefenceForces.Jews from Latvia also played an important part in setting up commer-cial and industrial undertakings and in the leadership of the Israel Manufac-turers’ Association (Zalman Susaieff, Marc Moshevitz). They have made avaluable contribution to Government service, municipal life and Israel’sdiplomacy.The following is a partial list of outstanding Latvian Jews who havetaken or are taking a leading part in the life of Israel:13The Jews in LatviaMembers of the Knesset: Rabbi M. Nurok, Z. Susaieff, Dr. Ben-Zion Harel,Raphael Bash, Isser Harel, Zalman Shuval, Dov Milman, BenzionKeshet;Judges: Leah Ogen, Eleazar Selikson, Boris Rapoport;University Professors: Yeshayahu Leibovitz, Benjamin Akzin, YehoshuaLeibovitz;Editors and Journalists: Arye Dissentchik, Shabbetai Daniel (Dan-Yahia),Elhanan Kramer;Medical Services: Ephraim Sinai; Sport: Baruch Bag, Emmanuel GO.According to incomplete statistical data of the Jewish Agency, 4547Latvian Jews settled in Palestine during the years 1919-1941. Of these, 503went on aliya during 1920-1924; 2253 during 1925-1934; 1715 during 1935-1939; 76 during 1940-1941. It is important to bear in mind the difficulty ofobtaining Immigration Certificates prior to the State of Israel.A second centre of Jewish emigration from Latvia was the UnitedStates; 2207 left during the years 1923-1936. The number would have beenfar larger that it not been for the limited American immigration quota.The Jewish population of Latvia, about 100,000 souls in all, took fulladvantage of the democratic regime established in 1918 and created a net-work of institutions which became a model for many other Jewish com-munities. The Zionists met with great opposition from the Labour “Bund”and the extreme orthodox “Agudat Israel,” but became the leading forcein the community. They established a wide network of Hebrew schools,cultural institutions, clubs, youth and student bodies and Yiddish news-papers and journals. The Zionists also took an active part in Parliamentaryand municipal elections. An influential figure in Latvian Jewish life wasthe late Dr. Jacob Heilman; a dynamic Zionist figure, scholar, journalistand man of action, who made a deep impact on the Jewish community.While a leader of the Labour Wing in the Zionist Movement, he deeplyinfluenced the general development of Jewish life. A well-known figure atinternational Jewish gatherings, he spent his final years in Poland as editorof the Yiddish daily “Unser Wort,” and in Argentine where, as represent-ative of the World Jewish Congress, he became an outstanding figure inSouth American Jewry.There was close cooperation between Latvian Zionists in many fields,but there were also divisions on political and social issues.The large majority of the General Zionists were supporters of Dr. ChaimWeizmann. One of their younger leaders was Boris Gurevitch, now Guriel,former Archivist of the Weizmann Institute.14IntroductionRiga was the cradle of the Revisionist Movement, led by Dr. JacobHoffman, who died in Israel. A lecture by Zeev Jabotinsky in the Russianlanguage led to the formation of “Brit Trumpeldor”, the first offshoot ofthe new world movement (1923). Among its founders were Aaron Propes,who has played a great part in the development of Israel’s tourist industry;Arye Dissentchik, now editor of “Maariv”, Moshe Gold, later head of the“Betar” in Israel; and Benjamin Eliav, now one of the leading IsraeliLabour intellectuals, a journalist, scholar and expert on Soviet affairs.In 1933, the last time Zionist Congress elections were held in Latvia,there were 22,536 shekel holders. A total of 19,474 voters elected 8 dele-gates: 3 Labour Zionists, 2 Revisionists, 2 General Zionists, 1 Mizrahi.Each Jewish community in Latvia had its own special characteristics.The cultural background of those bom in Riga, Kurland or Latgale wasdifferent in many ways. Even within the various Latvian regions each cityhad something of its own and produced a special type of Jew. Some werecloser to Russian culture, others to the German way of life. Some used theLatvian language, others did not. But the large majority of Latvian Jewsunderstood Yiddish and many knew Hebrew. Some Jewish communities ofLatvia are described in the accompanying pages by M. Amir (M. Bliach),a wellknown public figure in Dvinsk, head of the Zionist Socialist Party, anoted journalist and lecturer; and by Dr. Shaul Lipschitz—former Director-General of the Israel Ministry of Commerce and Industry, now a prominentbusinessman and Chairman of the Association of Jews from Latvia andEsthonia.For a number of years Latvia served as an important transit centre foraliya from the Soviet Union. It also had famous Hachshara (training) farmsof its own for halutzim. Visits by Hayim Nahman Bialik, Ben-Gurion, BerlKatznelson, Hayyim Arlosoroff, Zalman Shazar, Zeev Jabotinsky, RabbiMeir Berlim (Bar-Ilan), Leib Jaffe and many other writers and personalitieswere memorable occasions.The Fascist coup d'etat in Latvia (May 1934) came as a serious blowto the Zionist Movement. All public activities came under strict supervisionon the part of the Government. Zionist work, in a greatly restricted form,took on a semi-legal or illegal character. The following report from the“Zeirei Zion—Z.S.” to the XIXth Zionist Congress gives a picture of thesituation:“The recent revolution deprived the party of all its fruitful workin the past and rendered all further activity impossible. During thefirst few weeks of the revolution many leading members of the party15The Jews in Latviawere arrested, which ruined the whole organisation. About 30 mem-bers were taken to concentration camps and detained for six months,when they were released on the condition that they left for Palestine.All the members who occupied positions as teachers, even those inJewish autonomous schools, or as employees of the Sick Fund, havebeen dismissed from their posts without any reason being given, with-out getting any compensation, and without having any prospects ofemployment elsewhere. The material position of those members istherefore very precarious, and there is no solution for them exceptemigrating to Palestine. The only domain of activity left to the mem-bers of the party, though in a restricted form, is the training of halut-zim and all that directly relates to emigration to Palestine.”The General Zionists tried to carry on their activities but encounteredgreat difficulties. In 1934 Professor S. Brodetsky, a member of the JewishAgency Executive, came from London and interceded with the authorities,but the practical results were small.Latvian Jews played an important part in the history of the generalLabour Movement. Dr. Robert Feinberg of Mitau took part in the Germanrevolution of 1848. He was deported and sent to Siberia where he died in1860. In the year 1889 Jewish radical circles engaged in illegal activitiesalready existed in Riga and Dvinsk. Jewish revolutionaries took part in theorganisation of various strikes and celebrations of the May Day ‘"LabourFestival”. At the beginning of the present century Latvia became an im-portant centre of the “Bund”, whose members took an active part in pre-paring the first Russian Revolution (1905).A number of Jewish revolutionaries from Latvia made a name forthemselves in various fields. Among them were Abraham Braun (“Sergei”);Raphael Abramovitch—a leader of both the “Bund” and the Russian So-cial-Democratic party; Dr. Itzhak Nahman Steinberg—a leader of the SocialRevolutionary Party, who was “Commissar of Justice” in the first LeninGovernment (1917-18); W. Latzky-Bertholdy—a leader of the Zionist So-cialists (S.S.) and Volks-Partei in Russia, and later a prominent figure inboth Latvian and World Jewry (he died in Palestine). A number of leadersof the American Jewish Labour Movement were also of Latvian origin.The “Bund” had deep roots in Latvia, especially in Latgale. After 1918the Party developed an intensive activity in many fields. It had a represent-ative in the Parliament—Dr. Noah Maisel-—and a number of members inthe municipalities; it was also active in the Trade Union Movement. Ithelped and fostered a number of Yiddish schools and cultural institutions.16Introductionincluding the Riga “Peretz Club”. The “Bund” fought against the ZionistMovement and the Hebrew education system.There were other non-Zionist groups. Among them were the NationalDemocratic Party led by Jacob Landau, head of the Jewish Departmentin the Ministry of Education; L. Fishman, a member of the ConstituentAssembly; and Professor P. Mintz. Its programme was similar to that ofthe “American Jewish Committee” and the “Anglo-Jewish Association.”The strongest anti-Zionist force in Latvia was “Agudat Israel,” led byMordechai Dubin and Shimon Wittenberg. Both were members of Parlia-ment. Dubin, who died in the Soviet Union, was immensely popular becauseof his readiness to help people irrespective of party, and his close contactsin Government circles. Right-wing in his political views, his great influencewas due not to his ideology but to his warm Jewish heart, hassidic upbring-ing and care of individual Jews who were in constant need of help. Thesequalities made Dubin into a unique personality in Latvian Jewry and apowerful opponent during Parliamentary elections, when the Jewish voterhad to choose between the “Shtadlan” (intercessor) and the various politicalleaders. After the Ulmanis coup d’etat and the victory of reactionary forces(May 1934) Dubin’s influence increased, to the great disadvantage of theJewish illegal Socialist parties and the General Zionist groups. This was aperiod of decline in Jewish public life, the beginning of the tragedy whichreached its climax with the outbreak of the Second World War, the SovietOccupation and the Nazi invasion.The extermination of Latvian Jewry is described in this book by MaxKaufman, one of the few survivors and author of “Die Vernichtung derJuden Lettlands” (Munchen 1947), who now resides in the U.S.A.The fate of Latvian Jewry is clearly illustrated by one figure mentionedin Gerald Reitlinger’s authoritative study “The Final Solution” (London1968). He states that at the very least 24,000 Jews from Riga were murdered.He adds that after the mass extermination on November 30th 1941 andDecember 8th 1941, only 4,500 men and 300 women remained from theRiga Jewish community. Most of them did not live to see the Day of Libe-ration. Latvian Fascists played a leading part in the murder campaignagainst the Jewish population. One of the victims was Simon Dubnow, thefamous Jewish historian.According to the census of 1935 there were 93,479 Jews in Latvia, or4.7% of the total population. During the subsequent five years their num-bers declined on account of emigration and low natural increase. Between4,000 and 5,000 Jews were deported to the Soviet Union during the Plebiscite17The Jews in Latviaof July 14—21, 1940, sponsored by the Communist authorities; and someJews fled to Russia prior to the Nazi invasion on June 22nd, 1941.Some of the Latvian Jews in the Soviet Union perished during the war,others survived in the Asian Republics to which they were deported, and inother parts of the U.S.S.R. A few of the remnant found their way back toLatvia after the defeat of Germany.Of those who survived the Nazi occupation and the various concentra-tion camps—their number was small—some managed to reach Eretz Israel.Others now reside in many parts of the world.A new phenomenon are those Jews from Latvia who in recent yearshave managed to obtain exit visas for Israel. Among those Jews who haveraised their voices in the Soviet Union, demanding the right of emigrationto their Homeland, the voices of Riga speak the language of faith andheroism. These men of courage continue the great tradition of LatvianJewry.London, October 197018POLITICAL, SOCIAL & CULTURAL LIFEBr->H<>Mendel BoheFOUR HUNDRED YEARS OF THE JEWS IN LATVIA(A Historical Survey)FIRST evidence of Jews in Latvia may be found in the ledger of a mer-chant from Riga of the year 1536, who recorded: “From the Jew Jacob,received for sale and also sold to him...” Their end came with the transferof the remains of the Kaiserwald Concentration Camp to Germany in 1944.Hence the reckoning of four hundred years.The districts of which Latvia consisted are referred to below by thenames in use from the days of the Teutonic-Livonian Order in the 16thcentury to the times of Tsarist Russia and the establishment of independentLatvia in 1918:A. Livonia, with the regions of Riga, Walk, Wenden and Wolmar,constituting part of the Tsarist Russian province of Liflandia. Under Latviathe district was known as Vidzeme.B. Kurland, corresponding entirely to the Kurlandia province of theRussian regime, and divided into Kurseme and Zemgale under Latvia.C. Latgale, with the districts of Lucin, Rezekne and Dvinsk of theTsarist Russian province of Vitebsk. The name Latgale was also in useduring Latvian independence.All these three districts had been settled in early days by tribes whichdeveloped into the Latvian nation. Historical developments brought thecountry under the rule of various peoples, different civilizations left theirimprint on the local population, and as a result the country was dividedinto the districts mentioned, each with its own history. In the course ofthe present survey we shall refer to historical events which affected oneor another region more particularly.Each district had its own history, and correspondingly the attitude toJewish settlement was also not uniform. In accordance with the legal posi-tion in most districts, as we shall see, the Jews were regarded as undesiredaliens, and the prohibitions and restrictions applied to them were as a rulesimilar to those imposed on the Jews of Western Europe before the Eman-cipation. Some of these laws and regulations were, in fact, copied fromWestern patterns; but in each district the developments varied accordingto local conditions. To know the course of Jewish Settlement in Latvia itmust be studied separately for each district; and accordingly Jewish history21The Jews in Latviain Latvia should be divided into three periods:1) The period of Poland, Sweden and the Duchy of Kurland;2) The period of Tsarist Russia; and:3) The period of Latvian independence.I. POLAND, SWEDEN AND THE DUCHY OF KURLAND1. The legal status of the Jews.2. Livonia — Riga.3. Kurland.a. The District of Pilten.b. The Duchy of Kurland.c. Tax-farming.d. Expulsions and fines.e. Fixed payments for residence permits.f. The persecutions of 1760 and the end of the Duchy of Kurland.The Legal Status of the JewsBefore Jews made their way into Latvia, the entire country was underthe rule of German Christian Knightly Orders: first the Order of theKnights of the Sword (“Schwertritter”), later the Teutonic Order, knownin the Baltic countries as the Livonian Order. The Orders imposed a totalban on the presence of Jews in their territories, with a few rare exceptions.The situation changed in 1561, however, when the rule of the Orders cameto an end and the country was taken over by Poland — Livonia and Latgaledirectly, and Kurland as an independent duchy, with Gotthard Kettler, lastGrand Master of the Livonian Order, as first Duke.Once the rule of Poland commenced, Jews began to enter Latvia. InPolish Lithuania, on the southern borders of Kurland, there had actuallybeen a considerable Jewish population ever since the 13th century. How-ever, the instrument by which the Order submitted to Poland contained theprovision that it should be forbidden to Jews in Livonia to engage incommerce or act as tax and excise farmers. The local authorities inter-preted this to mean that Jews were not permitted to live in the countryat all. Hence their initial presence was at best illicit. Jews entering theterritory were regarded as aliens without rights of residence and the citiesand nobles exploited the situation by levying all kinds of imposts, fines,licence fees, and the like, even when they had special entry permits in orderto visit fairs, accompany goods in transit, etc.22Political, Social & Cultured LifeThis legal situation lasted for hundreds of years, continuing under therule of Sweden, which held Livonia for nearly a hundred years. Evenafter the country was taken over by Russia, the legal situation was notregularised simultaneously or in all places. Nor were the taxes and impostslevied in a uniform fashion. Some old ones were abolished and new wereintroduced, all according to the current attitude to the Jews whose situation,and the measure of injustice with which they were treated, remained con-stant.Livonia — RigaThe focus of attraction for the Jews was always the port city of Rigawhich handled most of the regional export trade, with its large area andnumerous population. It was the seat of the Grand Master of the LivonianOrder, and the Russian provincial governor hundreds of years later. In duecourse it was to become the capital of independent Latvia. The Jewishpopulation in the rest of Livonia always remained small and insignificant.The Jews of Riga experienced long generations of oppression andsuffering. The German burghers, who administered the city for hundredsof years and were always the dominant element, exploited the Jews withoutrestraint though they were well aware of the important part they played inthe city’s development. Indeed, they did all they could not to recogniseeven the most elementary rights of the local Jewish population. As late as1903, when the Russians proposed to include Riga in the Pale of Settlementwhere Jews were free to reside, trade, work and move from place to place,the German citizens protested and Riga stayed outside the Pale. It is enoughto remark that while the Jews appeared in the second half of the 16thcentury, the Jewish community of Riga was not granted legal status until1842, when the number of Jews registered as enjoying the right of domicilewas no more than 409 in all. In 1913, on the eve of the First World Warsome seventy years later, their total number was more than 33,000.The conditions under which the Jews who came to Riga had to liveare shown by the following taxes and restrictions to which they were sub-jected :A. Every Jew arriving in Riga had to a pay a Convoy Tax (Geleit)of one guilder for the right to trade within the city limits. In official docu-ments of the year 1611 the tax is mentioned as having been levied sincetime immemorial, meaning that it must have been in force for a great manyyears. The charge originated from the protection (Geleit) provided duringthe 12th and 13th centuries to groups of merchants or individuals as pro-23The Jews in Latviatection against brigands in certain parts of Germany. When conditionschanged and the convoy or “Geleit” was no longer necessary, the fee leviedfor it was converted into a frontier due payable to the local ruler whenpassing from one region to another. For Jews, who were regarded as aliens,the fee remained in force as a permanent impost under the name of “Geleit-zoll” or “Judengeleit.” Regions under German or associated rule, like theterritory held by the Livonian Order, adopted the custom. This chargecontinued to be levied in Riga under Poland (1581-1621) and Sweden (1621-1710). When the Russians entered Riga in 1710 they found it still in force.In 1723 Jewish merchants from Poland complained that it had been raisedfrom one guilder to three thaler — two for the mayor and one for the townbeadle. This complaint, like many others, had no effect. When the pro-vincial Governor inquired about its legal basis, the Civic Council repliedthat it was an ancient municipal privilege and formed part of the salariesof the mayor and civic functionaries. The Jews, the Council explained,were wont to resort to all manner of pretexts to avoid paying the tax, whosepurpose was that “these people, notorious for their rapacity, who are of nobenefit to the community but, on the contrary, are harmful to commerce,shall not be desirous to make their way into this place or settle therein.”The charge, levied by the City Council with no statutory basis, purelycustomary and never approved by higher authority, remained in force until1766, when Catherine the Second abolished it as an illegal tax.B. In 1621, Riga was taken by the Swedish king Gustavus Adolphus.The Swedes of the Seventeenth century did not allow Jews to set foot intheir country. Nevertheless the share of the Jews in Riga’s commerce in-creased markedly under their rule, and so, accordingly, did the numberof Jews arriving and departing. No particular friction between the Jewsand the civic authorities seems to be noted under the Swedes. Not incon-ceivably, the absence of complaints was an outcome of the very considerableeconomic prosperity of the period, in which the Jews played a major part.For all that, under the Swedes a “Juden-Herberge” or Jews’ Shelter wasestablished for the first time as the only place where Jews were permittedto lodge while staying in the city. The date when this institution, whichwas run by non-Jews, was actually founded is not known. It is mentionedin documents from 1666 onwards, and we have the regulations for itsmanagement. From these we learn that the purpose of the Inn’s establish-ment was to tighten control for the prevention of customs evasion, parti-cularly the excise on the manufacture of brandy which was largely inJewish hands, and to ensure that the Jews did not trade with “aliens” but24Political, Social <& Cultured Lifeonly with local residents. The rate for lodging was ten marks (shillings) aweek per person, and 3 groschen a night for a horse. Complains of pooraccommodation at the Inn were of no avail, and requests by merchantsfor permission to stay elsewhere were not granted. There were cases ofriotous behaviour on the part of the “Judenwirt” (Jews’ host). On oneoccasion the City Council decided to reprimand him, and in another casewhen he had beaten a Jewish lodger, he was sentenced to eight days injail or a fine of ten thaler. In 1685 the Inn was moved to another, moresuitable place. The degree to which conditions had improved may be judgedby the fact that the Council itself passed a rule against lodging more thantwo people in one room. In 1689 the rates were raised. In the same year,the Judenwirt petitioned the Council to compel any Jew who came to thecity to stay at the Jews’ Shelter, or else come to terms with him. This wasaimed at Jews who came to Riga by raft along the river Dvina. Theserafts were extremely important for the city’s trade1. They were mostlyconstructed of timber destined for export, and were loaded with goodsfrom Poland and the inland provinces of Russia. This trade was mostlyin the hands of Jews, who were accustomed to sleep on board to guardtheir merchandise. The Council did not grant the Judenwirt’s petition, forthe privilege permitting the Jews to stay with their merchandise had beenconfirmed by the king of Sweden (1690). During the “Northern War” theShelter was destroyed (in 1700 or 1701). For the next twenty years therewere no special lodgings for Jews in Riga. Incidentally, an application madeby a Jew for permission to open a hostel for Jews was rejected on thegrounds that he would not be strict enough in observing Customs Regula-tions.Riga came under Russian rule in 1710. The city’s articles of capitula-tion, stipulated that all its privileges were to remain in force, which meantthat all restrictions applying to Jews remained unchanged. Following re-peated applications by the Merchants’ and Artisans’ Guilds, which wagedunceasing war against Jewish penetration for fear of commercial competi-tion, a non-Jewish resident was licenced in 1724, for 50 years, to establishand run a hostelry for Jews. The Regulations were similar to those of1666, but the tariff was far higher than it had been, and a special fee wascharged for storing barrels of brandy. Moreover, a payment of half aguilder a week was imposed on Jews arriving on rafts, even if they did notlodge at the Hostel. The reason for the introduction of the new paymentwas that the privilege granted under the Swedes had expired. In the course25The Jews in Latviaof time, however, the payment was remitted for those who could find noplace at the hostelry.The situation remained unchanged until 1742, when the Jews wereexpelled from the entire Russian Empire by order of the Empress Elizabeth.The city fathers made great efforts to ensure that Riga should not be in-cluded in the decree, thereby revealing the hypocrisy of their constantcomplaints about the “damage” done by the Jews to the Christian popula-tion. But in vain: Riga and Livonia were emptied of Jews.Not until 1764 were a few Jews—three in number—permitted to livein Riga by order of the Empress Catherine the Second, so as to “organize”Jewish migration to Southern Russia: The “New Russia” where they wereto help develop commerce, agriculture and crafts. Migration to SouthernRussia soon became a convenient excuse under which Jews began to travelto and from Riga. The City Council took an unfavourable view of Jewishvisitors and protested. When the Provincial Governor asked for instructionswith regard to the Council’s complaint, the ruling was received from higherauthority that no obstacle should be placed in the way of the new arrivals,but their stay in the city should not exceed six weeks. Since Jews werethus allowed to stay in Riga, but on the other hand the city was entitlednot to permit them to take up permanent residence, the question of theJews’ Shelter came up again. It was re-established in 1764, in the Johan-nispforte suburb. The rates were approved by the council together with the“three merchants from New Russia” referred to above; and all Jews wereordered to move to the shelter within eight days. By January 1765 thethree “merchants” had received permission to dwell outside the Shelterwith their families, assistants, clerks and servants; 36 persons in all. Thesewere the first nucleus of “Schutzjuden” (protected Jews), in contrast toall the others who were regarded as aliens, allowed to live only at theShelter, and required to limit their stay in the city to six weeks only.In 1785 an order was issued under which settlement in the regionadjoining the Baltic Coast, including the towns of Shlok, Dubeln, etc., wasalso permitted to persons coming from abroad “without distinction of raceor religion.” Since the region was only fifteen miles or so from Riga, thisorder provided a measure of relief for the Jews of Riga, nearly all of whomregistered in the town of Shlok and in dealing with the authorities styledthemselves “the community of Jews of Shlok dwelling in Riga.”Thus, notwithstanding all restrictions and prohibitions, the number ofJews who came to Riga grew steadily as the result of several factors: Theopportunity of establishing residence in Shlok, the gradual extension of per-26Political, Social & Cultural Lifemission for foreigners to stay in Riga for more than a few days, and indue course, the War of 1811, which prevented a number of merchants fromleaving the city and let to the opening of two new Shelters in 1813, whenit was laid down that the persons in charge had to be chosen from the“Schutzjuden”. This was despite the objections of the City Council, whichdemanded that the revenue from this source should go to citizens. Theregulations provided that a tariff was to be established for lodging, board,stabling of horses and vehicles. In 1822 new regulations for the stay ofJews in the city were issued and the number of Shelters was increasedto five: One for traders in the city, two in the Moscow suburb, and twoacross the River Dvina. The hostelries only came to an end at about thetime when the Jews of Riga were allowed to set up an official community,in 1842.From the time a Jewish community was established in Riga, informationis available about customary Jewish institutions, such as membership feesfor the Hevra Kadisha (Burial Society) and contributions to the synagogue.The first meeting of the Hevra Kadisha took place in 1765. Membershipfees ranged from half a thaler to five thalers, and the fine for failure toobserve the Society’s Regulations was 5 thaler. Regulations issued by theCity Council of Riga in 1783 on the duties of the “Elder” of the communityand synagogue arrangements show that a fee of five farthings was chargedfor the use of the ethrog (citron) during the Sukkot Festival, The synagoguealso derived an income from the sale of wine for Kiddush and of aliyot(the right of “ascending” to the reading of the Torah).KurlandAs a result of historical developments, Kurland consisted of two sepa-rate political entities. This division also exerted a certain effect on thesettlement and treatment of Jews in the region. The Livonian Order distri-buted its lands among the bishops and knights, who became vassals of theOrder. The ties between the Order and its vassals were actually ratherloose, and each vassal soon came to regard himself as an independent rulerand his estate as hereditary. That land is a national asset which cannot betransferred to foreign elements was a conception that played no part inthe thinking of the rulers of those days; and so it came about that theBishop of Kurland, who held the province of Pilten including the districtsof Grobin and Hasenpoth and part of the district of Windau, decided,because of the precarious condition of the Order, to sell his estate whilethere was still time to the King of Denmark. The sale was effected in 1559.27The Jews in LatviaKing Ferdinand of Denmark presented Pilten to his brother, Duke Magnusof Holstein. Without recapitulating all the complications which arose fromthis situation, it is enough to note that after almost 26 years of disputationand occasional fighting between Duke Magnus, the local nobles, DukeGotthard Kettler of Kurland and the King of Poland, the province wassold to Poland in 1585. The outcome was that while Kurland was an in-dependent Duchy under the protection of Poland, Pilten was a kind ofenclave under the direct rule of the King of Poland. This state of affairshad its effect on local laws and practice regarding the Jews. Even beforethe district was sold to Denmark, the Bishop of Pilten had seen fit toimprove the condition of his estate by allowing wealthy Jews to settle andcontribute to the region’s economic development: To the no small benefitof the episcopal purse, as the historian Wunderbar hints.Since Pilten lies near the sea, it is believed that Jewish merchants alsosettled there from Prussia, since it was generally held that people couldlive there undisturbed, buy property and acquire citizenship. All this waspossible because of the peculiar status of the province, which was notunder the jurisdiction of the Duchy of Kurland and so not subject to theprohibition of 1561 against the entry of Jews agreed to by Poland. It istherefore necessary to consider the development of taxes and imposts sepa-rately for the two regions: Pilten, where the treatment of the Jews wasdetermined by the Polish Sejm, and the Duchy of Kurland, which wasruled by the duke and the local nobility.a. The Province of PiltenNothing is known about special taxes or imposts on the local Jewsbefore the year 1717. It is possible that the close connection between theduke and the Pilten nobility resulting from the “Treaty of Union” whichthey signed in 1635 affected the situation of the Jews of Pilten adversely,for from that year the discriminatory laws and imposts in the two regionsran somewhat parallel. In 1717 a charge of two thalers a year was imposedon every resident, and was doubled in 1719. Between 1727 and 1738 fourdecrees of expulsion were issued against the Jews of Pilten: In 1727, 1730,1731 and 1738. As a result part of the Jews left. Others remained or somereturned, otherwise there would have been no need for new decrees. In1750 the Polish Sejm decided to grant residence rights to Jews in theregion against payment of 1000 Albert florins or about 330 thaler; which iscomparable with the 400 thaler demanded in or before 1719 from the Jewsof Kurland. The collection of the payment was entrusted to guarantors.28Political, Social & Cultural LifeUpon demand by the latter the Jews would come to the district capitalHasenpoth for individual assessment. The levy was subsequently dividedby parishes and according to the number of Jews in each parish. Theguarantors were also given the right to collect the convoy tax from theJews of Mitau, who resided in the Duchy of Kurland, just as the Jews ofPilten had to pay convoy tax when they came to Mitau. In 1733, theannual levy was set at 400 thaler. In addition merchants were required topay 40 thaler cash quarterly to the municipal treasury (apparently in Ha-senpoth).A Sejm decree of 1783 ordered “the preservation of the civic andgeneral rights of the Jews, since they pay all taxes in accordance withthe lawThe Jews of Hasenpoth were permitted to build a synagogueand establish a community. When the region was annexed by Russia in1795, the Jews of Pilten retained the right to register as merchants in theguild of Hasenpoth and to vote — but not to stand — for municipal office.In 1817 administrative practice in Pilten was brought in line with thethe remainder of Kurland, and thereafter the rights of the Jews in Piltenand Kurland were identical.b. The Duchy of KurlandIn the Duchy of Kurland, the attitude to the Jews was one of openhostility, insult and contempt for aliens who had made their way into thecountry against the wishes of the local owners. Here and there a measureof tolerance could be felt. This was not uniform but dictated by classinterests. The townsfolk, merchants and artisans regarded the Jews as com-petitors even when their numbers were small. The aristocracy, as we shallsee, were interested in their presence. This interest was primarily one ofcommercial relations: The Jews acted as agents (“Hofjuden”), selling theagricultural produce of the landowners and importing commodities thatwere not manufactured locally. The gentry also derived an income fromfees for residence permits, fines, etc., paid by the Jews.The burghers, noblemen and bishops were all represented in the Diet(Landtag), a parliamentary body whose decrees required ducal ratification.The duke himself did not refrain from exploiting the Jews and profitingfrom their presence, and when in financial straits sometimes even farmedout the state resources to them.c. Tax-FarmingIn 1692, for instance, when the ducal exchequer was in a precarious29The Jews in Latviasituation, Jews were allowed to lease the collection of taxes and rents forseveral years. The nobility was opposed to the duke’s transaction and thatyear's Diet passed a Resolution to the effect that “eight days after thecoming Easter the right of the Jews to collect Customs duties shall expire,and thenceforward and forever they shall not be entitled to lease the col-lection of Customs and rents in this land or to engage in any commercewhatsoever..The Resolution was not implemented. The duke was neitherable nor willing to dispossess the Jews of their rights in this transaction;but the moral harm caused was considerable, and similar Resolutions werepassed by the Diets of 1698 and 1699. Nevertheless the Jews in the villagesengaged in peddling, leased inns and brandy distilleries and acted asbrokers. In the capital, Mitau, they lived in a special quarter, the “Juden-gasse” or Jews’ Lane. In 1710 they were allowed to buy a plot of landfor a cemetery.d. Expulsions and FinesIn 1713, the duke issued an Order to expel the Jews from Mitau andelsewhere. This seems to have been possible in Mitau, but in the villagesand at the courts of the noblemen it proved difficult because it was by nomeans easy to locate them, and also because the landowners gave themshelter. At the end of the year the Order was therefore followed by anotherimposing a fine of one thaler per day on those Jews who had not left thecountry.In 1714 the Order was repeated in such a form as to leave no doubtof the intention of converting the fine into a permanent source of revenue.The wording of the order was: “... Notwithstanding the instructions inrespect of their expulsion by reason of their activities which cause harmto the towns and villages, the Jews continue to be present in the countrycontrary to the law. Steps shall therefore be taken to assure that all Jewsleave within six weeks from this day, and if any Jew be found within theborders of the Duchy after that date he shall be imprisoned and be re-leased only upon payment of one thaler for each day... Likewise thisamount shall be levied upon all those who are present in the Duchy fromthe beginning of this year. Payment on behalf of those who have left shallbe made by the Jews who remain — the sum of one thaler a day shall becollected immediately, before the expiry of the term of six weeks..The fact that the fine was to be levied retroactively, and the jointresponsibility for those who left without paying, clearly show that the realpurpose of the Order was the revenue to be obtained from the fines.30Political, Social <& Cultural LifeIn the opinion of the historian Wunderbar, neither the expulsion northe collection of the fine was observed strictly. Insofar as the fine waspaid, it was regarded as payment for permission to remain.e. Fixed Payments for Residence PermitsA fixed payment of 400 thalers is first mentioned in a decree of theDiet of 1719, even though the wording encourages the conclusion that thedecree merely repeats an earlier one: “Jews shall be entitled to stay againsta payment of 400 thalers. Since this amount has not been paid, local officialsshall be required to secure its payment... Collecting officials shall beaccompanied by a Jew competent to determine who can pay, and howmuch.” This payment of 400 thalers a year, known as “Schutzgeld” (Pro-tection Money) went to the landowners and continued to be paid for twentyyears, until 1739.Most of the Diets between 1719 and 1735 dealt with the Jews and theannual payment of the 400 thaler. At first, it may be assumed, the com-munities assumed the obligation of payment in succession, but paymentswere belated and only partial. Cases are known of rabbis appealing tocommunity members who were in arrears to pay in time, so as to avert thedanger of expulsion from their brethren.The delays in payment resulted in the accumulation of a debt amount-ing to no less than 2000 thaler. In 1732 the sworn assessors Abraham Joeland Leiser Salomon were appointed from among the Jews and chargedwith determining the amount payable by each individual. The order providedthat any Jew who could not produce a tax receipt would be fined 10 thaler,and if the receipt was not forthcoming within 28 weeks after publicationof the order, his property would be confiscated for the benefit of thenobleman on whose lands he would be apprehended. The assessors wereexempt from payment and received 10 thaler each. Any nobleman whoconcealed a Jew and caused non-payment of the fee would be liable to afine of 500 thaler.The system of appointing assessors from among the Jews themselvesdid not always yield the envisaged results. Jews failed to pay because theywere unwilling or unable to do so, and there were cases in which assessorswere charged with defalcations, while some of them requested to be releasedfrom their onerous duties.In 1730 the Diet passed a decree confirming earlier enactments requiringJews to leave, but at the same time providing that all those who werecraftsmen, distillers of brandy or the like, who did not harm the local31The Jews in Latviapopulation, were allowed to stay. Likewise those who came for purposesof trade would be permitted to enter, though not to take up permanentresidence. The decree permitted Jews who exercised a trade to stay per-manently, and it is also thought that they were not required to pay theirshare of the 400 thaler fee. This resulted in an unusual “increase” in thenumber of Jews engaged in the trades concerned, which in turn caused theDiet of 1733 to decree that, contrary to ancient laws and the decrees ofearlier Diets, this Diet was unanimously resolved to rid the country of allJews including goldsmiths, artisans, tradesmen, brandy distillers and others;and this time not by announcements, but by actions in which the nobleswould also cooperate. However, working out ways and means of imple-mentation would have meant extending the Diet session, so the matter waspostponed until the next session in order that the Jews would have anopportunity of preparing and collecting what was owed to them. Here wasan ambiguous attitude to the Jews. On the one hand there was the desireto get rid of them, and on the other the realization of the advantages theypresented; a conflct of interests between the burghers who wished to befree of competitors, and the nobles who derived revenue from them andfound them so useful as brokers that they sometimes helped Jews to obtaindocuments enabling them to transfer goods abroad so as to exempt themfrom Customs duties. The result was the postponement of a final solutionfrom one session to the next. One has the impression that some of theexpulsion decrees were passed only to appease the townspeople, who wishedto be rid of the Jews at all costs.The Residence Permits seem to have ceased on account of the absenceof the ruling duke; for Duke Biron, who was connected with the Russiangovernment, was arrested and sent to Siberia, and Kurland remained to allintents without any duke until 1758.f. The Persecutions of 1760 and the End of the Duchy of KurlandDecrees of expulsion were, as we have seen, issued in 1727, 1733, 1739,1740 and 1754. Some of these were not carried out at all, others only inpart. A change for the worse occurred with the decree issued in 1760 byDuke Charles, the son of the King of Poland, on whom the Duchy wasconferred while Duke Biron was in exile in Siberia. Under this decree allJews were required to leave Kurland within six weeks. Those found in thecountry contrary to the law were to be whipped and expelled from thetowns. All those who claimed that they were strangers and had come onlyto trade, were required to register with the mayor and obtain a licence for32Political, Social & Cultural Lifea limited number of days, according to the nature of their business. Resi-dents of Pilten coming on the business of noblemen in their district hadto pay a “sechser” (about 30-40 farthings), and were also confined tospecial lodgings. The authorities were very strict in carrying out this order,and many Jews undoubtedly had to leave the country.The situation improved when Duke Biron returned in 1792 and oustedDuke Charles with the aid of the Russians. Under his son, Duke Peter,the Jews were able to live unmolested. During the final years of the Duchy’sexistence, several solutions were proposed for the Jewish problem. TheJews of Mitau themselves suggested that the number of Jews be reducedin accordance with the absorptive capacity of each separate place. If thisproposal had been adopted, recently arrived Jews would presumably havebeen the main sufferers. The proposal of the Mitau Jews was referred toa Commission which in turn suggested the grant of residence permits toJews against payment of protection fees to the amount of 2 thaler perperson for adults and one thaler for each child. The proposal was not dis-cussed at the last Diet, and in 1795 the Duchy ceased to exist as a resultof the Third Partition of Poland.II. THE TSARIST EPOCH1. The official Russian attitude towards the Jews.2. The Jews of Riga and Kurland outside the “Pale of Settlement”.3. The Jewish Share in Baltic Commerce and Industry.4. Jewish Citizenship in Riga and Kurland.5. Movement from the Pale of Settlement to Riga and Kurland.6. Double Taxation of the Jews.7. The Meat Tax (Korobka) in Riga.8. The Riga Jews offer to increase the Meat Tax for the upkeepof Schools.9. The law abolishing the Kehillot (Semi-autonomous Jewish Com-munities).10. End of the Nineteenth and Early Twentieth Centuries.11. Latgale.12. The First World War: The Expulsion from Kurland; the GermanOccupation of Latvia; the Russian Revolution.Note: — The term “Pale of Settlement” is frequently used in this volume.It was the name used for those provinces in Western Russia, the Ukraine,33The Jews in LatviaWhite Russia, Lithuania and Russian Poland in which Jews were permittedrights of domicile, employment and trade, namely:Vilna, Kovno, Grodno, Minsk, Vitebsk, Mohilev, Volhynia, Podolia,Kiev (not including the city of Kiev), Chernigov, Poltava, Bessarabia, Kher-son (not including the city of Nikolaiev), Yekaterinoslav, Tauris (Crimea),Warsaw, Kalish, Kielce, Lomza, Lublin, Piotrokov, Plotsk, Radom, Suwalki,Siedlce.The residence of Jews was prohibited outside these provinces, apartfrom certain exceptions which were the subject of special legislation.The Pale of Settlement comprehended 4% of the territory of Russiaand contained 94% of the Jewish population.The Official Russian Attitude Towards the JewsThe Russian epoch does not commence from any specific date that mark-ed a change in Government. In actual fact Latvia came under Russian rulein several stages. Thus Riga was taken over in 1710, Latgale in 1772 andKurland in 1795. Hence the term ’’Russian” is used rather to mark aperiod of special laws applying to all the Jews under Russian rule, and,apart from certain exceptional provisions described below, to the LatvianDistricts as well.It is true that the previous section, dealing with the Jews of Riga,refers to the refusal of right of domicile, the special “Hostels” of the Jews,etc., under Russian rule as well as earlier. This, however, was a survivalfrom the Swedish regime. The Russians did not intervene in what was re-garded as the exclusive concern of the City of Riga.The relations between Russia and its Jewish population, and the coursetaken by Anti-Semitism within the Russian Empire where most of theJews of the world were concentrated during the Nineteenth Century, havea long history of their own and this is not the place to deal with it.However, certain facts should be mentioned. The dominant Russian Or-thodox (Pravoslav) Church, like others, was not prepared to tolerate anyother religion within the boundaries of Russia. Only thanks to the supportof Peter the Great (1689-1725) were Protestants permitted to conduct re-ligious services and ceremonies. The Jews suffered from a particularlyrestrictive attitude on account of the repeated emergence of certain here-tical Old-Testament and Judaizing sects within Russia proper, which theofficial Church regarded as endangering its own existence. The influenceof the Church on the benighted and ignorant population as a whole wasoverwhelming and the reiterated sermons about “the Enemies of Jesus”34Political, Social & Cultural Lifewas one of the main reasons for those anti-Semitic excesses which tookplace in the course of several centuries. Thus in 1563 Ivan the Terribleordered that the Jews residing in the city of Polotzk, which he had captured,were to be drowned in the River Dvina. In the Peace Treaty concludedbetween Poland and Russia in 1686 it was stipulated that Jewish subjectsof Poland were prohibited from entering Moscow. In 1742 the EmpressElizabeth issued an Order of expulsion against all Jews in Russia, exceptthose prepared to adopt Christianity. When the city of Riga submitted thatconsideration should be given to the losses that would ensue for the mer-chants of the city through that expulsion, the Empress wrote with her ownhand : 4T do not wish to obtain any benefit or profit from the enemies ofJesus Christ.”Russia was brought face to face with the full dimensions of the Jewishproblem after the Partitions of Poland in 1772, 1793 and 1795 when closeon a million Jews came under its rule, and extermination or expulsioncould not be engaged in. The method adopted by the authorities was toreduce the Jews to the level of second-class citizens and make use of discri-minatory legislation in order to degrade them and diminish their possibilitiesof making a living.The attitude was not consistent or uniform, and fluctuated in bothdirections. From time to time the approach became tolerant and liberalwith the aim of making the Jews more or less equal to other sections ofthe population in the hope that this would facilitate their assimilation andultimate absorption. When this method met with difficulties and the tieswith Jewish faith and tradition were found to be more powerful than theauthorities had assumed, compulsory measures were initiated together withopenly-displayed official animosity accompanied by incitement and riots,through which the term “Pogrom” has obtained international currency.Furthermore, the supreme authority remained autocratic to the very end,relying on the clergy, a corrupt leadership and a secret police who viewedthe Jews as a revolutionary element opposed to the Government.As a result there was a steady multiplication of special laws and re-gulations restricting the freedom of the individual. Jews were permittedthe right of domicile and freedom of movement only within the “Pale”referred to in the note at the commencement of this section. Even withinthe Pale they were allowed to reside in large cities and country towns, notin the villages; with a handful of exceptions. Jews were absolutely prohibitedfrom obtaining Government employment and were not allowed to stand forelection to municipal office or hold officer rank in the army. There were35The Jews in Latvianumerus clausus restrictions on secondary or university education. Thisstate of inequality lasted for more than a century and a quarter.The above paragraphs most certainly do not exhaust the restrictive con-ditions under which the Jews of Russia lived. At the same time it is instruc-tive to list a few of the prohibitions and restrictions on Jewish rights ofresidence in the region, and the specific Jewish taxes.The Jews of Riga and Kurland Outside the Pale of SettlementBetween 1794 and 1804 there was an exacerbation of the conditionsunder which Jews could live, work, trade and move from place to placewithin the Pale of Settlement.In our survey there is a clear distinction between the “Latgale” region,which was annexed to the Polotzk-Vitebsk Government District and in-cluded in the Pale; and Livonia-Riga and Kurland. Until the end of theTsarist period the two latter districts remained outside the Pale of Settle-ment. The presence of Jews there was regarded as exceptional and theoutcome of special historical circumstances; and this quite often foundexpression in an amelioration of the laws and regulations current towardsthe Jews in other parts of Russia.In the 1897 Census there were 80,753 Jews in Livonia and Kurland;i.e., 40% of all Jews living outside “the Pale” within European Russia.What was the reason for this special attitude towards the Jews of Rigaand Kurland ?The Jewish Share in Baltic Commerce and IndustryIn spite of the obstacles placed in their way by the Russian Government,the latter could not ignore the fact that thanks to the Jews the RussianBaltic had become a very important region for imports and exports throughthe ports of Riga, Libau and Windau. At the commencement of the Twen-tieth Century, indeed, 10% of all Russian exports passed through Riga.The Jewish share in this export was 33%, although they were no morethan 6%—7% of the population. The Jews handled the greater part of theexports of cereals, timber, flax and eggs. They also controlled a quiteconsiderable part of the saw-mills, tanneries, etc. A similar state of affairswas to be found at the Port of Libau. In both places the Jews suppliedthe necessary capital for large-scale and variegated commercial activities,opening banks, credit societies, etc.This economic development also explains the attitude towards Jewish36Political, Social & Cultural UfeMerchants of the Third Guild who under the Law of 1865 were permittedto visit Riga for commercial purposes, whereas the Law of 1835 hadgranted this permission to Jewish Merchants of the First and SecondGuilds only.The local Jewish population grew simultaneously with the expansionof the businesses and industries in Jewish hands. Clerks and assistants wereemployed by the exporters and merchants. Most of the clothing storeswere in Jewish possession, together with the factories and workshops formanufacturing the clothes, in which the majority of the workers, male andfemale alike, were Jews. This Jewish population in turn supported all kindsof craftsmen and members of the free professions, lawyers, physicians, etc.On the eve of the First World War there were 33,600 Jews in Riga,and the estimate for Kurland was 68,000. These totals were the fruit ofmany years of toil, and resulted from the combination of the special oppor-tunities afforded by the Baltic Seacost and Jewish initiative and energy.It should be admitted, however, that this state of affairs would havebeen impossible without an attitude that was in some measure sympatheticon the part of the higher authorities in St. Petersburg. The local and pro-vincial authorities, on the other hand, were largely influenced by the re-sident German population which was vigorously opposed to the expansionof the Jews. More than once, indeed, the Jews were aided by the higherauthorities in spite of the opposition of the provincial governors and themunicipalities.The central authorities supported the local Jews for yet another reason.The historic past had influenced the latter and made them carriers ofGerman culture. Under the influence of Russian schools, press, etc., how-ever, the Jews had in the course of time become a Russifying element inthe region and constituted a counter-weight to the centuries-old Germanculture of Riga.Jewish Citizenship in Riga and KurlandIn the account of Livonia details were given of the difficulties met withby the Jews until 1842, when the Riga Kehilla (community) was granteda permanent or legal status. Here a brief account is offered of the develop-ment of Jewish rights of domicile, work and livelihood in Kurland afterthe latter had been annexed by Russia. This development had a certaininfluence on the grant of rights to Riga Jewry, and also on the subsequentattitude towards Jews who lived in the two gubernatorial regions affected.The question first arose in 1797, two years after annexation, in connec-37The Jews in Latviation with the need to collect an exemption levy from the Jews for not beingcalled to compulsory military service. (Only in 1827 were Jews made liableto serve in the army; and before that time they paid a charge of 500 roublesin cash for each person who would otherwise have been conscripted.) Thetotal amount of roubles owing under this head was 13,743 roubles; aconsiderable sum in those days, when the total Jewish population of Kur-land was 4531. The provincial Governor asked the St. Peterburg authoritieshow this amount was to be collected from a virtually nomad group, whohad no legal status and were very poor for the greater part.The Senate inquired as to the legal status of the Jews of Kurland andthe Governor, not uninfluenced by German circles, sent a negative reportdetailing the illegality of their presence for generations, with the exceptionof a handful of Jews in Pilten who enjoyed citizenship. There was no firmbasis of any kind for the livelihood of the majority, he stated. With theexception of a handful of merchants in Mitau they were mostly on themove, peddling in villages, and there was no hope of transforming theminto productive citizens. To sum up, they should be treated as aliens andthe majority should be expelled from the Province.The Senate was not impressed by the report and its reply stated interalia: “... It can be seen from the documents that in actual fact the Jewshave been in that region for more than two hundred years, and it is there-fore impossible to regard them as furtive arrivals. The Provincial Authoritiesare hereby required to prepare regulations for Jews similar to those inother provinces of the State.”In 1799 a law was passed permitting Jews to be registered with thestatus of merchants or city-dwellers in the cities, to reside in the Province,to engage in trade and handicrafts, to establish communities, open slaughter-houses and cemeteries. In virtue of this law the Jews of Kurland becamesubjects with civil rights. In 1804 the Code for “the Committee for Regula-tions affecting the Jews” was issued, and defined the provinces includedin the Pale of Settlement. Kurland was not among them, and this led to aconfirmation of the view that only those Jews who had been registeredlocally in 1799, and their offspring, were entitled to reside in Kurland andenjoy citizenship there. Several attempts were made over the years to expelfrom Kurland those Jews who had entered illegally. In 1835 a new Codewas published interpreting that of 1804, and containing two sections whichat last defined the status of the Jews in Kurland and Riga. This inter-pretation of the law remained in force until the end of the Tsarist period,and it enabled the Jews of Riga as well to register in the city.38Political, Social Sc Cultural LifeThe provisions of the 1835 Law were as follows:a) In the Province of Kurland permanent residence was allowed toJews who had dwelt there together with their families and had been re-gistered locally at the time of the last previous Census of population.b) The restrictions applied in the Province of Kurland were also appli-cable in the Province of Livonia;, in the city of Riga and in the town ofShlok.In accordance with the latter provision the Jews of Riga submittedan application for registration in the city. The Provincial Governor, to besure, had certain doubts as to whether the correct interpretation of thelaw actually did permit the Jews of Riga to benefit from it. The GermanGuilds of Merchants and Craftsmen were opposed, and the Riga CityCouncil therefore expressed opposition as well.Although a special law confirming the right of the Jews of Riga to beregistered in the city was approved by the Emperor in 1841, the Guildsdid not despair. In 1841, 1844 and 1845 they appealed to the Senate andbargained about the number of Jews to be registered. And whereas 517persons were approved by the Police in 1842, a total of 409 were finallypermitted to settle and establish an independent community. Right ofdomicile was restricted in practice to the city of Riga and the town ofShlok, where the Jews had been granted rights as early as 1785. Apartfrom these places Livonia remained “beyond the Pale”, even to the Jewsof Riga.Movement from the Pale of Settlement to Riga and KurlandThe difficult situation within the Pale of Settlement and the ampler op-portunities of livelihood within Russia caused Jews to leave their homes, andsettle in places where their presence was legally prohibited. The part playedby Jews in the economic life of Riga and Kurland caused both to attractmany Jews from the provinces near the Baltic. Thanks to a tolerantattitude on the part of the Authorities and in some degree to the “kindness”of the Police, Jews dwelt there for decades without being registered.* In* The Law of 1865 permitting craftsmen to reside outside the Pale included anappendix : A Memorandum by the Governor of the Livonian and Kurland Pro-vinces in which he reported to the superior authorities concerning Jews who hadentered the said Provinces in contravention of the law, but who were toleratedthere on account of their ties with their correligionists, who were so importantfor the foreign trade at the Baltic Ports.39The Jews in Latvia1880 a special Circular was actually issued specifying that no action shouldbe taken against Jews who were living outside the Pale. This tolerantattitude came to an end in 1893, when Jews who had no right of residencewere expelled from the inner provinces of Russia. In certain places thelaw was carried out to the very letter, while elsewhere it was deferred“pending further instructions”. Only in the Provinces of Livonia andKurland was this inhuman practice completely abrogated. The Jews whohad lived there in the Eighties became permanent residents.After describing the hardships undergone by the Jews of Riga andKurland until they received permanent permission to reside in those regions,we turn to another field in which Jews were also differentiated from otherinhabitants. This is the field of taxation, which included several taxes thatwere payable exclusively by Jews.Double Taxation of the JewsIn 1794 a Law was published requiring Jews registered in the categoriesof merchants or town-dwellers to pay a double tax, compared with taxeslevied on Christians of the same class. The law provided that Jews whodid not accept this law were permitted to leave the boundaries of the Rus-sian Empire following payment of this double tax for a period of threeyears. When Jews were given their legal status in Kurland in 1799, thelaw provided for the levying of double taxes as described above, togetherwith the alternative of refusing to accept the double taxation and emigratingfrom Russia.The main taxes levied at this period were: A Poll-Tax of 4 roublespayable by town-dwellers (instead of 2 roubles payable by Christians), and2% of the capital declared by merchants upon registration in their specificclass (instead of 1% payable by Christians), In addition the taxes for up-keep of the Posts were doubled to 24 hopeks per person, against 12 kopekspayable by Christians. It is held by some that the double tax was imposedwith the aim of putting pressure on the Jews to proceed to become farmersin South Russia (where Jewish Colonies had been planned and were beingset up). These double taxes were abolished in the years 1805-1807.The Meat Tax (Korobka) in RigaThe Meat Tax was a specific charge levied on every unit that wasslaughtered in accordance with the laws of Kashrut. It had been introducedby the Jews themselves during the Seventeenth Century in several East40Political, Social & Cultural LifeEuropean communities, as can be seen in a surviving Report dated 1650to be found in the Pinkas or Register of the semi-autonomous “Council ofLithuania”. This tax was intended to meet a series of specific Jewish re-quirements deriving from conditions then current, such as aid for refugeesfrom the widespread anti-Jewish “Chmelnitzky Massacres” of 1648, andpayment of debts owing to the Catholic Clergy who had lent money to theJews.* In the course of time other debts accrued to the Government forarrears in tax payments, particularly by those of limited means; for theupkeep of synagogues and their functionaries, aid to the sick and, at times,rental payments to landed gentry or municipalities for the use of theirlands.In Riga the meat tax or Korobka (the Russian translation of the Hebrewterm for Charity Box”) was introduced in the year 1809. The needs of thecommunity had previously been covered through the Charity Box in theSynagogue. It should be noted that in the year 1811, before the communityhad been authorised, the Jews of Riga amounted to 736 in all according toofficial figures. However, the number of Jews in the city increased steadily,and it was therefore decided to introduce the tax on meat. This meant thatthe slaughterer had to increase his charge for the slaughter of each headof cattle from 20 marks to 30 marks, and handed the additional 10 marksto the Head of the community. Both private and official slaughterers wererequired to impose this levy. The amount was agreed upon with the CityCouncil, on the understanding that the meat tax would serve to cover thecost of synagogue upkeep and to support the needy. The slaughterer of theHassidim in the city refused to comply with the demands of the Head ofthe community, until the City Council required him to behave like theother slaughterers.During the early years of Russian rule the Government did not interfere* Historians of the Korobka Tax have collected facts showing that very few ofthese debts derived from actual cash loans received from and repayable to theCatholic Clergy. However, the communities did undertake certain obligations inorder to obviate various kinds of false charges and libels, which might otherwisehave brought calamity upon them. Such obligations were also undertaken in lieuof participation in public religious disputations between Christians and Jews,which the Catholic Clergy were always anxious to arrange. Debts of this kindweighed on the Communities for centuries, and there was no hope of being ridof them. As a rule only interest was paid, and the money for this purpose wastaken from the tax on the slaughter of meat. As a result a number of CatholicMonasteries were maintained by money extracted from Jews by force and cunning.41The Jews in Latviawith the Slaughter Tax, which was viewed as an internal affair of the JewishCommunities.In the course of time, however, the importance of the tax and the neces-sity of defining its precise purposes became evident. In 1839 a general Lawon the Tax was promulgated, and was applied to “all the provinces inwhich Jews customarily reside.” The first paragraph of the law specifiedthat the “Slaughter Tax” belongs to the Jewish Societies, namely, to thecommunities.Its purpose was to provide help and ease the burden of debts weighingon the community, to pay off taxes and imposts and upkeep charges, andto provide for the requirements of charity, general education and socialwelfare. The sources of income which had to be met by all communitieswere “the General Tax” levied on the ritual slaughter of each unit ofcattle or poultry and the sale of kosher meat. This was a kind of indirecttax. In addition there was an auxiliary tax — a direct tax, so to say, con-sisting of percentages charged or agreed payments made on Jewish trade,income from houses and store-houses belonging to Jews, preparation ofJewish clothing, legacies, bath-houses and ritual baths (Mikveh). The“General Tax” was legally imposed everywhere, while the “Auxiliary Tax”was levied whenever found to be required, in consultation and agreementwith the local Community, if and when the general tax was found to beinsufficient to cover the budgeted outlay.Income and expenditure were supervised by the Municipalities, officesof the Provincial Governor and the higher institutions of the State Ministryof Finance. Unused surpluses from any community in the province werecollected and handed over to the supervisory authorities, being regarded assupplementary income.Riga Jews Offer to Increase the Meat Tax for the Upkeep of SchoolsIn 1838 the “Community of Jews of Shlok residing in Riga” — theofficial name of the Jewish Community in the city until its existence wasrecognised in 1842 — applied to the Provincial Governor for permission toestablish a school in the city. To cover the upkeep and maintenance of theschool the Community proposed the introduction of a special paymentamounting to 50 kopeks on each head of cattle, in addition to the regularslaughter tax.The proposal was approved by the Minister of Culture and was en-dorsed by the Tsar. Here we shall not go into details about the opposition42Political, Social & Cultural Lifeshown by the City Council to this new Jewish institution, whoch wasestablished in spite of the constant resistance of the Municipality and theGuilds to all Jewish expansion. It seems reasonable to assume that thesteps to obtain permission were taken over their heads and without theirknowledge. The school was opened in 1840 with German as the languageof tuition. It contained two classes and its curriculum included Languages,Arithmetic, Geography, History, and Religious Studies based on the Bibleas translated into German by Moses Mendelsohn. In accordance with theauthorisation the school had to be headed by a Jew from abroad with therequisite higher education, and the person appointed was Dr. Max Li-lienthal.(In due course he took charge of the Governmental educationalmeasures for Russian Jewry in accordance with the theories of the Haskalaor Jewish Enlightenment Movement during the year 1840-1844, on behalfof the Russian Government.)The Riga School was one of the first four “modern” Jewish schools ofRussia.The additional meat tax which the Jews of Riga proposed of theirown free will had a certain effect on the development of the Korobkataxes. Historians point out that this was first introduced as a tax for theupkeep of schools. A few years later it was included in the Korobka groupof taxes law in the form of a “Sabbath Candles Tax”.The Jews of Riga were exempt from this “Candles Tax” because theyhad introduced it of their own free will for the upkeep of their school.The authorities viewed all extraordinary expenditures from the supple-mentary reserves of the Korobka with suspicion. In the year 1899 the“Society for the Dissemination of the Haskala” in Riga decided to set upa school for handicrafts. The budget for the building and the necessarytools and implements was estimated at about 75,000 roubles, but in actualfact the institution cost a total of 141,000 roubles in all. Prior to its erection,application was made to the “Supplementary Fund” of the Province foran allocation of 40,000 roubles for the purpose. Although the erection ofnew schools was one of the purposes of the Korobka the authorities refusedto approve the amount requested, claiming that the Society would not havethe necessary resources for building and maintaining the school. Onlythanks to the intervention of Baron J. G. Guenzburg, head of the CentralCommittee of the Society for the Dissemination of Haskala in St. Peters-burg, and on his personal responsibility, did they consent to allocate theamount requested from the said source.43The Jews in LatviaThe Law Abolishing the KehillotOn 19th December 1844, two laws were published simultaneously. Oneabolished the Kehillot or Communities. The other was a new law regulatingthe slaughter taxes (Korobka) which remained in force until the end of theTsarist regime in Russia.The principal change in the new Slaughter Tax Law was the omissionof the provision that the slaughter tax was the property of the “JewishSocieties"’, i.e., the Communities. The other changes, with the exceptionof the “Candles Tax” referred to above, were in essence “technical”, buthad the operative effect that the greater part of the tax was a heavy burdenon the poorer sections of the Jewish population.This is not the place to consider the reasons for abolishing communalautonomy. Maybe it was the intention of providing the Jews, administrativelyspeaking, with what was ostensibly the same status as the other inhabitantsof the country. Alternatively the intention may have been to destroy theonly institution which sustained an independent Jewish way of life, withthe aim of encouraging assimilation and the disappearance of the Jewsamong the rest of the population.This ambiguous policy towards the Jews became evident when thenew laws made it clearer than ever that the Government did not intendto relinquish any fiscal demands in respect of either the direct taxes whichhad hitherto been collected through the communities, or such special taxesas the Slaughter Tax. Special officials were designated to collect the directtaxes, and constituted a miserable relic of the former communities. Otherappointees who retained special powers included the “Recruit Kidnappers \whose function was to secure the Jewish quota for military conscription.The latter was a painful episode, marked with boundless suffering, whichovershadowed the lives of Russian Jews for thirty years (1827-1856).The only institution of which the Jews continued to retain control wasthe synagogue. Together with the wardens of all kinds of charitable in-stitutions, this served to maintain the restricted and unofficial autonomy.Legal status was also given to “the Associations of Jews” in each place.For in spite of all the distortions and perversions of Russian legislationpertaining to the Jews, it was impossible to ignore the local Jewish repre-sentatives in respect of certain functions such as: Consultation regardingthe budget of the Korobka; requests for use of surplusses deriving fromthese monies; appointment of rabbis; provision for the old and sick; etc.These functions of “the Associations of Jews” which retained legal statusin spite of the abolition of the Kehillot, were also supported by the Senate,44Political, Social & Cultural Lifewhich was the highest authority in the State for the interpretation of legisla-tion.In any case, both the law for the abolition of the Kehillot and the NewSlaughter Fax Law specified that these provisions did not apply to Jewsresiding in Riga and the Jews of the towns of Kurland, who enjoyedspecial rights.As far as Riga was concerned the community, as seen in the previoussection, obtained its legal status only in the years 1842-1845. Further tothe law abolishing the Kehillot, Directives were issued in 1863, specifyingthat the Jews of Riga and Kurland were to elect 3-5 representatives con-stituting a body to be known as the “KahaT, who would deal with allmatters affecting taxes and dues payable by Jews in those places.The Kehillot in Riga and Kurland were finally abolished in 1893.End of the Nineteenth and Early Twentieth CenturiesThanks to the branches of commerce, particularly import and export,which were in Jewish hands as described above, there was a group ofwell-to-do persons within Latvian Jewry. Among them were great magnatesand a relatively not inconsiderable proportion of persons with universitytraining such as physicians, lawyers, etc., whose economic situation wassatisfactory. However, there was also numerous persons of limited means,including workers, clerks, craftsmen and small shopkeepers, among whoma fairly large proportion needed assistance in respect of education, economicsand social welfare.To the credit of Latvian Jewry it should be said that, in spite of thedifficulties in obtaining permits to set up public bodies of any kind, theJews of Riga and Kurland succeeded in establishing a number of cultural,economic and relief institutions.In 1898 a branch of the Society for Dissemination of the Haskala(Enlightenment) was opened in Riga. This was the third branch in Russia,and had the largest budget apart from the headquarters at St. Peterbourg.The Riga society established a school for handicrafts, with evening coursesand a large library. Mention has already been made of the Communityschool set up in 1840 and known as the Kaplan School. In addition another,the Stoppel School, was established together with a network of modelhadarim (Hebrew Classes) which were the equivalent of a school system.A “percentage norm” for Jews in Secondary and High Schools had beenintroduced in the year 1871. In order to surmount the difficulties resulting.45The Jews in Latviaprivate schools were opened both in Riga and in Kurland. Close on 20(Jewish students at the Riga Polytechnicum added considerably to the intellectual coloration of the Jews in the city.The communities of Riga and the towns of Kurland were regarded ajlively centres, not only economically but in respect of their communainitiative as well. The 4Tvria” Club in Riga was a centre of Zionist acti-vities and also the Jewish club for the well-to-do. The Left-wing circlesfound their place in the “Carmel” Club.There were all kinds of charitable and social aid societies such as thosefor visiting the sick, providing hospitalisation and aiding orphans; an Or-phanage, a People’s Kitchen, etc.The first Riga synagogue was built in 1850. In the course of time severalmore were added in the centre of the city and the suburbs. The most out-standing was the Great Synagogue of Riga in Gogol Street, where the well-known Cantor Baruch Leib Rosowsky officiated and gave the first inspi-ration to the famous singers Joseph Schwartz and Hermann Jadlowker.Kurland sent Jewish representatives to all the four Russian Dumaswhich met between 1906 and 1917. This was thanks to the political blocsestablished with Latvian and German minorities.*The Deputy elected to the First Duma was the well-known Zionistleader Dr. Nissan Katzenelson, who was a resident of Libau. Jacob Shapiro,a merchant and exporter who resided in Windau, was elected to the secondand the Advocate Lazar Nisselovitch of Bausk, who was so outstandingand energetic a protagonist of Jewish rights and planned to submit a lawfor the abolition of the Pale of Settlement, was elected to the third. Dr.Ezekiel Gurevitch, a Physician in the city of Jacobstadt, was elected to thefourth Duma.Outstanding rabbis officiated in several cities in Kurland, includingmembers of the following rabbinical families : Rabbiner (Bausk, Schoen-berg); Samunov (Mitau, Windau); Lichtenstein (Tukum); Nurock (Mitau);etc. The Rabbis of Riga included Rabbi Jacob Elijah Rivlin, MosheShapira and his son-in-law Menahem Mendel Avin.In Riga attempts were made to issue a Russian monthly and a Yiddishdaily.In 1881 Aaron Pumpiansky, who served as Crown Rabbi of the RigaCommunity, published a monthly called “Yevreiskiya Zapiski” (JewishComments), with twelve issues in all. The first Yiddish organ was the* A similar state of affairs was to be found only in the Kovno Province.46Political, Social & Cultural Life“National-Zeitung of which only eleven issues appeared. The second paperwas established on the initiative of the writer and publicist Judah LeibKantor, who served as Crown Rabbi* in Libau in the years 1890-1904,and exercised a similar function in Riga from 1909 until his death in 1915.The name of the Journal was “Die Iddishe Stimme” (The Jewish Voice)which appeared in 1910 and was edited by Dr. A. Eliashiv, better knownby his pen-name “Baal Machshavot” (The Penseur). This was an organof high standing. However, it had few local readers as most of the localJews read the German or Russian press while the authorities did not viewa Jewish journal with favour, and there was a lack of funds. After fifty-one issues the journal ceased publication.LatgaleLivonia, including Riga and Kurland, is correctly regarded as the ori-ginal nucleus of Latvian Jewry, both on account of the numbers who con-centrated there and also because of their national and economic importance.In addition these regions had a distinctive history of their own, as hasalready been recorded.The fate of Latgale, the third region of Latvia, was entirely different.After the liquidation of the Livonian Order in 1561 the region passed toPoland, which governed it for more than two hundred years until 1772.It was retained as a separate administrative unit under the name “Inflantia”.Jews appeared there in the second half of the Seventeenth Century, followingthe Chmelnitsky Massacres and Cossack Raids of 1648-1653.The Census of 1766 recorded that in the region there were 2996 Jewswho paid a poll-tax of 3 zloty per person. This number did not includechildren. In 1772, following the First Partition of Poland, the region passedunder Russian rule. It may be assumed that at the time there were about5,000 Jewish residents. The territory was annexed to the Province of Po-lotzk-Vitebsk and was included in the Pale of Settlement.As a result the Jews of what was subsequently Latgale experienced thesame hardships as all other Jews within the Pale. They were registeredin the class of merchants or townsfolk and were expelled from villages in1786 and 1808, which led to their excessive concentration in the cities. Theywere also subjected to double taxation as long as this existed. They hadto pay the Korobka and Candle Tax, and face all the other restrictions to* The Crown Rabbi was officially appointed in the larger Jewish Communities ofRussia to keep the Register of Births, Marriages and Deaths, and to act on behalfof the Community in its official relations with the Russian Government.47The Jews in Latviawhich the Jews of Russia were subjected. Unlike Riga and Kurland, whichwere developing and expanding economically, the economic position ofLatgale was a regressive one. Apart from several small factories, and a fewmerchants who made their living by trading in timber and cereals, mostof the Jewish population were workers, craftsmen, and employees in thebranches of clothing, footwear, etc. Most of the workshops were very small.According to the data of the Jewish Colonial Association (ICA) in 1893,some 18.5% of all the Jewish families in the Province of Vitebsk were inneed of social aid. On the eve of the First World War there were close to80,000 Jews in the region, whose numbers had declined to 31,000 by theend of the War and subsequently continued to fall.The First World WarLatvian Jewry experienced a severe crisis in August 1914, at the out-break of the First World War. Libau and the western part of Kurland wereoccupied by the Germans during the first days of hostilities. In Riga stepswere taken to evacuate the factories, educational institutions, etc. Someof the inhabitants abandoned their homes and migrated to the centre ofRussia.Tn order to account for the military defeats, the Russian authoritiesinvented stories of Jewish treachery. It was claimed that the Jews hadsignalled to the German Forces, provided hiding-places for German soldierswho attacked the Russians from the rear, etc., thus bringing about thecollapse of the Russian army. The purpose of these stories was to divertpublic attention from the incapacity of the commanders, and from thecorruption that was rife in upper military and civilian circles.Incitement grew more severe and was followed by the expulsion ofJews from a zone extending 50 versts behind the Front. At the end of 1914and beginning of 1915 mass expulsions of Jews began from the WesternProvinces including Kurland.The Expulsion Order for Kurland was issued on 27-28 April 1915.Almost 40,000 Jews including old people, women and children were cruellyand indiscriminately expelled.The Expulsion was completed on 5th May. Only a small amount ofbelongings might be taken. There was a complete ruination of property,and the liquidation of every branch of economic life.A Relief Committee was set up in Riga, through which the expelledpeople passed. It was headed by the Communal Workers: Paul Mintz, E.Ettingen, W. Luntz, E. Shalit, B. Mayer, Mendel Lulov, M. Magidson, etc.48Political, Social & Cultural LifeWith the aid of the Jewish “Committee for the Relief of Victims ofthe War (IKOPO), which was set up in the larger Russian centres, allpossible aid was provided. The exiles and their possessions were receivedand they were temporarily housed in schools, synagogues, etc. Warm foodwas provided, with medical aid and legal assistance in special cases. Mostof those expelled were directed to various provinces in the heart of Russia.The expulsion from Kurland marked the end of the longest-establishedsection of Latvian Jewry. For generations the communities of that territoryhad lived in various towns and large villages: Mitau, Pilten, Talsen, Ha-zenpot, Sasmaken, Tsabeln, Goldingen, etc. The provincial surroundings,the influence of German culture of the Romantic period, the meticulousconservatism in religious practices and traditions, all these created a uniqueJewish type. Their dispersion throughout Russia ended their special lifeand practices. Few of them returned to their former homes after the War.Kurland was occupied by the Germans as early as 1915, though theytook Riga only in 1917.The attitude of the German authorities was quite fair. There was nounfavourable discrimination in life and work. The Germans regarded theJews, most of whom spoke German, as a group who could help in im-planting the German language, particularly as there were more Jews thanGermans in Riga. The authorities planned to set up a “Baltic Duchy” inthe region and to settle Germans from East Prussia there. The army occu-pying Kurland established a local “Landeswehr” (Reserve) Force for whichlocally-born members of the Baltic German gentry were recruited.The February 1917 Russian Revolution took place, and was followedby the Bolshevik seizure of power in October that year. A rift emergedbetween the Allied Powers in the West and Soviet Russia. Unler the impactof the events within the country and the German attack along the entireFront between the Baltic and the Black Seas, the Soviet rulers signed thePeace Treaty of Brest-Litovsk on the 22nd February 1918. This incidentallyprovided that Latvia should also pass under German rule.However, war continued in the West and the victories of the AlliedPowers led to the surrender of Germany. A German Republic was proclaim-ed in November 1918.49The Jews in LatviaIH. THE LATVIAN REPUBLIC1. Declaration of Independence; Struggle against Foreign Powers.2. Minorities in Latvia.3. Number of Jews; Urban and Rural Distribution; Occupations.4. Reconstruction Activities after the War by the “Joint” and the“Central Committee” of the Communities.5. Press.6. Jews in the Legislative Institutions; Parties, Youth and SportMovements.7. The Jewish Fraction in the Seims; Special Jewish Problems.8. Jews in Economic Life.9. Cultural Autonomy.10. Decline and Holocaust.Declaration of Independence, Struggle Against Foreign PowersFollowing the collapse of Germany, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk wasdeclared to be invalid by both the Allied Powers and Russia (on 13thNovember, 1918). The Russian Army began to move on Latvia by wayof Latgale, in order to conquer the country and restore it to Russian rule.The German army fell apart, but still held out in Kurland under thecommand of General Von der Goltz who was supported by the LandeswehrUnits. Behind this army stood the Western Powers.It was a period of political instability, with the Russians attacking fromthe East and a German army still present in Kurland. At this time, on 18thNovember, 1918, a National Council attended by representatives of Latvianpolitical parties proclaimed Latvia a sovereign and independent State.It should be remembered that at the time the West supported the prin-ciple of national self-determination for small nations. This also providedthe moral and ideological backing for the creation of a “Cordon Sanitaire”west of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (i.e., the former Russia)by the establishment of the States of Esthonia, Latvia and Lithuania.A new epoch began for the Jews of Latvia, under the rule of theLatvian majority.The Provisional Latvian Government headed by Karl Ulmanis took itsfirst steps, and began by setting up a Government Military Organisation.The Bolshevik army was advancing and its Latvian representatives,Stutzka and Danishevsky, proclaimed the Dictatorship of the Proletariat inLatvia. This led to cooperation between the army of the Provisional Gov-50Political, Soc/a/ <£ Cultural Lifeeminent, the Germans in Kurland and the Landeswehr. All their combinedefforts, however, could not prevent the occupation of Riga by the RedArmy on 3rd June, 1919. The Provisional Government and the NationalCouncil had to withdraw to Libau under the protection of the BritishForces, which supported the struggle against the Bolsheviks.The Stutzka Government took its seat in Riga, and promptly beganto introduce harsh reforms in all fields of life. This was a difficult periodfor the entire population including the Jews. Almost from the first dayuntil 22nd May, 1922, a Yiddish newspaper was published called “DerRoiter Ernes” (The Red Truth) and containing the Orders and Ordinancesof the Bolshevik Government. Most of the articles were dedicated to attackson the bourgeoisie and the “Jewish clerics”.Joint efforts by the Government forces and the German army in Kur-land led to the reoccupation of most of the urban centres of the country.The Red Army was compelled to withdraw from Riga on 22nd May, 1919.Even before the Provisional Government returned to Riga there wasan internal revolt of the German army and the Landeswehr in Libau,headed by the Latvian Pastor Andrei Niedra who set up a rival Govern-ment. With the aid of the Esthonian army the Latvian Government suc-ceeded in suppressing the Niedra coup d'etat and on 3rd June, 1919, theGovernment returned to Riga.This was not the end of the struggle for power. In October, 1919, anew army was organised from the remains of the German forces andRussian prisoners of war, under the command of Bermondt-Avaloff, aformer Russian army officer, who began to advance in the direction ofRiga. After many efforts, and with the aid of the British Marines, theGovernment succeeded in repulsing this attack as well.Only in 1920 was Latvia free from foreign armies, both in the Eastand the West. On 1st May, 1920 the Legislative Assembly, called theSatversmes Sapulce, met and on 27th May adopted Basic Laws.Minorities in LatviaThe Latvians constituted between 73% and 75% of the population of thecountry. Thus a quarter of the population consisted of minorities, and attimes when Governments were being formed they often turned the scale.The largest minority consisted of the Russians (12%), then the Jews (5%)followed by Germans, Poles, etc.The establishment of the State of Latvia came about at a period when,as remarked, there was a general recognition of the principle of self-deter-51The Jews in Latviamination for small nationalities. It was only logical that the youthful State,which had been established in accordance with that principle, should adopta positive attitude towards its own minorities. In addition the necessityfor obtaining their support during the struggle for power that marked theyears 1918-1920, and the wish to appear at the League of Nations as aState without Chauvinist tendencies, had the effect that from the very firstthe Provisional Government recognised the national rights of the minorities.The latter were invited to send their representatives to the LegislativeInstitutions of the State, they were to participate in the National Counciland the Provisional Government, and their civil and national rights wereto be secured by the basic laws of the country.At the session of the Provisional Council held on 4th December, 1918,three Jewish Delegates were co-opted. They included Aaron Papiermeisterand Samuel Henkin. Participants in the Libau sessions of the Councilincluded: Isaac Rabinovitch, J. Bann and J. Himmelfarb, all three re-presentatives of the “Bund”, Yudel Mark, representative of the “Volks-partei”; and Max Goldberg of the Non-party Association.On 13th July, after the Government returned to Riga, the followingcomposition of the Jewish representation was published: Simeon Zacha-rovitz and Isaac Berz, the “Bund”; Advocate Philip Latzky, Poalei Zion;Professor Paul Mintz and Leib Fishman, National Democrats; AdvocateZ. Tron, General Zionists; and Mordechai Dubin, Agudat Israel.Professor P. Mintz entered the Government as State Comptroller, andwas replaced on the Council by Engineer Jacob Landau.The Provisional Government’s wanderings from place to place, thetemporary occupation, etc., led to the addition as required of additionalJewish representatives including: Dr. Julius Eliasberg and Dr. L. Gri-beshok.The State gradually established itself and was recognised by the GreatPowers. The support of the minorities was no longer quite so necessaryin the struggle against external enemies, and a more independent line to-wards the League of Nations could be adopted. The influence of theminorities began to diminish and earlier promises were forgotten. The firstGovernment was the only one which contained representatives of theminorities — Professor Paul Mintz for the Jews, and certain Germanrepresentatives.At the end of the period of the Constituent Assembly all the JewishDelegates voted against the Government established in July 1922 for the52Political, Social & Cultural Lifefollowing reasons: No facilities were provided for Jewish refugees to returnto Latvia; Antisemitic pamphlets were being printed at the GovernmentPress; matters of citizenship and property rights were not being justly orfairly treated, etc.The attitude towards the minorities grew worse with the increasinglyChauvinist tendencies that marked the final years of the State, as will betold below.The struggles affecting a series of specific Jewish questions continuedduring the entire period of Independent Latvia and the change for the worsewill be illustrated by various characteristic instances.Alumber of Jews; Urban and Rural Distribution; OccupationsIn 1914, on the Eve of the First World War, there were between 185,000and 190,000 Jews in Latvia.The expulsion from Kurland in 1915, the abandoning of homes in otherparts of Latvia on account of transfer of enterprises and higher educationalinstitutions to the heart of Russia, flight because of fear of conquest, etc.,reduced the total population, including that of the Jews.The first Census held in Independent Latvia during 1920 gave thenumber of Jews as 79,644; a decline of 58%, as compared with one of47.5% for the total population. The return of the refugees to their formerhomes, together with natural increase, raised the number of Jews to a totalof 95,675 by 1925.This was followed by a decline to 94,388 in 1930 and to 93,479 in 1935.The proportion of Jews in the total population fell from 5.19% in 1925to 4.79% in 1935.The reduction in the number of Jews was an outcome of several pro-cesses. The younger generation left Latvia, proceeding inter alia to EretzIsrael, while natural increase declined from 5.75% in 1925 to 2.32% in1935. (The birth rate fell from 4.25% to 3.75%, and the death rate rosefrom 3.5% to 4.10%.)Occupations were typical for the countries of the Diaspora at the period,and derived from the distribution of the Jewish population in town andcountry. The Jews were the highest proportion among town-dwellers,amounting to 92.5% of their total number. In the country there were only7.41% to be found.As a result, 48.6% of Jews were engaged in trade and 28.7% in in-dustry, the highest proportions compared with the general population. In53The Jews in Latviaindustry they were largely small craftsmen or clerks in factories, and onlythen came an actual industrial proletariat. In the free professions, con-sisting of physicians, lawyers, engineers etc., they were 7.3% while inagriculture they were 1.1% — the lowest proportion in the whole country.The Riga Community grew steadily, as shown by the following figures:1920 — 24,725 Jews.1925 — 39,459 Jews.1930 — 42,323 Jews.1935 — 43,672 Jews.This growth came about on the account of the provincial towns andvillages which were emptied of their Jewish inhabitants. Riga attractedthem by her size, her connections, the number of Jews who played aleading part in her economic life, and the possibilities of finding a livingthere.Reconstruction Activities, the Joint and the Central Committeeof the CommunitiesBoth those who remained where they were during the War and thosewho returned to Latvia following the close of hostilities were largely in veryserious economic straits, and assistance was urgently necessary from theoutside. The American Joint Distribution Committee (The Joint), whichopened an office in Riga found a wide field of activities. Its aid by theprovision of both commodities and constructive help was provided throughthe Central Committee of the Communities, which was elected twice, in theyears 1919 and 1921. The Communities organised themselves in most ofthe cities, and although they had no legal basis the Government Institutionsrecognised them de facto.From the beginning the Communities were envisaged as the nucleusfor achieving National Autonomy. At a Committee of the Central Committeeof the Communities headed by Professor P. Mintz, regulations for autonomywere prepared for submission to the Seim. Owing to the political situation,however, this dream of autonomy was not fulfilled. That part of the Con-stitution which included the proposed national autonomy of minorities wasnot approved by the Seim.The Central Committee of the Communities was headed by Dr. Isaaclaffe. Dr. Jacob Heilman, and Rabbi Mordechai Nurock. In 1922 Mor-iechai Dubin was elected in place of Dr. Heilman.The Central Committee was supported by various Sub-committeesthrough which the Joint conducted its activities. These were the Committees54Political, Social Sc Cultural Lifefor: Aid to Orphans; re-establishment of Vocational Schools in Riga andDvinsk; establishment of a network of cooperative banks; establishment ofa Bikkur Holim Hospital in Riga; etc.The Joint correctly regarded its functions as provisional. Once the in-stitutions were established it handed them over to local public bodies. TheHospital was taken over by the Bikkur Holim Society; the Trade Schoolsby the Society for the Dissemination of Enlightenment, etc. The CooperativeBanks established an Association of their own. Insofar as they receivedaid from the Joint they were under the supervision of its European Centrein Paris.All these institutions continued to function normally. As they came tobe withdrawn from the supervision and influence of the Central Committeeof the Communities, however, the latter lost its content and functions andhad to liquidate. This meant the elimination of an institution which mightotherwise have been the central administrative body of the communities,and the focal point of Jewish communal life in Latvia.In Independent Latvia all the Jewish social institutions which had existedbefore the War renewed their activities, e.g., the Orphanage, People’sKitchen, etc. The one exception apart from the Bikkur Holim Hospital,founded by Ulrich Milman and restored with the aid of the Joint as alreadymentioned, was the Linat Hatzedek Maternity Hospital, set up in Riga by thePhilanthropist A. Sobolovitch. In speaking of medical and social assistancemention must be made of OZE, the Jewish Health Society, which hadbranches in most towns of Latvia. It specialised more particularly in pro-viding care and treatment for children of school age, including medicalexaminations and supervision, treatment in dental clinics, provision of play-ing fields, etc.PressThe new communal life, the challenges faced by the Jewish Communitywithin the new State, its internal reorganisation and external political stand,all required suitable forums where the problems of the day could be dis-cussed and brought to public attention. That, however, was possible onlyif there was an independent Jewish journal, which was not easy to establish.We have already described the attempts made in this direction underRussian rule. Mention should again be made of the main difficulty that hadto be faced: Most of the local Jews were under the influence of the Germanand Russian cultures, and did not feel that a Yiddish journal was a neces-55The Jews in Latviasity. Steps therefore had to be taken not only to set up a Yiddish paperbut also to create the reading public which would find it of interest and takesteps to ensure its existence.It can be said that the Jewish press in Independent Latvia was establish-ed by public bodies only, and any journal that did not maintain a satis-factory communal level was bound to fail. The public was wide-awake,critical and unforgiving.Most of the journals established by public movements were markedby the energy and self-sacrifice of the founders and staffs. However, theycould not always succeed in concealing their shortcomings; namely, an inade-quate reading public and insufficient working capital.Below we give an account of the more imporant papers : IddisheFolks Stimme. Dr. J. Heilman, Professor A. Guliak, J. Vinnik, I. M. Mov-shovitch Gertz, published the Journal in July 1919 with the financialsupport of Nahum Moskovsky.Apart from various slight changes it was concerned with the sameproblems as the journals which appeared later: The struggle for civic rights,national and cultural autonomy, equality of the Hebrew and Yiddish lan-guages with other languages in the schools, support for the constructiveMovements of the Jewish people, etc.The journal was of high standard and apart from local journalists,outstanding writers from abroad also contributed. Yet the number of readersdid not exceed 300. There were financial difficulties and the attack of thearmies of Bermondt-Avaloff broke up the normal course of life in Riga.The paper had to close after the publication of 75 issues.Dos Folk. This journal continued to appear for seven years. It was thefirst to gain an appreciable reading public in Latvia, and also in Lithuaniaa few years later. Its rise and fall was characteristic of Jewish communallife in the country.“Dos Folk” was established as a communal journal, the initial capitalbeing contributed by Abraham Becker and Jacob Hoff. The editors wereDr. J. Heilman, I. Vinnik and M. Movshoviach-Gertz; and most of thejournalists and communal workers in the country participated in it. Fromthe very beginning, however, there were disagreements with regard to itsideological line, and these continued almost the whole time of its existence.In due course it passed from public control to the private ownership ofMessrs. T. Eidus and Z. Uhrmacher.T. Eidus, a gifted journalist and former member of the Bund, regarded56Political, Social & Cultural Lifethe journal as a source of livelihood, while his partner had no interest ineither literature or public affairs.Dr. Heilman left the paper within a month of its first appearance. J.Vinnik left it in 1921, returned in 1924 and a year later withdrew for good.In 1922 the paper was left by a number of writers who published an organcalled “Di Gelle Presse” (The Yellow Press) protesting against the ideolo-gical chopping and changing of the journal, the absence of a consistentpolicy, etc.: “... Left today, right tomorrow, Zionist and in favour ofHebrew today, Yiddishist and Socialist a little later, a pious newspapertoday, and heretical tomorrow...”All this led to the establishment of new journals, about which morewill be told below, and which had a clearcut communal and ideologicalcharacter. “Dos Folk,” whose chief merit was a creation of a Yiddishreading public, had some 6,000 readers. On Fridays it appeared with 6-8pages. It passed through various transformations, the editorship was trans-ferred to wellknown communal workers, it was closed and then reappearedwith the active help of the Agudat Israel, but finally had to close for goodin July, 1927.Der Weg, Unser Weg. These journals came into being because of thestruggle for an ideological press. The founders were the Zeirei Zion Party,which played a leading part in the establishment of journals worthy of thename. The editors and chief co-workers were Dr. J. Heilman, J. Vinnik, etc.,who belonged to this party. Special mention should be made of the self-sacrifice of Mr. Arie Tagger, who invested his capital in the undertaking.“Der Weg” appeared between September 1922 and April 1923, whenit had to stop because of lack of funds. However, on 17th April of thesame year it appeared again under the name “Unser Weg” and was sup-ported by the General Zionists headed by E. Ettingen. The paper developedwell, having ample and varied contents and achieving a circulation of 4,000copies. But this time as well there was not enough working capital and itfinally had to close down in February 1924.Letzte Neies. This was a purely Yiddishist paper whose chief editorwas Z. Kalmanovitch. It lasted for four months, from 30th January to29th May 1925. This was a paper of high public standards but was dogma-tically anti-Zionist. The founders and staff invested great efforts in thispaper too, but their devotion and self-sacrifice could not prevent it fromclosing down.Frimorgen. The above three journals, to be sure, were unable to main-tain themselves permanently; but they did affect the position of “Dos Folk”57The Jews in Latviaas the only paper, and prepared the way for the appearance of “Frimor-gen .Thitf was published by Dr. Polack and V. Brams, who put out theRussian daily “Sevodnia”, one of the best-selling papers in Latvia andabroad. They also published a Russian evening paper and one in Latvian.After they acquired a large printing press, it was only natural that theyshould add a Jewish paper to the others. “Frimorgen” began to appear inJanuary 1926.To begin with the publishers also included the Communal leaders:Advocate M. Finkelstein, Dr. L. Gribeshok and Dr. Dubinsky. From 1929onwards, however, the sole owners were Dr. Polack and Brams.To begin with the Chief Editor was J. Stupnitzky. After “Dos Folk”was closed down, Z. Latzky-Bertholdy and Dr. J. Heilman joined the staff,and became chief editors when Stupnitzky left.The practical commercial sense of the owners was opposed to anyspecific party line, but the paper always maintained a high communal stand-ard. It was rich and colourful in content, and responded to everythingthat happened in Jewish affairs, in Latvia or abroad. Ample space wasgiven to the new life which was assuming form in the Land of Israel.In 1932 the “Ovent-Post” began to appear and after a time passed intothe hands of the Revisionist Party under the editorship of Messrs. A. Dis-sentchik and D. Wahrhaftig.The publishers of “Frimorgen” also began to issue an afternoon paperthat year, called “Batog” and edited by Mr. Gertz.From time to time single-issue papers appeared, or the weeklies ofvarious parties: “Der Ruf” of the Zeirei Zion — Zionistim Sozialistim(corresponding to Mapai in Israel); “Die Arbeter Stimme” of the Bund;“Dos Iddishe Folk” of the General Zionists, etc.The “Arbeter Heim” and “Kultur Liga” were the organisations of theCommunists and their left-wing fellow-travellers. From time to time theyalso issued broadsheets and newspapers such as the “Neie Tseit”, of which40 issues appeared in 1924 before it was closed down by the authorities;“Arbeter Veit” which appeared in 1927-1928; and a number of otherpublications.The entire liberal and political press was closed down on 15th May,1934, when the Fascist coup d'etat toofl place in Latvia.A daily Yiddish paper, “Heint” then appeared, details of which aregiven in the chapter on “The Decline”.58Political, Social & Cultural LifeJews in the Legislative Institutions and PartiesUnder the Russians the following Jewish parties, all functioning withoutofficial authorisation, were to be found: The Bund; the General Zionists;and rather later the Zeirei Zion Party.In the conditions of freedom that followed the establishment of thenew republic, additional movements came into being. These were theAgudat Israel, the Mizrahi and the National Democrats. The previousparties steadily increased their activities. Though they did not all have aconsiderable number of registered members it can be said that several out-standing personalities represented each movement; and their popularity couldbe judged by the number of voters who supported them.The following are the numbers of the representatives of the Jewishpopulation in the Constituent Assembly and the four Seims, which metbetween 1st May 1920 and 15th May 1934, when the Fascist coup d'etattook place. They indicate the forces within the community that shapedpublic opinion and led Latvian Jewry.Party Representatives: Constituent AssemblyAgudat Israel 1National Democrats 2General Zionists 1Mizrahi 1Zeirei Zion — Z.S. 1Bund 2Total 8The Seims12 3 42 2 I 2112 1111 —111 —6 5 5 3There were 150 members in the Constituent Assembly and 100 Dele-gates in each of the Seims. In spite of the party divisions among the Jews,their representation was about 5%, corresponding to their proportion inthe general population. In the Fourth, final Seim their number fell to threefor reasons which were partly coincidental in character. These included thefact that they were a hundred or even less votes short, the splitting of forces,and a tendency to support the right-wing candidates.The National Democrats and the General Zionists both vanished fromthe scene in the early years of the State. The National Democrats repre-sented the well-to-do upper-middle-class group, which was largely in-fluenced by German culture and was more assimilationist than the rest ofthe Jewish population. They were never a properly organised movement59The Jews in Latviaand were characterised largely by their outstanding leaders, such as Pro-fessor Paul Mintz, Engineer Jacob Landau, the teacher and educator LeibFishman, etc. They were all familiar within the Jewish community for manyyears, and were therefore chosen as suitable representatives when the Re-public of Latvia was established.In some degree this description also applies to the General Zionists.Communal workers like E. Ettingen, Advocate Z. Tron, Dr. A. Salkind,Dr. H. Wasserman, etc., were also among the outstanding figures of Jewishpublic life.However, in the new period that accompanied the development of com-munal post-war activities they were superseded by new parties and men.Parties with an organised membership, which functioned all the year roundand not merely before the elections, were left-wing in character, being theZeirei Zion — Z.S. and the Bund. The representative of the Z.Z. — Z S.in the Constituent Assembly was Dr. Jacob Heilman, while during the firstthree Seims it was Professor Matatyahu Max Laserson. The Bund repre-sentatives at the Constituent Assembly were included in the Social Democratlist and were Isaac (Julius) Rabinovitz and Engineer Isaac Berz. The Bundput up a list of its own for each of the Seims, where its representative wasDr. Noah Maisel. The Bund representative belonged to the Latvian SocialDemocrat faction, and collaborated with the other Jewish delegates onlyin respect of specific and fundamental matters of exclusively Jewish concern.The representatives of the Mizrahi were the Brothers Aaron Ber andMordechai Nurock, who belonged to an old rabbinical family of Tukumand Mitau. Their roots had been set for many generations. Rabbi MordechaiNurock, the personification of the Mizrahi Movement in Latvia, was themore active of the two and exerted a great influence not only in Latviabut also in World Jewry, and finally in the State of Israel as well.As for the Agudat Israel, its establishment and activities turned on itsrepresentative, Mordechai Dubin, a dedicated Jew heart and soul, whoworked for the needy of all sections and classes. He can be described as aShtadlan (Intercessor) par excellence, at home with the authorities. He ex-ploited all opportunities and methods in order to aid any Jews who neededhis help. He was exceedingly popular. During the first two Seims his partycompanion was Reuben Wittenberg of Dvinsk who was, however, no morethan his shadow. In the final Seim, however, his companion was SimonWittenberg, a trained lawyer, teacher and educator who was a rising forceand made a great impression when he spoke on general political matters.The Aguda had a failure in the third Seim. Only Dubin was elected60Political, Social & Cultural LifeMunicipalities. When the establishment of the Republic was proclaimed in1918, and the provisional legislative body, the National Council, was consti-tuted (it was not elected), Jewish representatives from all the existent poli-tical trends entered it. The Constituent Assembly which was elected in 1920had a smaller representation of Jewish parties since they did not all gainrepresentatives. In the Seim, the permanent legislative body, the number ofJewish parties decreased even more. Those represented were the AgudatIsrael; Bund; Mizrahi; and Zeirei Zion.Most of the Jewish population of Latvia were Zionist, but this stateof affairs was not fully reflected in the political representation; for in theelections to state and municipal institutions the Jewish citizen was mostlyswayed not by ideological considerations but by practical daily needs. Forexample, in political elections the Agudat Israel gained more votes thanthe other parties, relatively speaking. Those unfamiliar with the conditionsand character of the community might mistakenly suppose that the Agudawas the strongest political group. In actual fact, however, it was not apolitical party in the ordinary sense of the word. The Agudat Israel ofLatvia shared little more than the name with that party as it functionedin other countries of the Exile. Its communal weight was not considerable,but the personal activities of its chief representative, Mordechai Dubin,were largely directed to the daily requirements of the average Jew. Thanksto his personal popularity he was elected for two different Districts, Rigaand Latgale. During the early years he turned the second seat over to hiscomrade R. Wittenberg of Dvinsk, who was not particularly outstandingeither spiritually or as a man of action. In due course Simeon Wittenbergof the Zeirei Agudat Israel in Riga was chosen as the second representative.He was a talented lawyer with an excellent general education, who set outto give his party a political-clerical character and to introduce the practicesof the World Agudat Israel into the communal life of Latvian Jewry aswell. He was not particularly successful under the Democracy, but thesituation changed entirely after the Fascist coup d etat. We shall refer tothis in greater detail below. The martyred Simeon Wittenberg is known tohave perished in tragic circumstances in the Nazi Concentration Camp atStuttgart.While most of Latvian Jewry were deeply rooted in popular traditionalJudaism, they had no particular interest as a general rule in any politicalreligious Movement. For the reasons above, however, even non-religiousJews used to vote for the Aguda representatives. In really they voted notfor the party but for its representative, Dubin. He was a Habad Hassid83The Jews in Latviawere also sports movements with a political tinge, such as the Peretz SportsSociety of the Bund. In 1932 the Latvian Maccabi participated in the FirstEretz Israel Maccabiad. Most of the participants from Latvia did not returnhome, but remained in Eretz Israel as illegal immigrants.The Jewish Fraction in the Seims; Special Jewish ProblemsNo Fraction of Jewish Delegates with a common discipline, such aswas to be found elsewhere in Eastern Europe, came into existence in theLatvian Seim. This was because of political and class differences.In accordance with the Bund tradition, the Bund representatives be-longed to the Social Democrats. M. Laserson, the representative of theTseirei Zion, agreed to join the Jewish block provided that he was notto be bound by majority decisions on social questions. The other membersof the block who represented the Aguda and the National Democrats (thelatter took part in the First Seim) supported right-wing governments. Therepresentatives of the Mizrahi were progressive in tendency and supportedthe left-wing Coalition Government, the only one of its kind in DemocraticLatvia, which functioned during the term of the Second Seim.Only in the external defence of specific Jewish interest was there acommon front on the part of all Jewish delegates to the Seim.The Aguda did not agree to the setting-up of a Council called “Beirat”(Advice) by the delegates to include representatives of all parties andprofessions, such as economists who were not represented in the Seim.Maybe the reason was the fear that the decisions of the majority of theproposed Council, who were largely indifferent on religious matters, wouldbe morally binding on them even if they were opposed and did not acceptits discipline for reasons of religious conscience.One of the most important problems faced by the Jews of Latvia wasthat of citizenship.Under the National Council a law was passed according to whicha Latvian citizen was deemed to be any former subject of one-time Russia... residing within the territorial frontiers of Latvia who originated fromthe provinces included within the frontiers of Latvia ... or places whichhad belonged to those provinces according to the laws that had beencurrent in Russia until 1st August 1914.The term had belonged could be interpreted as “entered in the localregisters.” However, the greater part of Latvia except Latgale had been62Political, Social & Cultural Lifeoutside the Pale, and there were many Jews who had not been enteredin the local registers but who had resided there on the basis of administra-tive regulations; such as, for example, the instructions of the Russian Min-istry dated 1880, not to expel Jews who had proceeded there in spite ofprohibitions, or the subsequent regulations of 1893 which authorised theirpresence in the Provinces of Livonia and Kurland. These persons weredescribed as “Achtsiker” (persons with the right to reside according to theRegulations of 1880) and were treated as residents in all respects. Similarly,according to a circular of the Prime Minister Stolypin dated 1907, an Orderwas issued not to expel those who had entered the region illegally before1st August 1906.On the basis of these administrative orders such Jews were residents;but they had not always been entered in municipal or other registries. Thisleft room for various interpretations and applications of pressure on thepart of the Authorities.The struggle to change the law lasted eight years. Only in 1927, whena Leftist coalition was in power, did it prove possible to pass a supplementto the law providing: “The citizens of the State include all former Russiancitizens who have been residing within the frontiers of Latvia since 1stJanuary 1925, who resided there for six months prior to 1st August 1914...who resided permanently in Latvia prior to the year 1881, or any des-cendants of such persons.”The most important achievement of Independent Latvia was the Agra-rian Reform — the restoration of the land to its original Latvian owners,who had been deprived of it hundreds of years earlier by the conqueringGerman knights.The distribution of the land was by no means easy, and unfortunatelysome Jews were among those who suffered most from it. Redistributioncommenced in villages and small towns, where Jews had been residingon the basis of agreements with the Local Council or, as in Latgale, inaccordance with “Tsins” rights; i.e. the hereditary right to lease landbelonging to others in return for a regular payment. Thus “Tsins” wasactually the renting of land without any restriction on the period of rental.As a result of the First World War, with its accompanying expulsions anddisplacements, the original documents were sometimes lost. When the landwas redistributed the local authorities, supported by the relevant Committeein the Seim, were in a position to reject the claims of the Jews and givepreference to all kinds of other claimants. The Jewish representative on63The Jews in Latviathe Committee had a difficult, unremittent struggle to safeguard the rightsof such Jewish lessees, and prevent them from being deprived of theirrights and compelled to leave the places where they and their ancestorshad been living for many generations.Naturally there were specific Jewish problems in respect of economics,culture, etc. The Jewish representatives in the Seim played a very activepart in connection with these, as is told in the coming sections.The Jews in Economic LifeEarlier sections of this essay have drawn attention to the importantpart played by the Jews of Latvia in expanding local trade and industry.This process, which began under Russian rule, also continued to somedegree in Independent Latvia. Although the extensive hinterland withits ample supplies of raw materials was no longer available, there werenevertheless certain economic fields where the Jews had their tradition,experience and connections both inside and outside the country.From the very commencement of the State it became clear that in orderto stabilize Latvian currency increased exports were necessary, for thepurpose of increasing the arrival of stable foreign currency from abroad.The Jews had ample experience of exports, particularly the exportof timber and flax. They also played a big part in industry, even thoughindustrial plants had been evacuated during the War and their equipmenttransferred to Russia, while what was left behind was pillaged. In thetimber, match-making, beer, tobacco, textiles, overshoes, conserves andother industries the Jews were the first to establish or reestablish factoriesand plants.The Jews were also the representatives and agents of internationalcompanies, which supplied petroleum products and coal.In order to obtain the resources needed for the economic branches inwhich they were engaged the Jews re-established or founded a number ofbanks, such as: The Libau Bank; the Northern Bank; the Riga InternationalBank; etc. They succeeded in attracting foreign capital for these institutions.In order to promote small-scale industry and commerce a number of Co-operative Banks were established with the aid of the Joint, with an OwnCapital that was far greater than that of the Cooperatives established bythe Latvians, the Germans and the Russians.In the economic structure of the Jews the percentage engaged in tradeand industry and making their livings from these sources was greater thanamong the rest of the population.64Political, Social Sc Cultural LifeThe whole range of Jewish economic activity was of unquestionablebenefit for the country as a whole. It brought in foreign currency by meansof exports, provided employment for factory workers, and secured capitaland credit abroad through the banks. Yet in spite of this the Governmenttook all kinds of steps to restrict their activities, with the aim of protectingChauvinist interests and Latvian groups and associations.Thus from the very beginning of the State a Government monopolyfor the export of flax was introduced. This led to such great losses thatthe monopoly was cancelled in 1921.The unfair treatment of the Jews was particularly striking in respectof the official Cooperative Credits provided for petty trade and industry.The following table shows the sources of capital, in percentages, whichwere made available to Cooperatives in 1931 :LatvianJewishOwn Capital14.822.9Deposits22.965.0Loans57.33.8Various5.08.3The main source for loans granted to the Cooperatives was the StateBank, which supplied 57.3% to Latvian Cooperatives as against 3.8% toJewish Cooperatives.All the complaints and efforts made by the Jewish Seim members tosecure a place for a Jew on the Board of Directors of the State Bankproved useless.The Latvians also begrudged the development of the large Jewishbanks. In 1929 the “Darmstaedter” Bank in Germany suspended payment.There was a wave of distrust such as appears in such cases among depo-sitors, who engaged in a run on the banks to withdraw their deposits, whichcould have shaken the entire economy. The Darmstaedter Bank was con-nected with the Libau Bank,In such cases it is the practice of State Banks to come to the aid ofprivate Banks and advance them the necessary resources until the emergencyis over, the private depositors regain confidence and replace their deposits.That was the way the Lithuanian Central Bank behaved, for example.The Latvian financial authorities were of another mind. They felt thetime had come to clip the wings of Jewish banking. The National Bankrefused to provide the necessary assistance to the banks affected. As aresult the state of emergency also spread to Latvian Banks, which likewise65The Jews in Latviahad to suspend payments. A general moratorium was proclaimed andled to economic difficulties in all branches of trade and industry.The Jews suffered in particular during this period. While the othersections of the population could divert their unemployed to agriculture,this was impossible for the Jews, whose share in agricultural activities wasnegligible.Among the Jews there were 3,500 craftsmen, or close on 9,000 soulswith their families, constituting 10% of Latvian Jewry.In order to meet competition and improve their economic conditionthe craftsmen established their own special organisation and also publisheda monthly called “Der Handwerker”. They set up their own Cooperativesfor loans and the purchase of raw materials.Particularly fruitful activities were carried out among the craftsmenby the ORT Society, which had branches in Riga, Dvinsk and Libau. TheSociety organised Girls’ Schools which taught sewing and millinery. It ranevening classes for adults, and in Dvinsk and Libau had Vocational Train-ing Schools for locksmiths, carpenters and electricians. The Society alsosupported craftsmen by providing machines through a Fund establishedthanks to contributions by kinsfolk and philanthropists abroad. In Rigait set up the “Mavera”, an auxiliary society for the purpose of acquiringforeign machinery, which was supplied to craftsmen at reasonable prices.Cultural AutonomyThe most important achievement of the minorities in Latvia was theLaw of Cultural Autonomy, an exceedingly democratic piece of legislationwhich served as a model for its period.The Law, which was passed while the National Council was still insession, laid down general provisions such as: Free education in elementaryschools; the requirement of the study of the Latvian language; inclusion oflocal history and geography in the syllabus; rights and duties of theteachers; relations between the cultural institutions of the minorities andthe central authorities of the Ministry of Culture; etc.Administration of the educational institutions of minorities was en-trusted to special departments of each minority. The law provided thatthe state and municipalities were to allocate to the minority schools suchsums as were required in proportion to the number of pupils belongingto the given minority in each place.The Jewish Culture Department, or the Jewish Department as it was66Political, Social & Cultural Lifegenerally called, was administered throughout its existence by EngineerJacob Landau, two assistants, inspectors, a Secretariat, etc. Besides theadministration there was a Public Council consisting of representatives ofthe legislative bodies and Teachers’ Associations: The Centre for YiddishSchool Organisations, the Hamoreh Federation of Hebrew Teachers, andthe Moriah Federation of Orthodox Teachers.As a result of the history of Latvian Jewry, there were three linguistictrends:Supporters of Yiddish, headed by the Bund Party. This trend wasnaturally comprehensible to a large part of the Jewish population. Yiddishwas their mother tongue and their vernacular, and attracted all those whoregarded the Yiddish language as the one that linked and would continueto link World Jewry and its literature.The Zionists supported Hebrew, which they regarded as a securityfor the hopes of the Jewish National Revival in Eretz Israel.A large part of the public, who had grown up under the influence ofGerman and Russian, took steps to ensure that their children studiedEuropean languages that had a present and an actual future. They werenot apprehensive regarding the assimilation of the younger generation,which would inevitably follow education of that kind.This autonomy made it possible to direct the education and cultureof the younger generation, and to encourage those aspirations which wereheld to be desirable. As a result it was the subject-matter of severe struggleswithin the Jewish community. An active part was played by the politicalparties and their representatives in the Seim and the Municipalities, theteachers and educators, Jewish leaders and public opinion as a whole. Atthe same time this struggle helped to shape the Jewish consciousness ofthe Jews in general and young Jews in particular, crystallizing points ofview and deepening an awareness of the value of both Yiddish and Hebrew.The first registration of children took place in 1918 and was conductedby a Committee on which Yiddishist teachers were represented. As a resultYiddish was recorded as the “mother tongue.” Yiddish schools were thefirst to be opened. In 1921 there was a Conference of Yiddish teacherswhich laid down the principles of secularist education in the Yiddishschools, and an organisation was established under the name “TsentraleIddishe Shul Organisatzia in Lettland” (Central Yiddish School Organisa-tion in Latvia).The Hebrew language was first introduced at the Kaplan and Stoppel67The Jews in LatviaJewish Community Schools in Riga. Since the Community did not have theresources for maintaining them, they were transferred to the MunicipalSchool system.In 1921 the “Society for the Advancement of Knowledge and Art”was founded in Riga and headed by the veteran Zionist Dr. HermannWasserman. Much of the development of the Hebrew language in Rigamay be credited to him. The Society founded the Hebrew Gymnasium(Secondary School) in the city, together with a popular Music Conservatoireheaded by the Composer Solomon Rosowsky, a Hebrew kindergarten, etc.The “Ivrit” Teachers Society was founded in 1919, and became the “Ha-moreh Hebrew Teachers’ Federation in 1922, with the aim of organisingmodern schools in which the language of instruction would be Hebrew.In 1925 an All-Latvian Teachers’ Conference was held and adoptedthe proposal of the Yiddishist Teachers: To support Yiddish as the Jewishvernacular and to introduce an amendment to the law whereby the languageof instruction in all Jewish schools supported by the State and the Muni-cipalities would be Yiddish.This resolution served as a warning to Hamoreh. In 1926, when Z.Michaeli (Michelson) was elected chairman, the Hamoreh Federation beganto take political steps against the Yiddishist attacks. A party struggle com-menced between the Bund and its supporters on the one hand and theZionists on the other, and support was mobilized by both sides.The first step was taken by “Hamoreh”, which entered the All-LatvianTeachers’ Federation. The Latvians agreed to accept “Hamoreh” intotheir organisation in spite of the epithets “Reactionary gang”, “Anti-Pedagogues”, etc., which the Bund used in plenty to villify it before theLatvians.A Latvian Teachers’ Conference was held in 1926. “Hamoreh” in-creased its membership, organised public meetings and issued a journalin Latvian whose contributors included, among others: M. Laserson, Mem-ber of the Seim. J. Vinnik, Z. Latzky- Bertholdy (a member of the Folks-partei who nevertheless supported Hebrew), etc. They also appealed tothe Latvian national poet J. Reinis, who afterward visited Eretz Israel andwas then serving as Minister of Culture, to support the Hebrew language.All this was done in order to modify the resolution calling for priority toYiddish in the schools.Laserson delivered an address presenting the scholarly and practicalfoundations of living Hebrew. He was attacked by Dr. N. Maisel, the68Political, Social & Cultured LifeBund representative, who disparaged the Zionists as a reactionary groupand Hebrew as a clerical language. Then came the Latvian poetess Aspasia,who enthusiastically supported Hebrew as the language of the Bible andthe Halutzim (Pioneers) in Eretz Israel.A resolution was passed to defer the implementation of the resolutionadopted at the previous Conference.The struggle continued both in local government bodies and at the Seim.This was the period of the Left-wing Coalition, which was supported byboth M. Laserson and M. Nurock. Speeches were delivered at PlenarySessions of the Seim. The Opposition hoped that the dissatisfaction of theZionists regarding the language of instruction in Jewish schools would makeit possible to break the Left-wing Coalition. In the Cultural Committeeof the Seim, however, the Social Democrats, despite the dissenting voteof the Bund, supported the formula submitted by Laserson providing forthe equal rights of the two languages in the Jewish schools maintained bythe Government and local authorities. The actual language of instruction,whether Hebrew or Yiddish, in the existent schools and those to be openedwas left to the decision of the parents. On occasion, as a result, thereensued quite a struggle between the protagonists of the two languages.Elementary education was compulsory, but not secondary education,which in addition was not free. However, the Government supported second-ary education, and took the numerical ratio of the minorities into con-sideration. The amounts lacking for the upkeep of the schools were providedby the local Jewish population and by tuition fees. There were secondaryschools in Riga, Libau, Dvinsk, Rezekne, Mitau, Windau and Lutzin. Somewere governmental, others municipal or public, and some were private.Their languages of instruction were Hebrew, Yiddish, Russian and German.Traditional education was provided by the “Reformed Hadarim”, whichwere included in the Elementary School System and were continued in the“Tushia” Secondary Schools, supported by Mizrahi circles. The AgudatIsrael maintained its own “Torah ve-derech Eretz” system of elementaryand secondary schools.There were also vocational training schools in Riga, Dvinsk and Libau.In order to regularise the connection between schools and any giveneducational system, regulations were issued in due course according towhich any school containing at least 60% of pupils belonging to a recog-nised minority was under the cultural administration of that minority.The decline in the birth rate during the First World War and thedecline in the Jewish birth rate during the period of Latvian independence69The Jews in Latvia(amounting to 26% in the years 1925-1936) had the result that the numberof Jewish pupils in elementary schools was 12,402 in 1922/3 and was nomore than 12,235 in 1935/36.The following was the distribution of Jewish school children by lan-guages of instruction at schools:Hebrew andYearsYiddishRussianGermanLatvianTotal1922/38,8721,8981,25239012,4121935/610,562181001,55112,231The changes between the two periods were due to the influence ofnationalist trends and cultural autonomy, as well as the law that the childrenof the minorities were required to attend their own minority schools orthose of the Government, i.e., the Latvian schools.The number of pupils at the Secondary Schools showed the followingdevelopment:Language of InstructionYears Hebrew and Russian German Latvian Total Yiddish 1922/3 1,241 2,032 494 101 3,8681935/6 1,577 27 19 704 2,327The steep decline of some 40% in the number of pupils was the resultof the emigration of part of the adolescent youth, primarily to Eretz Israel.Official figures show that between 1920 and 1941 some 4,547 personsemigrated from Latvia to Eretz Israel. These figures are known to be farfrom correct, particularly insofar as they refer to Halutz immigration.The decline was also largely due to the fact that secondary educationwas a privilege but not a duty, and the tuition fees were often beyond thecapacities of those with restricted resources among the Jewish population.The number of Jewish students in Higher Educational Institutions alsodisplay the same characteristics:Years 1920/25Faculty :Law & Economics 62Architecture,Engineering,Chemistry, Nature 319Medicine 140Agriculture 20Philology, Philosophy 4Total 545% 1935/6 %11 159 3060 247 5025 31 63 23 41 50 10100 510 10070Political, Social & Cultural LifeThus the number of students had undergone a decline. Their distributionby Faculty had been affected by considerations of subsequent earningpower as well as the difficulty of obtaining admission to certain Faculties,particularly Medicine. The great increase in Philology and Philosophy wasdue to lack of choice and the hope of subsequently transferring to otherfields of study.In the High Schools for the Arts the number of Jewish students was asfollows :The Conservatoire of Music Academy of Art and Sculpture1925 — 25 students 1926jl — 8 students1930— 48 students 1930/1 — 14 students1934 — 52 students 1934/5 — 6 studentsAt the Conservatoire the number of Jewish students fluctuated between8% and 17%. In the Academy they were 3% of all students. At the timethe Jews were about 5% of the population.At the High School of Economics the number of Jewish students was:In 1933/4 — 89 Jews or 15.5%.In 1934/5 — 58 Jews or 11.6%.The Decline and the HolocaustAs remarked, attempts were made here and there to undermine therights of the Jewish Community in Latvia. In spite of this, Latvian Jewrywas a lively national entity in all respects: Education and culture, economicsand finance. It had its own charitable and social welfare institutions, politicalparties of every kind with their youth, clubs, sports associations, press, etc.However, the developments of the Thirties in Europe, the Right-wingRevolt in Lithuania and the frequent visits of the Prime Minister to Ger-many brought a cloud over the general situation and led to an increase inthe extremist national trends, which derived from the deeply rooted chau-vinism of a large part of the Latvian people. A National Socialist journalwas published called “Ugunkrust” and semi-military organisations calledthe “Perkonkrust” were set up.The democratic forces grew steadily weaker. The Social Democrat Partydeclined from 30 and 31 delegates at the First and Second Seims to 25 inthe Third and 20 in the Fourth Seim. Finally, the two votes of the ZZ-ZSand Bund representatives were also lacking. The Communist delegates ofset purpose refrained from participating in any activity that was liable toweaken the reactionary forces in the Seim.The end of the Third Seim and the period of the Fourth, which was71The Jews in Latviathe last, were marked by an undermining of the country’s democraticfoundations as, for instance, by the misuse of the Government authority tolegislate while the Seim was not in session. Thus the Health Insurance Law,a fundamental factor in the life of the workers, was revised to the advantageof employers. Restrictions were introduced on freedom of meeting andassociation. Proposals were made for the direct election of the Presidentby the people instead of appointment by the Seim; and for ministers to beresponsible not only to the Seim but also to the President. It was alsoproposed to set up a new Constituent Assembly without the participationof the Minorities.The weakening of democracy and strengthening of Chauvinism helpedto speed up the decline of Latvian Jewry. This decline had several stages,each of them more tragic than the one before.On 15th May, 1934 Karl Ulmanis, the Prime Minister, carried out aFascist coup d'etat which passed without bloodshed. There were none whoopposed this step against democratic freedom in the country. The Seimwas dispersed, the Left-wing parties were closed down, and the Social De-mocrat fraction in the Seim together with the heads of the Left-wing parties,including ZZ-ZS and the Bund, were sent to a Concentration Camp atLibau.The Jewish political parties liquidated included the Zionist parties,ZZ-ZS, the Bund, and their associated Youth Movements. The Eretz IsraelOffice was allowed to function, together with the Hehalutz Movement whichchanged its name to “Olim” (Emigrants). The authorities did not interferewith those who wished to leave the country.Cultural autonomy was liquidated. The Jewish schools were entrustedto the Agudat Israel, which was regarded as a supporter of the new regime.A new teaching system was introduced according to the programme of theAguda, which provided for study with covered heads, etc.The existent press was closed down and replaced by the “Heint”,administered by the leaders of the Aguda. The lack of freedom of expres-sion, the need to accept the official line, the absence of public criticism,all had the effect that the paper was very poor both in content and ap-pearance.In the economic field the aim of the authorities was to restrict Jewishactivities by the introduction of a Permits System in all branches of tradeand industry. Jewish owners of large factories were compelled to sell themto Latvians. The employment of domestics under a certain age was prohi-72Political, Social & Cultured Ufebited, provision of work depended on residence in a given place for a cer-tain number of years, etc.The second stage in the decline of Latvian Jewry was marked by theSoviet Occupation.Under the Ribbentrop-Molotov Agreement of 1939, Latvia was includedin the sphere of Russian influence. In October 1939 bases in various partsof the country were placed at the disposal of the Russians, and on 17thJuly 1940 the Russians took over the country.With the Soviet annexation of Latvia all parties were liquidated, eco-nomic enterprises were nationalised, education became secularised, and thelanguage of instruction in Jewish schools was Yiddish. Zionists and theleaders of other parties were persecuted. M. Nurock and M. Dubin werearrested and exiled, together with many others including Revisionists, ZZ-ZS,Mizrahi, etc.A few days after the German attack commenced in June 1941, a massevacuation of Jews began. It is estimated that ten thousand persons wereexiled to various places in Siberia and Central Asia. Many of them mettheir deaths from sickness and starvation in concentration camps. Only afew remained alive.The fate of these exiles was bitter. Often they were sent with littlechildren to Northern Siberia unmder very severe climatic conditions, andwere engaged in the hardest possible labour. Yet it must be admitted thatsome of them were saved from the Nazis thanks to the evacuation and indue course, after investigations, purges, etc., were permitted to return totheir original homes.The German-Russian War began on 21st June, 1941. On 29th June theGermans occupied Libau and Dvinsk. On 1st July the Germans took Riga,and the final, tragic stage of the history of Latvian Jewry began.The Nazis found dedicated assistants for their murderous activities inthe Latvian population. In spite of the common sufferings of the Latviansand the Jews under the German Barons in the Seventeenth and EighteenthCenturies, and the common front they had established during the revolu-tionary years at the beginning of the Twentieth Century against the Tsaristregime, there were savage Jew-haters among the Latvians who revealedthemselves under the Nazis.Latvia was regarded as a place where “there were convenient con-ditions for extermination”, according to the evidence of the Chief of the73The Jews in LatviaGestapo in that country, (It is also estimated that about 16,000 Jews fromother lands were transferred there.)During the early days, and even before the Germans had issued detailedinstructions, the Latvian Antisemites very energetically commenced exter-minating the Jewish inhabitants, thus helping to solve the Jewish questionby their own efforts. They themselves murdered the Jews in most of thesmaller towns of Kurland and Latgale. Some of the survivors were trans-ferred to the Ghetto in Dvinsk. Within a few days of the German occupa-tion Judenrein* (Cleared of Jews) Notice-Boards were to be found at theentry to many small towns.Ghettoes were set up in Libau, Dvinsk and Riga. However, theirestablishment was preceded by mass slaughter on the part of special groupsof the Latvian “Perkonkrust”, Jewish property was pillaged and synagogueswere set on fire. In Riga only one synagogue remained. It could not beput to the torch without endangering the surrounding buildings.On 27th July about 4,000 persons were slaughtered in Libau. In Augustthe Jews were ordered to wear the yellow badge, and “actions” were re-sumed from time to time. By Summer 1942, 800 persons remained in theGhetto. In October 1942 the Ghetto was liquidated, and the survivors weretransferred to the Kaiserwald Camp near Riga.At Dvinsk the Ghetto was established in July 1941 within the survivingfortifications of the one-time Dvinsk citadel, and Jews from the smalltowns of Latgale who had not already been liquidated were also transferredthere. In all there were about 15,000 persons in this Ghetto, living in dread-fully overcrowded conditions. Old people, the sick and ailing and womenwere taken out of the town and killed in order to “ease” the congestion.In November there was an “action” which lasted for three days and lefta total of about 1,000 persons. In October their number was reduced to350, who were also transferred to the Kaiserwald Camp.During the first few days of the German occupation about 8,000 per-sons were murdered in Riga by Latvian volunteers. An Order was publishedrequiring the yellow badge to be worn and requiring Jews to walk in thegutters. In October the Ghetto was established with more than 30,000 in-habitants. During the ten days from 30th November to 9th December 1941some 27,000 persons were taken from the Ghetto to the forest near Rumbuliand were shot in front of mass graves that had already been dug. A totalof about 4,500 persons were left in what was called the “Small Ghetto”,and were mostly employed on outside work. Jews from Germany andAustria were brought to fill the places left vacant in the older Ghetto,74Political, Social & Cultural Lifewhich was then called the "Reichsjuden Ghetto” and existed until No-vember 1943, Part of the inmates were transferred to Treblinka and diedin the Gas Chambers.The rest were transferred to the Kaiserwald Camp, the inmates of whichwere regarded as criminals. Every prisoner had a number and a badge.The regime was one of terrorisation, and starvation reigned supreme, manyperishing of sheer exhaustion. When the Russians approached in August1944, most of the Kaiserwald Camp inmates were taken to Danzig andfrom there to Stutthof, being driven from one Camp to another. About1,000 in all survived until the Liberation.In Riga itself a few score survived in all kinds of hiding-places. Ahandful of Latvians had the moral strength to risk their own lives andsafeguard them and the places where they hid. The names and deeds ofthese rare persons have not yet been placed on record.It is a sacred duty to record, among the martyrs of the Riga Ghetto,those who took steps to organise resistance, to store arms, to train them-selves and to accumulate medicines and food for the rebels.Engineer Ovsei Okun of Dvinsk and Advocate Jacob Joelson of Rigawere among those who preached resistance and took the earliest steps.They were joined by some members of the “Ordnungsdienst” (GhettoPolice), Isaac Bag and the teacher Elijah Latt, Engineer M. Michelson, thelocksmith Botvinkin and others. With the assistance of Fisher, head of thegroup that worked in the “Pulverturm” Warehouse which contained theweapons the Germans had taken as spoils of war, they set out to stealmachine-guns, hand-grenades and sub-machine guns and transfer them tothe Ghetto in the boxes in which food was taken every morning to thegroups outside the Ghetto, and which were brought back empty in theevening. A hiding-place for the weapons was found in a bunker, a store-house was set up containing food, medicines, mattresses and water; anda cellar was occupied near an engineering workshop whose noise coveredthe sounds of the shots of those who were undergoing training.In the Camp there was a debate whether to remain on the spot andforcibly oppose the liquidation of the Ghetto, or to escape and join thePartisans. In October 1942, eleven men made their way eastward by lorryin order to join the Partisans. They ran into a Gestapo ambush whichopened fire on them. The Jews returned fire. Some were killed, othersescaped into the neighbouring forest. This was a warning to the Nazisthat the Jews had arms. Fisher, head of the group working at the Pulver-75The Jews in Latviaturm, was arrested soon after. All members of the Oidnungsdienst weresummoned to the Kommandatura (Headquarters) and accused of betrayingtheir trust, since they had not heard of the escape of persons bearingweapons. When they left the Commandatura and it was clear that they wereabout to be liquidated, they attacked their guards. Fire was opened and41 men were killed on the spot. As a result the autonomous administrationof the Small Ghetto was liquidated, and it was made part of the largerGhetto where the Jews of the Reich were held.Activities recommenced some time later. Cells were organised, eachconsisting of ten active members of the Underground, and disassembledarms were again smuggled in. Moshe Glaser was particularly active in ob-taining supplies from army stores. A mishap came about again when Da-mski, one of the survivors of the liquidated Ordnungsdienst, was foundin hiding. Once again there were arrests and investigations of a kind it isunnecessary to describe. The persons who had helped Damski to find ahiding-place were discovered and three men were killed, including WilliCohen and S. Machtus who were active in the Underground. In due coursethe Gestapo set hands on another survivor of the Ordnungsdienst, MosheIsraelovitch. After prolonged examination he revealed the hiding-place ofthe arms, foodstuffs, etc., prepared by the Underground. Following this,dozens of persons were arrested, including many active members of theResistance Movement.The arms cache was discovered when a young man of Riga namedHayyim Freidberg was arrested. He succeeded in getting away as soon ashe was detained. However, an order was issued that if he returned noharm would be done to him, and the entire Ghetto feared that there mightbe a new action if he did not return. He appeared on the scene after takingpoison. What caused him to return is not known. A physician summonedby the Gestapo succeeded in preventing his death. After two days ofquestioning the Gestapo came to the arms bunker. Everybody who hadany connection with the affair was liquidated. It is to be assumed that thebunker contained a list of members of the Underground.That was the end of the resistance in the Riga Ghetto. Although noactive steps were ever taken by it, the Underground Movement shows thefirm intentions and resolution of activists in the Ghettoes, particularly amongthe younger generation, under conditions of absolute destitution and in theabsence of all hope of rescue. They set out to protect their honour and notbe destroyed like sheep led to the slaughter.76Political, Social & Cultural LifeThe final destruction of Latvian Jewry marks the end of four hundredyears of history.However, in accordance with Jewish tradition it is customary not toclose with words of reproof and sorrow...It should be noted that Riga, the centre of Latvian Jewry, once againhas a Jewish population consisting of tens of thousands.Only a few formerly belonged to Latvian Jewry. Most of them comefrom various places in all parts of Russia.Will they also have a history of their own? Only time can show.77Isaac Maor (Meirson)THE COMMUNAL IMAGE OF LATVIAN JEWRYLATVIAN Jewry was a singular tribe. It continued within itself the best ofthe popular and community tradition of Russian Jewry, to which it belongeduntil 1918, when the independent Democratic Latvian Republic was estab-lished. It absorbed the cultural influence of Western Jewry which was soclose a neighbour; yet the assimilationist trend never took deep root there.In its spiritual life it combined the Lithuanian scholarly approach to Torahwith Habad Hassidim, the intellectualism of old-time Ashkenazic Jewry withthe ardour of the Safed Kabbalists, the spiritual Rabbinical aristocraticawareness with the simplicity of the Jewish masses, the yearnings for na-tional redemption with a revolutionary social ferment. There you wouldfind traditional piety and a secularist environment dwelling at ease together.The Jews of Latvia were not of a single kind from the social and eco-nomic viewpoint either. There was a recognizable social differentation amongthem, and they engaged in manifold and widely-differing crafts, trades andprofessions. Among them you would find merchants large, medium andsmall; industrialists and craftsmen of every kind; manual and skilled work-ers, clerks and members of the free professions.All these elements together, economic and spiritual alike, found fullexpression in the lively and active Jewish national community life and thegeneral political life of the Latvian Republic. There were political partiesof all the colours of the rainbow: Trade Unions and craftsmens’ associations;federations of merchants and industrialists, engineers, physicians, lawyers,students and high school pupils. There were teachers’ federations and cul-tural workers, scientists and artists, writers and journalists, actors andmusicians. There were youth movements of every kind—Scouts, Pioneers,political groupings, sports societies and cultural clubs. There was an exten-sive network of credit and consumer cooperatives, besides manifold societiesfor charity and aid. All of these derived from and set their stamp upon therich and colourful life of this community with its hundred thousand souls.Thousands of Jewish children attended Hebrew and Yiddish schools inaccordance with the Compulsory Free Education Law of the land, andthanks to the practice of national cultural autonomy. The Ministry of Educa-tion and Culture had special departments for the National Minorities: Jewish,Russian, German, Polish and Lithuanian. Each of these departments was78Political, Social & Cultural Lifedirected by members of the minority concerned. The activity of the JewishDepartment was very complicated on account of the language dispute be-tween the Yiddishists and the Hebraists. The extreme Yiddishists were mostaggressive and wished to eradicate the Hebrew schools. In this they wereassisted by the Bund, which was a Jewish section of the Latvian SocialDemocrat Party, and put pressure on the Social Democrats to adopt aresolution requiring all members of their party in the Seim (where they werethe largest single group) to vote against Hebrew schools.However, the Zionist Delegates in the Seim, consisting of Rabbi M.Nurock of the Mizrahi and Professor M. Laserson of the Zeirei Zion, to-gether with Yerahmied Vinnik, Zeirei Zion representative in the Riga Muni-cipality, came to the defence of the Hebrew schools and demanded equalrights for the two languages. The Latvian Socialists, who had enoughtroubles of their own, usually used to answer the Zionist Socialist leadersand Hebrew teachers more or less as follows: “You come to terms withour Jews of the Bund, and then we shall not interfere at all with yourprivate affairs...”On this question, however, it was easier to come to terms with the non-Jews than with their Jews... We used to answer the main argument of theBund, namely that Hebrew is a “clerical, bourgeois and reactionary lan-guage” by pointing out to the Social Democrats that this was the languageof Jewish workers in the Land of Israel and that thousands of Jewish parentsof the labouring classes in the Latvian Republic were accustomed to sendtheir children to Hebrew schools. In this quarrel of the languages theBundists and the Jewish Communists used to collaborate. However, thecommunal weight of the Communists was very small. The Latvian Com-munist Party, of which the Jewish Communists formed a Section, was quitea minor body, apart from being illegal. They operated under the labels ofCultural and Sports Societies, etc.The Zionists and protagonists of Hebrew stood firm, so the Hebrewschools grew, expanded and flourished. Yet apart from the extreme Yid-dishist attack the Hebrew Movement had to face another—that of theJewish assimilationists, who maintained schools in Russian and Germanfor Jewish children. However, in the final years of the Democratic Republic,shortly before the Fascist coup d’etat of 15th May, 1934, a law was issuedplacing Jewish schools conducted in other than the Jewish languages underthe authority of the specific Education Department whose language servedas language of instruction. Finally they were ordered to go over to thenational language of instruction, Latvian, to be included in the general school79The Jews in Latviasystem and the supervision of the Ministry of Culture. To be sure, thegeneral Latvian cultural level was too low to attract Jews or induce themto assimilate. In spite of this a number of Jewish foreign language schoolssubmitted to the order, in order not to have to go over to Hebrew or Yid-dish. This dispute came to an end with the destruction of Latvian democracy,while all the others were terminated by the destruction of the entire Jewishcommunity.The vital spirit in Hebrew education was the “Hamoreh” Federation,to which belonged teachers of various Zionist schools of thought amongwhom the supporters of Labour Eretz Israel were the most influential. Themost active of them was Z. Michelson (Michaeli); the martyred SamuelGram who was murdered by the Nazis in Riga, Zvi Maimon, Samuel Herr,J. H. Port and, of other Zionist groups: the martyred M. Latt, a Revisionistmurdered by the Nazis in Riga, Meir Weinberg, a Revisionist; Rabbi Levin,M. Breitbart, a General Zionist; and others.The Yiddish schools were organised chiefly by the “Tsentrale IddisheShul Organizatzia” (The Central Jewish School Organisation), known asCISHO. Participants in this organisation included Bundists, Folkists andsupporter of Communism. The active Folkists were Mendel Mark and hisbrother Yudel Mark the wellknown writer and philologist, who afterwardsmoved to Lithuania and headed the Yiddishist Gymnasium in Wilkomir.(Both brothers are now in U.S.A.) The active Bund members were IsraelBraun, Isaac Berz and his wife Bertha. Among other Yiddishists mentionshould be made of the two sisters Wolfson, Zadok Levin, Dr. B. Lifshitzand Joseph Fabricant.Apart from the Yiddish schools organised by the CISHO there wereothers, chiefly in the smaller towns, with a “synthetic” approach; meaningthat Yiddish was the language of instruction but Hebrew studies playeda prominent part. Hebrew was also taught in the CISHO schools but on avery minor scale. In addition there were the religious Yiddish schools of“Torah Vederech Eretz” under the influence and guidance of the AgudatIsrael; these being both Elementary and Secondary Schools. There were alsoreligious schools, in Hebrew known as “Hadarim Metukanim”, which wereelementary schools leading to the Tushiya Secondary Schools under Mizrahiinfluence. As remarked, all these schools operated within the setting ofnational cultural autonomy, which permitted freedom of educational trends.There were three central institutions in Riga where teachers were trained.These were: 1) The General Teachers’ Seminary founded by the JewishSection of the Ministry of Culture, headed by Zeev Polotzkoi, Assistant80mLeib ShalitWulf LuntzNathan Abraham Scheinessohn(1790-1860)Eliezer EttingenCommittee-member of “TheCommunity of Jews of Shlokdwelling in Riga”Jacob HindinJ. (Zhano) TronMax ScheinfeldMordechai NurokFIRST COMMITTEE OF THE “SOCIETY FOR THE DISSEMINATIONOF ENLIGHTMENT”, RIGA, 1898.Third from left: F. Mintz; at his right Leib Shalit; first from rightDr. M. Scheinfeld.Paul MintzWladimir MintzNahum MintzWmmmpip -iimgMttUnjust#* 3 m;Is .*js sm*GREAT SYNAGOGUE IN GOGOL STR , RIGA (1871)I’fy.l. A/V;JEWISH DELEGATESFROM KURLANDDr. Nissan Katznelson1st DumaJacob Shapiro2nd DumaTO THE RUSSIANPARLIAMENTS(“DUMA”). (1906-1917)Lazar Nisselovitch3rd DumaDr. Ezekiel Gurevitch4th DumaMax Laserson Noah Maisel Jacob HoffmanWulf Latzky-Bertholdy Isaac Jaffe Hermann WassermanRabbi Abraham Isaac Kook Rabbi Meir Simcha Cohen Rabbi Joseph Rosen(Gaon of Rogatchov)Rabbi Mendel Zack Mordechai Dubin Shimon WittenbergRabbi Levi Ovchinsky Rabbi Ben-Zion Dan-Jahia Baruch Leib Rosowsky[1“033 p"!X\ btw jwdt tt'ysi miss rrWr* ns Ssnv nbrrp nsSo a'aiSy ns Kbn vs prims nsv n-yans ««fcSnn am pi rtb nu>K Snn nSsan n'ss yiap -nsa nSv ns-nss rrjsb psbrrrpva , Shi puna prams ns nsboi epn Sa pnnoyo by may nny nyi. nnrnu n nsn»ai rranospop mya bbaoi rrs'nn 'JsS navy pmK saoi ftp obv nn — hjv o'yans”iis~I'ri niaSS vrt a'jSH , aryls'-? m ombmr . nyiai nav baa bsnvSs yimS a'sa am ~n nn nsaa , annb' 'ana , am ns -nyi t nnavanScnn -noyi lponsrsn mt a —ry, inn Ski 'ponKiKi pna 'bn nbsnrrarrnva hits ht D'Tinsi a'pisn arny anr'va numn 'ivh nman n'ssn'yjbr pSipS 3'iyprrS isnSsn nn nnvo u'aon niv a'ysns . nbnsa—I'aan pntaSj, D,Layjn p’nurnyaS rtmm , maab ninpibn p'nnarSiSs a'yisivm nyrt aS ns anpta n"n ,pa psnn ann nayn aSS -tin'Sir-Sayi pisa |r-man ntSi Ss-vv niSsn nn ns onS nnotoi niSgnnnm -pry, mnswHi mSnnn Sy vbjtt niobnmi vnp nnnn nuynU'TTiSsn Sa Sy mS'SSi trmp nrni D’junnn Syi nrypan Sy nsai innvrtp rtnav 'ysn mss .awa mSo nann nr i:S mas niymo — iruimnnmy mSySn mSyi jniynn Trisai sni -tyin 'O'a p'ynryb nSnn nanyjiprsa 'a's! yvs nnsai |iy nrfSa arts iypaS tsb uSsnn nv>s a’o’s aaban-nnnS b'“it n'n'sp pS nnn3'SS?-nnm anSsn nm uny -3s nm ns pnnS's (mp'nyrt irmSsn ns pa vabnS Sin nnm pS nnpS sS, anannv nvs n’-oyn m'vn mpo yan rm psnpa nvs mirn abn snpovmp : ]9jn 'siya psn 'aiya n:"nn pnS , n'niSsn Sy nm rraya rmis• ymsn vnpi nanpnaa nnsi n-rjpT ’»,La py'snS nsiuS p'nSs n pn'nm nvs mnsiunit* rr:rr; njroiO mymprt pmosyn Sy mnyS nny pnss rsiSnpS n'3'vpianr unjs .Snjrr psimva 'S'nyai pnv 'Siyin t p'npioa'jv mmiyy Mt p'mmsivi p'ninsT p'nrsSn maS a'rtsnn ,p'3i3“ipnar 'a(rrTrr ai'a nama pS b'Kvut isaaS 'pnyts unmn pS a'anpamnsS pSm marya '.n' pSipi nap nns nvs Saa naioS aSiy pSn,0'ia’ mapsm aiua n'Sn n"ni, aSo nans nvS p'nsS a’nnn myvta^vS n"iS, asrmiayS anna avya nitii-i p'j'y vmJl 1 -V\ i^UU'*> j * r • ft a . y * y-v"■* ¥fllg(, l S /(. [t/r eP ' ®Ur>'V /Vy/’/'/V/J/V?//*^M// ^ -;r m f * ^A^5>Stttt ^ -" fmtWfiVA/rJ'?*fv Vv fjiAddress of honour to Cantor B. L. Rosovsky on his seventeenth birthday afterforty years of service as Cantor of the Congregation. Presented by the Communityof Riga, 5th Kislev 5672 (26 November 1911).BIKKUR-HOLIM HOSPITAL IN RIGATHE SONS OF SHLOMO SHALITSeated r. to L: Elijahu, Zalman, Mordechai.Standing r. to L: Lipman, Tuvia, Nachman.Abraham SobolevitchUlrich MilmanRudolf KaplanPolitical, Social & Cultured LifeDirector of the Department of Culture; 2) The (Yiddish) Teachers’ Seminaryof the CISHO; 3) The Froebel School of Kindergartners, established bythe Hamoreh Federation. This school was headed by Z. Michelson.IIReligious and secular leaders, renowned scholars and sages, dwelt amongLatvian Jewry. Here let us mention great Torah scholars such as theworld-famous Rabbi Reb Meir Simha, author of the work “Or Sameah”(Joyous Light) and Rabbi Joseph Rosen the Gaon of Rogatchov, authorof “Tsafenat Paaneah” (Interpreter of Secrets) both of whom dwelt inDvinsk, a city and mothefl in Israel. Then there were the rabbis of theancient Don Yahia family, whose ancestors had come from Spain andPortugal and who lived in Lutzin: Rabbi Eleazar of blessed memory fol-lowed by his martyred son Rabbi Ben Zion, who was tortured and mur-dered by the Nazis. Both of them wrote and published commentaries andnovellae on the Shulhan Arukh. There was the martyred Rabbi Zack, ChiefRabbi of Riga, who was also tortured and murdered by the Nazis. In Mitau,the capital of Kurland, lived Rabbi Levi Ovchinsky, who published a valu-able work on the history of the rabbis of Kurland. For several years RabbiJoseph Isaac Schneurson of Lubavitch also lived in Riga before transferringhis seat to the United States. Here as elsewhere he had his following ofthousands of Habad Hassidim. Last but by no means least was RabbiAbraham Isaac Hacohen Kook of blessed and saintly memory, former ChiefRabbi of the Land of Israel, who spent several years in Kurland as Rabbiof Bausk.Of the secular scholars and spiritual leaders mention should be madeof the writer and communal worker Z. Latski-Bertholdy; The leading JewishCommunist writer and publicist Dr. M. Schatz-Anin; Professor P. M. Mintz,who lectured on Criminal Law at the Riga University; Professor AsherGuliak, author of “The Foundations of Jewish Law,” who lectured on Jew-ish History at the Teachers’ Seminary in Riga and was afterwards Professorof Jewish Law at the Hebrew University; Professor Max Matatiahu Laser-son, who published many outstanding works on the Theory of the Stateand the Philosophy of Law; Professor Zentnerschwer, who was Professor ofChemistry at the Riga University; Professor Pereferkovitch, who translatedthe Mishna into Russian; Dozent Weintraub, Instructor in Philosophy andLogic. For some time the Jewish Sociologist Jacob Lestchinsky also livedin Riga. The famous Lawyer O. O. Gruzenberg, who defended MendelBeiliss in the Russian Blood Libel Case shortly before the First World War,81The Jews in Latviaalso lived for several years in Riga and took a very active part in Jewishcommunal life. Last of all, the martyred historian Professor Simon Dubnowspent his last years in Riga and wrote his reminiscences there, being mur-dered by the Nazis.Famous artists and musicians also came from Latvian Jewry. To men-tion only a few: Marc Lavry the composer and conductor; the composerand musicologist. Professor Salomon Rosowsky, son of the famous CantorBaruch Rosowsky, at one time Director of the Jewish Peoples’ Conservatoirein Riga; and two outstanding pupils of Cantor Rosowsky, who afterwardsbecame world-famous singers; Hermann Jadlowker the Tenor, and JosephSchwartz the Baritone.The following played a leading part in the Jewish press: Dr. Jacob Hell-man; Yerahmiel Vinnik; Z. Latski-Bertholdy; Tanhum Eidus; Michael Kitai;M. Gertz-Mowshovitz, who wrote a volume on “Twenty-Five Years of theJewish Press in Latvia”; also Mikhail Yo the painter and art critic.Naturally this is not a full list of all those whose names deserve specialmention, yet even the brief list given here indicates the spiritual image andcultural quality of Latvian Jewry.Mention should also be made of the part played by the various clubsin fostering cultural life. Some of them enjoyed Government support. Thosein Riga included: The General Jewish Club, whose building served for per-formances by the Peoples’ Jewish Theatre and public meetings of the variousparties; The Peretz Club of the Bund; the Kultur Liga, which was Com-munist-orientated and had a like-minded students’ organisation, the Akade-misher Farein; The Bialik Club of the Zeirei Zion with its outstandingOratorio Choir, directed by Abramis; the Brenner Club of the Z.S., whichmerged with the Bialik Club when the two Zionist Socialist Parties unitedin January 1931.The Zionist House in Riga was a large club at 11, Merkelia (PauluzziStreet) which played a part like No. 10 Meinecke Str. in Berlin, and wasthe initial centre for all the Zionist Institutions: The Jewish National Fund,Keren Hayesod, Palestine Office, etc. But in due course these grew largerand established offices of their own. The building served whenever necessaryas a home for any Zionist Party or Youth Organisation which neededquarters.IllThe Jewish political parties engaged in their activities not only in theJewish community but also in the elected institutions of the State and the82Political, Social & Cultural LifeMunicipalities. When the establishment of the Republic was proclaimed in1918, and the provisional legislative body, the National Council, was consti-tuted (it was not elected), Jewish representatives from all the existent poli-tical trends entered it. The Constituent Assembly which was elected in 1920had a smaller representation of Jewish parties since they did not all gainrepresentatives. In the Seim, the permanent legislative body, the number ofJewish parties decreased even more. Those represented were the AgudatIsrael; Bund; Mizrahi; and Zeirei Zion.Most of the Jewish population of Latvia were Zionist, but this stateof affairs was not fully reflected in the political representation; for in theelections to state and municipal institutions the Jewish citizen was mostlyswayed not by ideological considerations but by practical daily needs. Forexample, in political elections the Agudat Israel gained more votes thanthe other parties, relatively speaking. Those unfamiliar with the conditionsand character of the community might mistakenly suppose that the Agudawas the strongest political group. In actual fact, however, it was not apolitical party in the ordinary sense of the word. The Agudat Israel ofLatvia shared little more than the name with that party as it functionedin other countries of the Exile. Its communal weight was not considerable,but the personal activities of its chief representative, Mordechai Dubin,were largely directed to the daily requirements of the average Jew. Thanksto his personal popularity he was elected for two different Districts, Rigaand Latgale. During the early years he turned the second seat over to hiscomrade R. Wittenberg of Dvinsk, who was not particularly outstandingeither spiritually or as a man of action. In due course Simeon Wittenbergof the Zeirei Agudat Israel in Riga was chosen as the second representative.He was a talented lawyer with an excellent general education, who set outto give his party a political-clerical character and to introduce the practicesof the World Agudat Israel into the communal life of Latvian Jewry aswell. He was not particularly successful under the Democracy, but thesituation changed entirely after the Fascist coup d'etat. We shall refer tothis in greater detail below. The martyred Simeon Wittenberg is known tohave perished in tragic circumstances in the Nazi Concentration Camp atStuttgart.While most of Latvian Jewry were deeply rooted in popular traditionalJudaism, they had no particular interest as a general rule in any politicalreligious Movement. For the reasons above, however, even non-religiousJews used to vote for the Aguda representatives. In really they voted notfor the party but for its representative, Dubin. He was a Habad Hassid83The Jews in Latviaand a timber merchant by profession. He was a typical faithful popularShtadlan (Intercessor) who made no distinction between one Jew and an-other, treated them all as equals and was not concerned whether the manhe helped had voted for him or not. He would do his best to free a youngJew arrested for illegal Communist activities, just as he saw to it that Jewishsoldiers should be given leave for Jewish festivals. He would try to obtaina permit for a flax merchant, demand Government support for synagoguesor Yeshivot, or would vote in the Seim for a Government grant to theJewish Theatre. In his “political” alignment, if he had any such thing,Dubin went his own way. He regularly and systematically supported theRight Wing in the Seim, arguing more or less as follows: The Socialistshave to support the Jews anyway according to their programme, but theRight Wing have to be kept on friendly terms so that they should not harmus... After the Fascist coup d'etat on 15th May, 1934, when Karl Ulmanis,leader of the Conservative Peasant Society, became a dictator, the latterremembered the past kindnesses of Mordechai Dubin and appointed him“leader” for Jewish Affairs.Dubin continued to engage in Shtadlanut under the new conditions, andentrusted all communal affairs, particularly culture, education and schools,to the young men of the Agudat Israel. These abandoned all communalfairness, exploited their preferential position and wrought havoc in thesecular school system. They compelled the teachers to wear skull-caps, anddismissed those who refused, declaring that any teacher with liberal viewswas unsuitable for the Fascist Authorities. Incidentally, they prohibited theteaching of Bialik and Jewish history according to Dubnow in the schools.At the same time Dubin, in accordance with his own practice, saw to it thatthe dismissed Jewish teachers all received compensation or regular pensions.In 1940 Dubin was arrested by the Russians. He was released in duecourse and continued to deal with communal matters, baking Matzot anddealing with the affairs of the Hevra Kadisha Burial Society. He was there-fore re-arrested and died in a Concentration Camp. In spite of all difficultieshe held firm and fast to his principles, remaining Orthodox and observingall commandments until the last moments of his life.Rabbi Mordechai Nurock, head of the Mizrahi, was a communal leaderof quite a different type. The Mizrahi in Latvia was also hardly a masspolitical movement; although its representatives, unlike those of the Aguda,supported the communal democratic tradition of the World Zionist Move-ment. Many voted for the Mizrahi list largely because they so esteemed thepersonality of Rabbi Nurock. He was the son of an outstanding family in84Political, Social & Cultural LifeKurland that belonged to the Rabbinical family Lichtenstein, the son of theRabbi of Mitau, capital of Kurland, enjoyed an extensive Jewish and generaleducation and was popular among Baltic Jewry. As a modern member ofParliament in every sense of the world (he was a Delegate to the Inter-national Congress of Minorities) he was also highly respected by non-Jewishcircles. In the Seim he usually supported the Democratic and Left Wing,and every combination of a Leftist and Liberal Coalition took him intoaccount. For many years Rabbi Nurock was Chairman of the Keren Ha-yesod Centre in Riga, and he was constantly returned as a Latvian Delegateto Zionist Congresses.Apart from Rabbi Nurock, the active leaders of the Mizrahi includedhis brother. Rabbi Dr. Aaron Nurock of Libau, who was also a Seimmember for some time; Rabbi Ben Zion Don Yahya of Lutzin; MosheWeinberg; Menahem Mendel Gor; Hayyim Yaffe; Rabbi Zeev Arie Rab-biner; and Reuven Hovsha. Sympathisers with the Mizrahi included the well-known industrialist Abraham Sobolevitch, a man of outstanding qualities,a philanthropist, Keren Hayesod leader and head of several charitablesocieties.There were two Jewish Socialists in the Seim: Professor Max MatatiahuLaserson of the Zeirei Zion (whose representative in the Constituent As-sembly had been Dr. Jacob Heilman) and Dr. Noah Maisel of the Bund.They were elected by the Jews of Latgale, the easternmost province ofLatvia, which contained most of the poor and toiling Jews. Naturally theywere both included in any Left-wing Coalition, but waged a harsch com-munal struggle with one another, chiefly with regard to Hebrew schools.About this we have written above.However, there were also occasions when all the Jewish delegates inthe Seim united together. This happened whenever the Antisemitic partiestried to restrict the rights of the Jewish minority or their representativesspoke against the Jews. At such times all the Jews rose as one man to repelthe attack, and each hit back in his own style.The Jewish Seim delegates mostly spoke only on Jewish questions, butProfessor Laserson, as an expert on International Law, also used to parti-cipate in general discussions, and would sometimes address Plenary Sessionson behalf of the Legal Commission.The Bund, as already remarked, was organised as a section of the Lat-vian Social Democrat Party. In spite of this it was fully involved in Jewishlife and was very active among the Jewish workers. At the same time italways did its best, in accordance with long-established Bundist practice, to85The Jews in Latviaappear as “the only representative of the Jewish Proletariat.” This monopolywas not unsuccessfully contested by the Zionist Socialist Movement, ofwhich more will be told below. The Bund had their Youth Organisationand the “Zukunft” Student Organisation. Apart from Dr. N. Maisel thefollowing were among the outstanding leaders: In Riga I. Rabinovitz wasa Delegate to the Latvian Constituent Assembly and an active TradeUnionist. Engineer Isaac Berz, Head of the Yiddishist Gymnasium, wasalso a Delegate to the Constituent Assembly. The teacher Israel Braun wasthe brother of an Underground leader known as “Sergei” in the days of theTsar. In Dvinsk were P. Meiksin and the journalist Isaac Levin-Shatzkes.In Libau there was the teacher Alkishik, Bann and the Dentist Berzner.The leaders of the Youth and Students’ Organisation were Moshe Dribin,Isaac Seligmann and Jungelson.IVYet political activity was only part of the communal life of LatvianJewry. As remarked, the Jewish population was largely Zionist. The Zionistparties engaged in widespread and continuous activities on behalf of theNational Funds. The Labour Eretz Israel Movement also worked for His-tadrut institutions in Eretz Israel. Shekel-selling and Congress elections en-gaged thousands of Jews in every town and village, while Halutz trainingabsorbed hundreds of youngsters of both sexes and all Zionist currents.As a rule representatives of all groups were elected to the Zionist Con-gresses : Mizrahi, General Zionists, Socialist Zionists, Revisionists and laterthe Jewish State Party (the Grossmanists) which was small and had littlecommunal influence.The General Zionists were almost all Progressives of Group A. Theywere headed by Eliezer Ettingen, representative of the Shell Company inLatvia, who virtually maintained the party he represented. The GeneralZionists gave the Movement a group of active and faithful leaders, someof whom we mention here: Advocate Z. Tron, Delegate to the LatvianConstituent Assembly and for many years Chairman of the Latvian JewishNational Fund Centre; Dr. J. Jaffe, Director of the Jewish “Bikkur Holim”Hospital; Dr. H. Wassermann, head of the Society for Art and Science andfounder of the Riga Hebrew Gymnasium; Mr. Payenson, Chairman of theEretz Israel Office, and Mr. Scheinberg, its long-standing Secretary; Dr.Raik, member of the Eretz Israel Office; the well known merchant MendelLulov, supporter of Hehalutz and Labour Eretz Israel, with Mrs. Lulovwho also actively supported Hehalutz and the League for Labour Eretz86Political, Social Sc Cultural LifeIsrael; Mr. Finkelman, veteran worker for the Jewish National Fund, firstin Dvinsk and later in Riga; Zalman Rabinovitch; Dr. Abraham Salkind;Professor Benjamin Sieff, the wellknown publicist and economist, who after-wards lectured at the High School of Law and Economics in Tel-Aviv;Schechter the Hebrew teacher, a veteran Latvian Zionist; the veteran Zion-ist Abraham Groys, Hayyim Joseph Gordon, Hayyim Tov; and of theyounger men who were active in the Herziia Zionist Youth and the HehaverStudents Organisation — Dr. J. Shraga and Advocate Boris Gurevitch. Lastof all, the Zionist “patriarch” and honorary chairman of National ZionistConventions, Rabbi Naphtali Levin of Lutzin, who came to Eretz Israeland lived with his grandson in Kvutza Kinneret, where he passed away ata ripe old age.The Wizo and Young Wizo Organisations did a great deal for the Na-tional Funds, and many of the members of Young Wizo came to EretzIsrael. Among their leading figures mention should be made of Mrs. J.Friedlaender, Mrs. Raissa Rabinovitz, Mrs. Rachel Pernik, Mrs. R. Wein-berg, Mrs. Lydia Dolgitzer and Mrs. J. Genin.The visit paid by Zeev Jabotinsky to Riga in 1923 led to the foundationin Latvia of the Zionist Revisionist Party and the Betar Youth Movement.(This was the first branch in the world.) The Revisionists were headed byDr. Jacob Hoffman, a very active and faithful Zionist. Together with himwere A.B. Gamzu of Lutzin, Elhanan Halperin, M. Sussman, A. Crystaland others. For several years there lived in Riga and worked on the edi-torial staff of “Dos Folk”, with Z. Latzki-Bertholdy, the well-known jour-nalist Dr. Joseph Schechtman, companion and follower of Zeev Jabotinsky,who in due course became the representative of the Revisionists in thehighest institutions of the Zionist Organisation.The Betar Organisation gathered its own dedicated and active Zionistyouth. Among its leaders mention should be made of Aaron Propes, En-gineer Michelson, Advocate M. Joelson, M. Zelikovitch, M. Gold, Z. Le-venberg, A. Dissentchik, B. Lubotzky (now Benjamin Eliav), Nathan Michlinand D. Wahrhaftig. Throughout the years of its existence the Latvian Betarmaintained an agricultural training farm. Special mention should be madeof their marine training ship. They acquired the “Theodor Herzl” of 300tons with the assistance of the “Yacht Club” and the contributions ofRudolf Kaplan, owner of the Delka Textile Factory in Riga; and they gavemarine training to scores of youngsters.The Revisionist Party, together with its youth movements of Betar andthe Hashmonai Students Cooperation, was a very active Zionist group87The Jews in Latviaindeed; and this was reflected in the elections to Zionist Congresses. Forsome time they issued their own newspaper, “Qvent-Post”, which was closedat the time of the Fascist coup d’etat.When the Revisionist Party split a “Grossmanist” Group was establishedin Riga and headed by Nahum Moskowsky. Its active leaders includedMoshe Cohen. Both of them had formerly been members of the Zeirei Zion.The largest and strongest Zionist Party, which operated in all fields ofcommunal and political life, was the United Zionist Socialist Party (ZeireiZion — Z.S.). It received a relative majority in all elections for ZionistCongresses.The Zeirei Zion Party in Riga was founded as a “Peoples’ Fraction”as early as 1912 by Zeev Levenberg, a delegate to the Zionist Congressbefore the First World War, Hadassah Schneurson-Litwin and Abba Kar-nibad.When the Latvian Republic was established the Zeirei Zion becameone of the leading parties of the Jewish Community. Apart from Dr. JacobHeilman and Professor Max Laserson who have already been mentioned,the party had a number of active members who left their impression inevery field of communal life. The chairman of the Central Committee wasEngineer Mendel Bobe, one of the leading workers for the Kupat Holimof Riga, who was also active in Credit Cooperatives and the Clerks’ Union.Other active members included: the gifted journalist Yerahmiel Vinnik; hiswife, nee Rivka Rasby; the teacher Zvi Gorfinkel; Judah Yatskan and hiswife Zosia nee Wittenberg (who perished under the Nazis); Meir Zieglerand his wife Rivka nee Meirson, who also perished under the Nazis; Ad-vocate Philip Latzki who was a Delegate at the National Council; SussmanGalle who perished under the Nazis; the teacher Z. Michelson and hisbrother Zvi Michelson; Dr. Z. Gordin, a member of the Dvinsk Municipa-lity who was active in the OZE; the pharmacist Feibush Riebush ofRezhitza; Engineer Zalman Chanutin; Judah Jaffe who was engaged inthe Credito Cooperation of Dvinsk; Isaac Weisspap and Antonovsky ofLutzin; Leib Tagger, one of the founders of the journal “Unser Weg”;Moshe Gerson, a founder of the Hashahar Student Society; the PharmacistBer Levin; the publisher Moshe Lvovitch; Joseph Krupkin, Vice-Chairmanof the Eretz Israel Office in Riga; the Dentist Dr. Zvi Liknaitsky. Hehalutzleaders included Moshe Levius and Jacob Seltzer; Ezekiel Magidson andBaruch Cohen, both of Libau; Dr. Zeev Merlin, Zalman Etkin, etc.The Zeirei Zion played a large part in setting up the general Jewishpress in Latvia. In addition the Party published the Zionist daily “Unser88Political, Social & Cultural LifeWeg” whose chief editor was Dr. Jacob Heilman while the Editorial Secret-ary was Moshe Schattenstein.The Z.S. Party was founded in 1922 from the left wing of the ZeireiZion after the split in that party. The first group was established a yearearlier in Dvinsk on the initiative of Samuel Sragovitch, but the party beganto operate on a countrywide scale only shortly after the split. It expandedactivities following the arrival of Dr. V. Adler from Russia. (In 1929 hereceived a visa to visit his family in Moscow and stayed there. In 1939 welearnt that he was no longer alive.)The members of the last Central Committee before the Union with theZeirei Zion were I. Meirson (Maor), Chairman; Engineer Joshua Hayyimo-vitch. Secretary; Jacob Shlez; Engineer Abraham Ribovsky, who was activein the ORT; the teacher J.H. Port; Agronom Arieh Liak; Dr. AbrahamLiak the lawyer; the teacher Moshe Bliach; Dr. Shneour Levenberg. Activemembers were: Dr. M. Zand, member of the Dvinsk Municipality; and inLibau Moshe Elkes, Engineer P. Leviatan and the brothers Eidelman.Among other founders mention should also be made of Zalman Slivkin andAlta Rachman.The Z.S. party succeeded in bringing to the Halutz Movement largegroups of working and studying youth who had formerly been far fromZionism. It also brought in Jewish workers and working intelectuals. Therepresentatives of the party were actively engaged in Hehalutz, in ZionistInstitutions, Trade Unions, Municipalities and Jewish Communities. A Zion-ist Socialist Youth Organisation known as “Z.S. Jugendverband (Noar Bo-rochow)” was organised by the Party. Its active members included: AlterGoldman, Nathan Neishul, Abraham Burstein, Arie Liak, Simeon Draznin,Naphtali Joel, Moshe Schwalb, Zvi Chernobrod, and Dr. Maharik. Mentionshould also be made of some of the active female members: Golda Pitke-vitch, Luba Levi and Bella Liak. Special mention should be made of HaverMinkov (Hayyim Leib).After the union between the two Labour parties Ahdut Haavoda andHapoel Hatzair and the establishment of Mapai in Eretz Israel in 1930, thetwo Latvian Zionist Socialist parties were the first to unite in the Diaspora.The Union Conference met in Riga in January 1931 and set up the UnitedZionist Socialist Party. This union aroused a considerable echo in localJewish life and many young working and studying Jews joined on thatoccasion.Zionist Socialist youth was organised in three groups: The HashomerHatzair (NETSAH, initials of Noar Tsofi Halutzi, Pioneer Scout Youth);89The Jews in LatviaNoar Borochow (Z.S. Yugent); and Gordonia. There was also the “Hasha-har” Zionist Socialist Students* Federation. Many members of the LatvianHashomer Hatzair are to be found in kibbutzim: Abraham Ettingen; MosheAverbuch; A. Pruver; Eliezer Drobish; Moshe Tel-Tsur; etc. Special men-tion should be made of Sioma Sheinkman, who drowned in Lake Kinneretshortly after his arrival in Eretz Israel. Most of the Gordonia members areto be found in Mishmarot, others in Geva. Active Hashahar members nowin Tel-Aviv include Immanuel Glickman and his wife Etia Gamosh; BaruchBag; Judge Eleazar Selikson; Joshua Hayyimovitch; etc. The Hashaharrepresentative on the Riga University Students’ Council was Dr. ShneourLevenberg, now at the head of the Jewish Agency Offices in London.The United Party Central Committee organised all the Zionist SocialistYouth Movements in a single Federation and ensured friendly relations andcooperation between them. Representatives of the Youth Organisations at-tended meetings of the Party Central Committee in an advisory capacity.As remarked, the Zionist Socialist Party faced the severe public com-petition of the Bund, in both the Jewish and general Socialist Movements;for the Bund lost no opportunity of impugning the Socialism of Zionistsin the eyes of the Latvian Socialists. Yet in spite of the ideological andpolitical contests between the two parties, animosity was absent between theirmembers. Indeed, there were cases of personal friendship. The same maybe said regarding the other communal currents in Latvian Jewry; an indica-tion of their cultural level.Both sections of the Poalei Zion were also found in Riga. They weresmall groups of no particular public weight. The Left-wing Poalei Zion wereheaded by Moshe Herzbach. The members of this group did not participatein any Zionist activity, but were close to the Jewish Communists. At firstthey collaborated with the latter in the Kultur Liga. Later they set uptheir own Club called “Licht” (Light), but merged with the Communists indue course.The Right-wing Poalei Zion were a very small group. When this partyjoined the Z.S. in Vienna in 1925, the veteran Hebrew teacher Samuel Herrjoined the Z.S. Central Committee as their representative.To round off this description of community activity, mention shouldbe made of two other groups which, to be sure, were not large-scale politicalmovements; but they were important on account of the personalities thatheaded them. These were the National Democrats, and the members of theFolks-Partei. The former consisted largely of the leaders of the “Societyfor the Dissemination of Culture (AFE)”, and were non-Zionists. At first90Political, Social & Cultural Lifethey were openly anti-Zionist, but during the final years they also workedfor the Land of Israel and even supported the Training Centres. In Rigathis Society maintained not only an excellent Vocational Training Schoolin Riga but also a Training Farm for agriculture, almost all of whose stu-dents were members of Hehalutz. They were trained by expert agronomists.The leaders of the National Democrats were: Jacob Landau, Director ofthe Jewish Department at the Ministry of Culture; L. Fishman, who was aDelegate to the Constituent Assembly and the first Seim; Professor P.M.Mintz; the banker Lebstein, who represented the non-Zionists on the KerenHayesod. The “Vetulia” Students Cooperation was associated with them.The members of the Folks-Partei were not all ideologically akin. Amongthem were avowed Yiddishists who stood firmly in the anti-Zionist camplike the CISHO Group; and as against them stood a man like Latzki-Bertholdy, once a leader of the S.S., the companion and disciple of NahmanSyrkin. Long before he went to Eretz Israel he had virtually joined theLabour Eretz Israel Movement, and was a member of the Jewish Agencyas a non-Zionist. When he came to Eretz Israel he joined Mapai.Among other Folks-Partei leaders in Riga mention should be made ofZalman Levitas, who was engaged with the ORT, and the journalist Dimant-stein of Rezhitsa.Other non-party communal workers were wellknown in the city, aswell as various party men who chose themselves special fields of activity.Particular mention should be made of: Engineer Abraham Wolf son, a gen-eral Socialist worker who was one of the leaders of the Sick Fund andactively engaged in the Trade Union Movement; S. Schmuelson, a SickFund leader from the Bund who had a poetic soul and tried his hand atliterary work, translating into Yiddish Alexander Blok’s “Twelve”, someof Krillov’s Fables and passages from the children’s books of Chukovsky;Dr. Boris Lifshitz, a Social Democrat, formerly a member of the “Iskra”Group, who worked for the Sick Fund, gradually came over to the ideaof Eretz Israel and in 1929 visited the country together with Yanis Reims,the Social Democrat Minister of Education who was the great poet of theLatvian People; Dr. S. Lipshitz whose field was Credit Cooperation and whois now a Director of the Ford Company in Israel; Advocate Libenson ofthe Bund who was dedicated to the ORT; Dr. B. Herzfeld, a non-ZionistKeren Hayesod supporter, and Director of the Linat Hatzedek CommunalMaternity Hospital; Dr. J. Eliasberg of the Bund, Physician and supporter ofthe communal Sick Fund; Dr. B. Dubinsky of Left-wing circles. Chairmanof the OZE Society; Dr. Shabtai Kramer, one of the founders of the Sick91The Jews in LatviaFund for Industrial and Commercial Workers (a general public institutionwith a Jewish character) and its Head Physician; Dr. H. Tsivian, who re-placed him after his death. However, we shall be doing far less than ourduty if we do not particularly mention the outstanding and exceedinglywealthy philanthropist E. Mushkat, whose heart and hand were open toevery Zionist and Hebrew cultural activity, and who was a faithful friendof the Halutz Movement.VIn its public life Latvin Jewry was not isolated or self-enclosed. It wasin close touch with World Jewry through the representatives it sent to WorldJewish gatherings and the visits made by leaders, emissaries, writers andpoets. Riga was frequently visited by outstanding writers and thinkers, to-gether with other cities of Latvia. Those who came included: Ch. N. Bialik;Saul Tscheraichovsky; the Yiddish writer David Bergelson on his way toRussia; the poet David Hofstein on his way to Eretz Israel, though he after-wards returned to USSR; the poet Itzik Manger; Dr. Hayyim Zhitlovsky;the Hebrew and Yiddish writer Z. Anochi. Then came the leading figuresof the Jewish Scientific Institute IVO, the philologists Dr. Max Weinreichand the martyred Z. Kalmanovitch, who was murdered by the Nazis; R.Abramovitch, leader of the Russian Social Democrats and the Bund; Dr.Syngalowsky, a leader of the ORT; and others. Riga was also the firststation of Habima, the Hebrew National Theatre, on its way from Russiato Eretz Israel. Its performances were a national festival for Latvian Jewryand a deep experience for the actors, who came into close touch with aZionist public and youth here for the first time.Latvian Jewry also warmly welcomed the leaders of the Zionist Move-ment when they came to Riga on various missions. Among them were:Menahem Ussishkin, Berl Katnelson, Hayyim Arlosoroff; Zeev Jabotinsky;Rabbi Meir Berlin (Bar-Ilan); Leib Jaffe; Alexander Goldstein; ShlomoKaplansky; David Remez; David Ben-Gurion; Zalman Rubashov (Shazar);Eliezer Kaplan; Meir Grossman; Baruch Zuckerman; Isaac Gruenbaum;Professor Selig Brodetzky; Kurt Blumenfeld; Nathan Bistritzky; Levi Shkol-nik (Eshkol); Engineer J. Friedland of Haifa; the writer S. Zemach; NahumVerlinsky; Dr. Arie Tartakover; Joshua Manoah; Gershon Hanoch; A. I.Juris, etc.Those who visited Latvia on behalf of the Labour and Halutz Move-ment included: Ada Fishman (Maimon); Isaac Tabenkin; Joseph Baratz;Aaron Zisling; Eshed (Eisenberg); Engineer Anshel Reiss; Z. Feinstein92Political, Social <& Cultural Life(Shefer); Nahum Ben An; David Sverdlov; Zifroni of Ayelet Hashahar;and others. Persons who passed through Riga on the way from Russia toEretz Israel included Eliahu Epstein (Eilat) who was afterwards IsraelAmbassador in London; and Zalman Aharonovitch (Aranne, afterwardsMinister of Education and Culture in Israel).Emissaries of the Histadrut to Hehalutz and the Zionist Youth whostayed in Latvia a longer time included the following members of Afikim:Eleazar Galili; Joseph Yisraeli; Arieh Golani and Arieh Bahir. Others wereZeev Shaaref (now a Minister in the Israel Government); Moshe ben-Ellulwho came from Riga and is now a member of the Davar editorial staff;Pesah Gamadi (Krollik, now on the Histadrut Central Committee); DavidHagai of Mishmarot, originally a member of Gordonia in Latvia; and others.In these few pages we have not given a detailed description of thecommunal and political life of Latvian Jewry. We have only sketched afew characteristics showing the spiritual and public image of a single tribein Israel which was not very large in numbers but had a rare quality, anobility of spirit, wealth of culture and ample activities.We have mentioned only those whose names came to mind while wewere writing. There are certainly a great many more who deserve to bementioned, among both those who are now living in Israel and the Diasporaand those who have passed away.We have done our best to describe the activities and essential characterof all communal and political currents without discrimination. If we havededicated rather too much space here to Zionist Socialism, it was not be-cause of any intention to make the others appear less important. This, itshould be remembered, is only a brief collection of memories. It is onlynatural that details about the group he himself belonged to should beengraved most deeply in the memory of the writer.93Professor Max Matatyahu LasersonTHE JEWS AND THE LATVIAN PARLIAMENT, 1918-1934Note: Professor M. Laserson was a Member of the First, Second, and ThirdLatvian Seims, In addition to the sources listed in the course of this essay,the author made use of the following Minutes :1. Minutes of the National Council — Latvijas Tautas Padome.2. Minutes of the Constituent Assembly — Satversmes Sapulce.3. Minutes of the Four Seims.L THE NATIONAL COUNCIL(November 1918—April 1920)THE first period of Latvia’s independent existence was not a convenientone for any open efforts of the Jewish minority to ensure its rights.Enemy forces had not yet left the country. They continued to threatenthe independence of the youthful State, and hence the time was not yet ripefor the preparation of an organic Constitution. On 18th November, 1918,to be sure, the National Council had met in Riga and solemnly proclaimedthe Independence of Latvia. This, however, was only a first step intendedprimarily for the outer world, particularly the victorious Allies in the West.At the time the Members of the Council were concerned only with sketchingthe basic foundations of the future political and social structure.These foundations were published as a “Political Programme’" whichproclaimed the sovereignty of the New Latvia. The document expressedthe need for calling a Constituent Assembly with members chosen in freeelections; and the interim establishment of a Provisional Government.Although the First Meeting of the National Council was attended onlyby representatives of Latvian parties and groups (who themselves wereappointed or nominated, not elected since there was no possibility of holdingproper elections under the conditions then current), it was resolved on thatoccasion that representatives of the National Minorities in Latvia oughtalso to participate under Article Four of the political platform:1) The national minorities are to send representatives to the Consti-tuent Assembly and the Legislative Institutions on the basis ofelections by proportional representation.2) The national minorities participating in the National Council willalso participate in the Provisional Government.3) The social and national rights of the national minorities shall besecured by the basic laws of the State.94Political, Social & Cultural LifeNor was that all. At its first Meeting the National Council gave ex-pression through the speeches of its members to its firm desire to bringthe minority groups into the structure of the new State. This desire foundexpression on the part of both right-wing and left-wing circles. Karl Ul-manis, whom the National Council elected as the first Prime Minister ofthe Provisional Government, declared inter alia in his programmatic address:“In this task of renewing the fife and restoring the economic progressof our country all the citizens of Latvia can participate. All of themwill be able to benefit from the fruits of our independence. Allcitizens without distinction of nationality are invited to help us inour work, for all the peoples of Latvia are assured of their rights.”In the Official Declaration read at the National Council by Dr. P.Kalnin in the name of the Social Democratic Labour Party of Latvia, weread in Section 8:“All languages will be given equal rights in schools and life. Nationalminorities will enjoy national and personal autonomy.”Both the Government programme and the speeches of the Councilmembers attest to the fact that the main groups of the Latvian peopleaspired, from the earliest days of their independent State, to recognize thecultural rights of the minority peoples, as well as their right to take anactive part in the political life of the country. In view of the great im-portance of this aspiration for the fate of the Jewish minority in Latvia,it is only proper to consider the matter in greater detail.In the ample literature dealing with national minority rights there is ageneral opinion that the liberal attitude of the Baltic Republics, and moreparticularly of Latvia, towards their national minorities, derived from theirinternational obligations to ensure minority rights. In actual fact, however,there is a clear distinction between the Minority Treaties signed by Poland,Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia, Roumania and Greece when established orreestablished in the years 1919-1920* (in which they undertook to basetheir constitutions on equal rights to all citizens of the country withoutdistinction of race, language or creed, and including national minority rights),and the declarations which were signed by the Baltic States immediatelyafter their political establishment in the years 1918 and 1919.* Although Roumania and Greece had been in existence for many decades beforethe First World War, they were so much transformed after the Versailles PeaceTreaty of 1919 (their areas being expanded and the nationalities resident withintheir territories being increased), that they also had to sign national minoritytreaties together with Poland, Yugoslavia and Czechoslovakia.95The Jews in LatviaEven more important, however, than the legal distinction between thosetreaties and the Declarations was the political character of the youthfulBaltic States. The majority peoples dominating them, particularly Latvia,*had been minorities themselves within the Russian Empire. The Latvians,like several of the peoples of the Caucasus, had taken an active part in theRussian Liberation and revolutionary movement of 1905-1906. Like the otherminorities in the frontier areas of Russia, and like the Jews who weredispersed throughout the Western part of its territory, the Latvians hadbeen among those who demanded natianal minority rights and were opposedto Tsarist Russification and centralisation. In Latvia close ties had actuallybeen established between the Latvians and the Jews as minorities deprivedof rights from the beginning of the Twentieth Century. These ties hadfound expression in particular during the 1905 Revolution when the CentralCommittee of the Revolutionary Movement in Riga, known as the Federa-tive Committee, had been composed of representatives of the Latvian So-cial Democrats and the Jewish Bund. During the subsequent years themoderate Latvian and Jewish circles united for the elections to the RussianDuma. Their blocs of electors joined together against the German electors.It is therefore clear that the political past of the Latvian People as anopposition national minority under Tsarist rule in Russia did not permitit, during the establishment of its independence, to proceed immediatelyto an extreme Chauvinism. This is one of the basic factors which led theLatvian National Council to adopt a positive attitude towards its nationalminorities, long before it signed any international obligation in this respect.There were also a number of incidental considerations which compelledthe Latvians to respect the rights of the national minorities.After November 1918 Latvia was in a state of chaos. The country hadbeen split in two by one of the principal Fronts of the First World War,and was ruined and desolate. Its industry had in part been destroyed byartillery bombardment and in part had been transferred to inner Russianprovinces in 1915. Tens of thousands of Jews had been expelled fromKurland in Spring 1915 by order of the Russian Commander-in-Chief,Grand Duke Nikolai Nikolayevitch, and had been followed by hundredsof thousands of Latvian peasants, workers and intellectuals.* It should be noted that in political-juridical-historical literature before the FirstWorld War only Latvia and Esthonia were regarded as Baltic Provinces, as theyhad originally been under the rule of the Livonian Order.96Political, Social & Cultural LifeIt was absolutely necessary to establish a united front against the re-actionary Junker regiments which were still concentrated in Kurland underthe German General Von der Goltz, and against the Red Army whichwas still stationed in Latgale and was prepared to advance at any momentagainst the weak new country. The minorities included a considerablenumber of industrialists and business men with foreign ties, and personswho still retained part of their property and money. They included alarge number of members of the liberal professions who were also a veryuseful group in the emergency conditions.Besides, the youthful Latvia wished to prove to the Allies — GreatBritain, France and U.S.A., on whose kind graces it was dependent —that it was not a Chauvinist country but a modern parliamentary state thatrespected law and order and aimed at peace and compromise.The convenient position of the national minorities could also help toprevent hesitant groups among the Germans of Latvia from joining thereactionary Activists of the “Landeswehr” and Von der Goltz. And itwould also prevent hesitant Russians from joining the counter-revolutionaryforces of Bermondt-Avaloff or Yudenitch.In view of all these considerations the third Meeting of the NationalCouncil, held on 4th December 1918, co-opted three Jewish and fourGerman representatives, while the total number for all Latvian Parties atthat session was only 47. (The names of two of the Jewish Representativeshave been preserved in the Minutes of the National Council. They were :Aaron Papiermeister and Samuel Henkin.)At the Fifth Session of the Council, which was held on 6th December,1918, the Jewish Delegate Aaron Papiermeister, supported by the SocialDemocrat group, submitted the following question to the Ministry of In-terior :“Is the Minister of the Interior aware that Latvian citizens returningfrom Russia are being subjected to persecution by the local author-ities, who arrest them and impose various hardships upon them?What steps does the Ministry of the Interior propose to take in orderto put an end to these malicious activities on the part of the localadministrations towards citizens returning to the homeland, and inorder to secure their undisturbed return ?”At the same meeting a draft law was presented for Latvian Courts,which provided that those appearing before them would be granted theright to make use of the Courts and submit documents thereto in the97The Jews in LatviaRussian and German languages; and that the judges were to have aknowledge of those languages. Delegate Henkin submitted a proposal thatYiddish should be given identical rights, particularly in Latgale, but hisproposal was rejected.*As remarked, two of the larger neighbours of Latvia, Germany andSoviet Russia, set out to interfere with the growth of the new State, althoughthey had different objectives. Both of them retained vestiges of their armedforces in Latvia. The Soviet units held the capital, Riga, and compelledthe Provisional Government and its institutions, including the NationalCouncil, to proceed north-west into Kurland. On the other hand the Allies,headed by Great Britain, were interested in intensifying the struggle againstSoviet Russia, and permitted the forces headed by Von der Goltz to re-main in Latvia after the collapse of Germany. This General held underhis command not only the purely German units, consisting largely of ad-venturers who had been promised that the land of the country would beshared out among them at the end of the War, but also units of the localLandeswehr, a force consisting chiefly of soldiers of Baltic German origin,whose officers belonged to the landed German gentry of the region. Amongthem were Baron Manteufel, Von Strick, Pfeffer, etc. There were alsoyoung Jews in the Landeswehr, who belonged to pro-German “aristocratic”Jewish families of Kurland and Riga.The Landeswehr also tried to attract “Quislings” from the Germanizedand conservative Latvians. They succeeded in exploiting, not without acertain diplomatic gift, the fears that the Latvian Provisional Governmententertained in respect of Russian Bolshevism. They continuously reiteratedthat they and the Latvians were united in their common desire to defendtheir Homeland against the domination of “Russian Bolshevik Barbarism.”The Baltic Germans made every effort to win the approval of the Allies,imputing Bolshevik sympathies to all the Latvian peasants. The BalticBarons presented themselves to England and France as “the only defendersof Western Civilization against the anarchy of Moscow Bolshevism.”On the other hand, the Germans did not reveal any sign whatsoeverof anti-Semitism at the time. Indeed, as long as the Jews of Kurland anda not inconsiderable part of the Jews of Riga continued to be influenced* The attack of the Soviet Forces on Riga led the Provisional Government andNational Council to move to Libau. We have in our possession the regularMinutes of Meetings of the Council only from the time that these were renewedon 12th May 1919.98Political, Social & Cultural Lifeby German culture, spoke German and were anti-Russian in their feelings,— opposing first the anti-Semitic Tsarist Russia and later the anti-bour-geois Soviet Russia — there was no fear of anti-Semitic manifestations.One may go further: The Germans regarded the presence of Jews in Latviaas of benefit to themselves. For the Germans constituted only 4% of thepopulation, and found it convenient that the existence of a Jewish minorityreduced the overwhelming weight of the Latvian majority.Here a sociological phenomenon, which emerges so clearly throughoutthe history of the Jewish Exile, made itself manifest once again. Whereverthe German minority met the Jewish minority (until the time of Hitler,naturally), a friendly partnership was established between them, in whichthe Germans were generally the gainers while the Jews were the losers. Inthe Province of Posnan (or Posen), for example, which passed into Germanhands after the partition of Poland, the Germans had used the GermanizedJews as an auxiliary support against the Poles. And indeed, as soon asPosnan was restored to Poland in 1919, the Jews felt all the depth of Polishrancour. Something similar happened in Czechoslovakia. As long as Bo-hemia and Moravia were included within the Austro-Hungarian Empirethe Jews of those two countries were regarded as Germans because theyspoke the German language. After Czechoslovakia came into being, thelocal Jews had to bear the consequences of their ties with the SudetenGermans and those who lived elsewhere.The activities of the Landeswehr circles against the Provisional Gov-ernment of Latvia continued during the Winter of 1918-1919. On 16thApril 1919 a revolt came about in Libau. It was headed by the LatvianPriest Andrei Niedra, who joined the Germans together with his Latviansupporters. Pfeffer’s Regiment and part of the Landeswehr disarmed theLatvian Unit that was stationed at the Military Port of Libau, pillaged theGovernment stores, arrested two Members of the Provisional Governmentand several high officials, occupied the Printing Press where currency noteswere printed, and seized the Provisional Government House itself aftermurdering the guard.At the first session of the National Council following the April Revolt,which was held on 12th May 1919, Menders, representative of the LatvianSocial Democrats, announced that in order to achieve victory over theGerman landed nobility who were supported by the Occupying Forces ofVon der Goltz, the Latvian Social Democrat Party would henceforwardsupport the Government of Ulmanis to the utmost. Menders went so faras to publicly denounce the German Social Democrat Minister of War99The Jews in LatviaNoske, who “dared to lie to the German Constituent Assembly, wherehe declared that the Latvian Social Democrats had requested General Vonder Goltz to remain in Latvia with his forces.”At the same time L. Schreiner, Representative of the German Pro-gressive Party, did his best to dissociate himself from the other Germanswho had revolted and were enemies of Latvian Democracy. To the applauseof the Assembly he demanded that Democratic Germany should pay atten-tion to the voice of Democratic Latvia, and aid her in her difficult position.At this historic session of the Council, which closed with an appealto the German Government in Weimar and the Allied Governments towithdraw the German Occupation Forces at once from Latvia and provideher with economic and political existence, no Jewish representative madehis voice heard. This in spite of the fact that when the Council met inLibau J. Rabinovitz, J. Bann and J. Himmelfarb, three representatives ofthe Bund, participated as members of the Social Democrat Faction. Alsopresent were Yudel Mark, representative of the Jewish Folk Party, andMax Goldberg, an additional representative of the non-party Jewish Asso-ciation.The Jewish Left identified itself with the Latvian Soviet Democrats,while apparently the representative of the non-party Jewish middle classdid not manage to declare his political position. At the time the Zionistshad no representative. Possibly the complete silence of the Jews can beinterpreted by the fact that the Council was meeting at Libau in Kurland,whose Jewish population had been expelled by the Tsarist military rulersand had not yet returned.The Jewish representation changed in July, when the National Councilreturned to the capital. At the session of 13th July, 1919, the followingcomposition of the Jewish representation was published: Simon Zacharovitchand Isaac Berz for the Bund; Philip Latzky for the United Jewish SocialistParty; Paul Mintz for the Jewish National Party, afterwards joined by L.Fishman of the Middle Class Jewish Assimilationists; Zhano Tron for theGeneral Zionists and Mordechai Dubin for the Agudat Israel.Most of those mentioned above were afterwards elected as Delegatesto the Constituent Assembly or to one of the Seims.At the above Session of 13th July the Prime Minister, Ulmanis, in-formed the National Council of the composition of the Government, whosenine members included two German representatives and one Jewish repre-sentative — Paul Mintz as Government Comptroller.The composition of this Government met with very strong opposition100Political, Social & Cultural Lifebecause it did not include representatives of the Progressive groups whileits members included two local Germans, one of whom had been an activesupporter of the pro-German Government of Niedra shortly before. Eventhe Radical Democrats who voted for the Government declared in theirspeeches that they were supporting it purely as a transitional body, in orderthat Latvia should not remain without a Government during that periodof international crisis when vestiges of enemy armies were still to be foundin the country. The speeches of Opposition delegates showed that this com-position of the Ulmanis Government was in part the result of pressure onthe part of the Allies who wished it to appear as a Coalition of all theanti-Bolshevik forces in the country, which should be composed of repre-sentatives of the Latvians and the national minorities alike.The attitude of the Jewish Delegates towards the new Cabinet varied.As a representative of the Middle Class circles (one of them. ProfessorMintz, was a Member of the Government), Delegate L. Fishman spoke ofthe national character of the new Government and confined himself to thestatement on behalf of the Jewish, Russian and German minorities thatthey would vote for the Cabinet. On the other hand S. Zacharovitch ofthe Bund, speaking as a Member of the Social Democrat group, declaredthat only in so far as the new Government followed the lines laid downby the Social Democrats could it expect their support. “We declare”, saidhe, “that Mr. Mintz who has entered the Government is not the repre-sentative of the Jewish people or of the toiling Jewish masses, but repre-sents only the Jewish bourgeoisie and plutocracy.” The other remarks ofZacharovitch on that occasion constituted the first clear and well-presentedParliamentary address specifying the demands of the Jewish minority forthe recognition of its cultural and national rights, and particularly its rightto educational and administrative institutions.In August 1919 a “purely” Jewish question was submitted to theMinister of the Interior, and was signed by seven Jewish delegates andthree Latvian Social Democrat delegates. The contents of this questionwere: 1) Why were letters to America which were written in Yiddish notaccepted at the Post Office? 2) Why had a Police Officer demanded, at ameeting called in Riga by the Bund, that the proceedings and the debateshould be conducted in Russian; and when this illegal demand was notcomplied with, why had the Police had broken up the meeting?The National Council rejected the proposal to regard this question asurgent, and it was referred to the Questions Committee.Of greater importance was the discussion on the proposed Citizenship101The Jews in LatviaLaw, which was held on 23rd August 1919. The Citizenship Law was ofmajor importance on account of the principles involved in all the newStates founded after 1919 and previously included within the three pre-War Great Powers Russia, Austria-Hungary and Germany. These Stateswere not ethnically homogeneous. All of them contained a dominant nationalmajority and two, three and on occasion even more national minorities.Hence all the Treaties known as National Minority Treaties, and datingfrom 1919-1920, contain a paragraph confirming the rights of all permanentresidents to receive their citizenship without distinction of race, languageor creed.In August 1919, however, Latvia was not yet bound by any internationalobligation in respect of its Citizenship Law, and was free to act in ac-cordance with its own sovereign decision.However, in Latvia as well the question of citizenship immediatelyinvolved the protection of the national minorities. As already pointed out,in the middle of 1919 when the Citizenship Law was discussed, the countryhad not yet been cleared of the forces of General Von der Goltz and theRed Army Units. The Latvians still remembered the decisions of the shadowParliaments called Landrathen in Kurland and Riga, which met in 1917-1918 and were participated in by German Barons and other nobles, togetherwith Germanized Latvian Quislings. These had humbly appealed to KaiserWilhelm II to graciously annex them to Germany.The affairs of the Jews were now combined with those of the othertwo nations that had formerly been the rulers of Latvia, and whom thevicissitudes of History and Fate had transformed into national minorities:namely, the Germans and the Russians.The debates at the National Council and the proposed Law of Citizen-ship must be regarded as of major significance for any future political historyof Latvian Jewry. They concentrated on the first paragraph of the proposedLaw, which the Committee concerned had adopted in the following form:1. A citizen of Latvia is deemed to be any subject of former Russiawithout distinction of nationality or creed who dwells within the boun-daries of Latvia, who originates from the districts comprehendedwithin the frontiers of Latvia, and who has not adopted any foreigncitizenship prior to the publication of this Law.The majority of the Committee proposed the addition of an amend-ment following the words “comprehended within the boundaries of Latvia”:102Political, Social & Cultural Life“And which under the laws of Russia also belonged to those districtseven before the 1st of August, 1914!'This amendment deprived thousands of Jews of the right of automaticcitizenship at a single stroke. The reason was as follows: The term “be-longed” could be interpreted as implying registration in an urban centreor in some village. However, a very considerable proportion of the Jewswho dwelt in Riga and the surrounding Province, and who had settledthere from the Eighteen-Seventies until the First World War, were notregistered in the local communities but merely resided there in accordancewith administrative regulations. Only Jews holding land in Kurland andLatgale had been registered in the towns and villages under the Tsar. Apartfrom them the only Jews registered were a small number with special pri-vileges, who resided in Riga and Livonia.Accordingly the Jewish representative Philip Latzky, who at the timebelonged to the Social Democrat group, proposed another amendmentwhereby the formal registration implied in the term “belonged to” was re-placed by “resided in.” This amendment read: “And any persons who re-sided in Latvia until 1st August, 1914”, i.e. until the outbreak of the FirstWorld War. All representatives of the National Minorities supportedLatzky’s amendment, yet it gained only 18 votes in all. It is interesting thatthe Latvian Social Democrat Group did not wish citizenship to be grantedto German colonist peasants whom the German Baltic Barons had broughtto Latvia on their own account in the years 1906 and 1907, after Latvianpeasants actively participated in the 1905 Revolution and burnt and destroy-ed baronial mansions and estates. After 1905 the Baltic German noblestook steps to settle their estates with German farmers and peasants in thehope that they could rely better on them in case of agrarian disturbances.It should be noted that Noske and the other German Right-wing SocialDemocrats did their best in 1918 to support the “cultural and nationalpositions” of the German national minorities wherever the latter were tobe found, including the large landed estates of the German Junkers inLatvia and Esthonia.In the years 1906 and 1907 these German peasants were registered inthe village communities of Kurland and Livonia, but during the crisisperiod of 1919, when all concerned were waiting for a decision regardingthe political fate of Latvia, many of them joined the Landeswehr alongsidethe Germans and against the Latvians. To be sure, these German peasants103The Jews in Latvianumbered no more than some 4,000-5,000 in all.* In spite of this the SocialDemocrat Group proposed an amendment to this paragraph which, if adopt-ed, would automatically have deprived all German colonists of their Latviancitizenship. This Amendment read: ‘ or any person who resided there fornot less than ten years before 1st August, 1914.”German settlement, of course had commenced only about seven oreight years before the specified date. But this amendment was also rejected.On this occasion the Social Democrats did not refrain from displaying theirapprehensions regarding the Germans and Russians, and expressed theirfull support of the Jews, particularly the toiling Jewish masses,** whomthe Tsarist Government had deprived of the right of registration in Rigaand Livonia.Finally adopted was the amendment of the majority of the Committee,which required proof that the intending citizen had been registered before1st August, 1914.In surveying the further activities of the National Council from the endof August, 1919 until it ended its existence, it may be said that the JewishDelegates did not display their powers in carrying out their duties at thisfirst pre-parliamentary institution of the youthful State, which was strugglingfor its existence.It is instructive to observe the position of the Jews in discussing theproposed law on the rights of languages in Courts, administrative institutionsand local Government bodies. The Jewish delegates were of the opinionthat it was their duty to endeavour to ensure absolute equality between therights of Yiddish and those of Russian and German. They paid no atten-tion to the peculiar historical and political background of the country, andalso ignored the fact that all the intellectuals and a large part of the towns-folk and peasants knew either German or Russian or both languages to-gether, but did not know Yiddish. Two of the Jewish Delegates, Zacha-rovitch and Latzky, made every effort to prove that the inclusion of Latgale(the districts of the Catholic Latvians which had formerly constituted partof the Province of Vitebsk and comprised the Districts of Dvinsk, Rezhitzaand Lutsin) would be impossible without the aid of the Jews of Latgale;* There were also a certain number of Russian colonists whom the Tsarist Govern-ment had settled in Latgale in the days of Minister Stolypin in order to russifythe province.**See the speech of Tselen (L.T.P.) I, (pp. 238-240): “We are struggling againstspeculation, but we shall not permit any attack on the toiling Jewish masses.”104Political, Social & Cultural Lifeand therefore the Latvian administration had to know Yiddish. (“He whowishes to rule in Dvinsk has to master the language of the Jews.”)*It should be noted that the Germans and Russians, whose languageshad greater prospects of enjoying legal status in the Courts and other insti-tutions, displayed a more cautious stand and did not stress that there was,as it were, any link between the political future of the country and theadoption or otherwise of the liberal law involving the languages of thenational minorities. The behaviour of the Jewish Delegates appears evenstranger in view of the fact that the attitude of the Jews towards Latvianindependence was basically more sympathetic than that of extensive circlesamong the Russians and Germans, who had formerly ruled over the Latvianmajority.The immaturity of the Jewish delegates at the Council was chieflydisplayed by the absence of the courage and capacity to stress a specificJewish approach in all problems affecting the political fate of the country.Particularly characteristic were the debates conducted at the NationalCouncil during September and October, 1919, when the political situationof Latvia came under discussion. It then became clear that in order tostrengthen the State it would be necessary to make an alliance with SovietRussia. The Russian and German delegates had the courage to adopt afirm and open stand against any peace negotiations, and in general againstthe establishment of any diplomatic relations with the mighty Easternneighbour. The Delegate Presniakov, representative of the Russian NationalSociety, declared:“Peace is impossible with Russia as long as the Bolsheviks are therulers there. Where is the security that the Russians will keep thePeace Treaty and will not try to attack us when we are in a stateof peace. . .? After making a Peace Treaty with a new State theBolsheviks will direct all their forces against Democratic Russia...because in fact neither Denikin nor Kolchak exists and there is onlyDemocratic Russia.”The German delegate Dr. P. Schiemann, speaking in the name of theDemocratic Group, also spoke against peace with Russia:“Democracy will never be able to proceed shoulder to shoulder withthe Bolsheviks. Only the Reaction will be able to do this... Peacewith the Bolsheviks means nothing but continuous Civil War.”These declarations were made by the Russian and German delegates* Speech of P. Latsky, L.T.P. I, p. 268.105The Jews in Latviaat a time when Keller in Mitau raised a military force in order to attack theProvisional Government of Latvia from Kurland. Latvian national intereststhen required the conclusion of a Peace Treaty with Soviet Russia in orderthat the country should be able to turn all its forces against the anti-demo-cratic units of the Russian and German armies, headed respectively byRermondt-Avaloff, Keller, Von der Goltz and others. Yet throughout thisviolent discussion of peace and the best methods of defending Latvian in-terests in the New Europe, while the Allies were opposed not only to thedefeated Germany but also to Soviet Russia — throughout these discussionsof burning, intricate problems the voice of the Jewish delegates was neverheard. One may go further: Abroad it was possible to gain the impressionthat the Jewish delegates did not in any way wish to utter any reservationsagainst the spokesmen of the other national minorities. This was exceedinglyshort-sighted behaviour, particularly as the Kurland threat of the Kellerand Bermondt units was about to become a serious attack.At the stormy Session of the National Council held on 9th October,a formula was adopted which gained the support of all the Latvian groups.In this formula the Allies were called upon to safeguard the Independenceof Latvia, and the need was also stressed for commencing immediate nego-tiations for peace with Soviet Russia. Among the minorities, the GermanProgressive Group was the only one to support this formulation. This smallgroup of Schreiner and Kluge was not represented subsequently in the Lat-vian Parliaments, but at that critical hour it joined the fateful struggle ofthe Latvian People for independence. The Jewish delegates, however, wereabsent from the political arena. At that historic session a Latvian delegateasked: “Where have the other Minorities vanished?” The reply came fromthe seats of the Social Democrats: “They must have gone to Mitau!” (i.e.,to the Headquarters of Keller and Bermondt.)When the National Council had to leave Riga because of the advanceof the German and Russian military units from Kurland, and proceededto Wenden, the Jewish delegates were absent from the First Session heldin that city on 11th October, together with all the other Minority delegatesexcept the German A. Schoenhof, who represented the afore-mentionedProgressive Group. Matters continued thus during the entire brief Wendenperiod.Early in November the military escapade of Bermondt was repulsedwith the aid of Lithuania and Esthonia, and the National Council returnedto Riga. At the meeting of the National Council held on 12th November,the Latvian Delegates charged that the German delegates had been colla-106Political, Social & Cultural Lifeborating with Bermondt. But Dr. P. Schiemann, the German delegate whohad been absent from the Council for several weeks, strongly protestedagainst these accusations. At this Meeting the Delegate Z. Tron was chosenas Jewish representative on the Committee for amnestying political pri-soners.From November 1919, after the victory over the Bermondt Units anduntil the final session of the National Council on 18th March 1920, theJewish delegates refrained almost entirely from participating in the delibe-rations, although there were ample opportunities for letting themselvesbe heard.During the discussion on the Draft General School Law Dr. Eliasberg,the Representative of the Bund, delivered an orthodox Marxist speechagainst the Church and religious instructions in schools. Dubin, the Dele-gate of the Agudat Israel, reacted by declaring that the words of Dr. Elias-berg reflected his personal opinions only, while the Jewish masses hadwidely different opinions on this matter. It is astonishing that even in thedebates on the schools of the National Minorities held on 2nd December,1919, the Jews refrained from participating. The brief remarks of Berzof the Bund, who restricted himself to speaking against the surviving russi-fying or germanizing tendencies which had formerly reigned supreme inLatvian schools, merely confirmed the opinion that the Jewish delegatesin the National Council did not appreciate the significance of this law,which afterwards became famous in the History and Theory of NationalMinority Rights in Europe as a model piece of legislation.No less peculiar is the fact that the Jews did not participate in thedebates of 8th and 9th December 1919 on the composition of the newCabinet under Ulmanis, although a member of the Jewish group. ProfessorP. Mintz, was included as Comptroller General. The German DelegateSchiemann then expressed the views of all the minority groups regardinga number of matters.And it should be remarked that even in respect of so important a matterfor Jewish economic life as the establishment of the Latvian EconomicCouncil and the rehabilitation of industry from the ruins of war, not asingle authoritative Jewish voice was heard. Instead of supporting the Lat-vian Social Democrats who struggled to renew industry and revive thecities. Engineer Landau, the only Jewish delegate who participated in thedebate, rested satisfied with demanding that the State should not sell theindustrial enterprises of foreign companies since it would have to pay largesums for them as compensation.107The Jews in LatviaHence throughout the initial period of Latvia the Jewish delegates atthe National Council made no serious attempt to penetrate into everydaypolitical life and seize their proper position as representatives of the interestsof urban masses, who were not concerned with providing further pre-ferential treatment to the upper strata of the well-established peasantry.II. THE PERIOD OF THE CONSTITUENT ASSEMBLY(May 1920-1922)DURING the preparatory period that went before the Latvian ConstituentAssembly, the entire atmosphere of political life was transformed. Theuncertainty with regard to the political independence of the country hadgradually faded away. Her economic and diplomatic relations with the Westhad assumed form. The complete separation of the state from Russia hadbeen achieved with the agreement of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.Once Soviet Russia had recognised the independence of Esthonia by thePeace Treaty of 2nd February 1920, there was no longer any doubt thatit would soon recognise Latvia too as an independent State. And indeedthe Peace Treaty between Latvia and Soviet Russia was signed on 11thAugust, 1920. De facto recognition and the establishment of diplomaticrepresentation by the more important Western Powers reached their peakin January 1921, when the League of Nations legally recognised Latvia andEsthonia.About 200,000 Latvians returned to their country during the periodthat preceded elections to the Constituent Assembly, and while that bodywas in session. Most of them were peasants, but they also included severalthousand Jews, chiefly from Russia.Though we have no precise statistical information on the matter, it isknown that several thousand Jews who left Latvia either willingly or un-willingly (namely, by order of the Tsarist Military Authorities), did notreturn after the War. There is considerable interest in the following summingup: The number of Jews in the area which afterwards constituted the Stateof Latvia (i.e., Latgale, Kurland and Livonia) was as follows:in 1897 — 142,000, or 7.4% of the total population;in 1920 — 79,000, or 5.1% of the total population;in 1925 — 95,000, or 5.3% of the total population.Dvinsk can be taken as an example of the movement of Jewish popula-tion in the cities of Latvia:In 1897 it contained 32,000 Jews;108Political, Social & Cultural LifeIn 1920 it contained 11,000 Jews;In 1925 it contained 12,000 Jews.In certain of the country towns of Latvia, where the Jewish populationhad formerly constituted an absolute majority (e.g., Rezhitsa and Lutsinin Latgale, and Bausk and Friedrichsstadt in Kurland) they were a minorityafter the First World War.The stabilisation of the general political situation, the slow improve-ment of the economic position and the restoration of normal conditionsin town and country all helped the Jewish population to settle down andawakened hopes for the future among them. The sense of general revivalin the country, the implementing of the land reforms, the repair of theroads and the railways, the extensive building activities, all helped to bringabout an economic upsurge and increased the purchasing power of thepeasants and other consumers.The large factories of Riga and other cities, to be sure, were only par-tially restored; and an appreciable section of the skilled Latvian workerswho had been taken from Latvia in 1915 and 1916 and transferred to theheart of Russia together with the factory machinery, did not return toLatvia after the War was over. The timber industry, the sawmills, theplywood factories continued to be held and managed by Jews in the newLatvia as well. These Jews were not only owners of the plants but alsoworked there as clerks and experts. All of these, together with otherbranches of minor industries and handicrafts in which the Jews were en-gaged, promised a flourishing period for Jewish enterprise as well duringthe early days.The political visage of Latvian Jewry began to change rapidly. Thedays of the Tsar had passed never to return, taking with them the pro-vincial paternalism of the well-to-do groups. All the Jewish communalmovements had been in a process of slow emergence before 1914 (apartfrom the Socialist groups, particularly the Bund in Riga and the othercities, which had displayed considerable political awareness and activityeven before the Russian Revolution of 1905-1906 and during that Revolu-tion as well). Now all these Movements were compelled to display freshenergy in order to participate in the political life of the youthful State andhelp to shape its elected democratic institutions, and the Constituent As-sembly first and foremost.It was characteristic of the new situation that political representationas well as the political struggle now assumed ethnic forms. In 1906 andafterwards, during the period of the Russian Dumas, joint Jewish and109The Jews in LatviaLatvian blocs had come about during the Elections, thanks to which therewere Jewish Delegates from Kurland in each of the four Russian Dumasin spite of the fact that the Province was not included within the Pale ofJewish Settlement. In the new Latvia, however, there was no possibilityof establishing blocs of Jews and Latvians, or of Jews and Germans. Apartfrom the dominant Latvians, all the other peoples residing in the country,Jews, Germans, Russians, and Poles in Latgale, were organised in an auto-nomous political federation. Even the Bund, which at the elections to theLegislative Assembly had joined the general list of the Latvian Social De-mocrats, had appeared with a list of its own from 1922, when the firstSeim commenced functioning in Latvia, and had appealed to Jewish elec-tors only; and naturally the same was done by other Jewish groups andparties. The Jewish representation went the same way in the first Parliamentof Latvia, in the Legislative Assembly and the four Seims that followed.In all these Parliaments, except the fourth Seim which was elected in 1931,the percentage of Jewish Delegates was identical with that of the Jews inthe population of the country, i.e., 5%. As a rule the number of Jews ineach Seim was 5 out of 100 Delegates. At the Legislative Assembly therehad been 6 out of 150 Delegates in all.The basic political currents of the Jews were already plain to see inthe elections to the Legislative Assembly. At the extreme right was theAgudat Israel, whose conservative orthodoxy did not prevent it from reach-ing an understanding with the non-religious Conservative Assimilationistswho afterwards called themselves “National Democrats”. What they sharedin common was their rejection of all progressive economic policy, sociallegislation and cooperation which, they held, constituted a major perilto private enterprise in trade and industry; and they also shared appre-hensions regarding agrarian reform. In its political tendencies the JewishRight was compelled to rely in part on the reactionary Baltic Barons andthe leading German factory-owners and big merchants in the cities, andin part on the well-to-do and moderate Latvian peasants who were re-presented in the Peasants’ Party (Zemnieku Savieniba). At the centre stoodthe moderate Zionists, such as the General Zionists and Mizrahi, who com-prised the liberal groups. To the left stood those with Zionist Socialistaspirations and followers of the Bund, coming from the less prosperousgroups of petty traders, craftsmen and workers.As regards this social difference within Latvian Jewry, it should beremembered that during all the fifteen years of Parliamentary democracythe Jews of the country were very much influenced by their geographical110Political, Social & Cultural Lifeand cultural divergencies. The Jews of Latgale, who lived in the districtformerly included in the Russian Province of Vitebsk (Dvinsk, Rezhitsaand Lutzin) and the Jews in one of the districts of the former Provinceof Pskov, were the only ones who sent, to the Constituent Assembly andthree of the four Seims, the candidates of the Bund and the Zionist So-cialists (Zeirei Zion — Hitahdut, later Zeirei Zion — Z.S.). Kurland andRiga, which were never part of the Jewsh Pale of Settlement, did not giveany representation to the Left. In these regions, to be sure, there werenumerous Radical and Socialist circles who elected (Zionist or anti-Zionist)Socialists for the Municipalities; but they were not strong enough to electsuch representatives to the Seim.A vast wave of national exultation was felt by the Latvians during theperiod of the Constituent Assembly, which remained in session from 1stMay, 1920 until Autumn 1922. The period of legal or illegal struggles in1918 and 1919 had passed and was forgotten. The Nation now faced threebasic functions: First, an agrarian reform whose purpose was to makean end of the land-ownership of the German nobles, a burden that hadbeen weighing on the Latvian People for seven hundred years; second,preparing a basic Constitution aiming to rouse to political life a people ofwhose past nothing was left but a heritage of folklore — proverbs, songs,and folk tales — as well as a few remnants of a one-time material culture,together with the first shoots of a modern literature; and third, prepara-tion of a regular Budget for a new country that had lost its Russian “Hin-terland” and its industrial markets, together with a considerable part ofits industrial workers; a country that was now compelled to proceed alongentirely new economic lines and achieve self-sufficiency.If it is asked how the representatives of the Jewish minority behavedin respect of the social and political shaping of the country in this initialperiod, an answer can be given only by examining the precise reports ofthe sessions of the National Council and Constituent Assembly.If we study the details of the Agrarian Law proposed at the Consti-tuent Assembly we learn that all this material expresses, first and fore-most, the viewpoint of the Latvian majority. The extreme Right, headedby A. Berg and Porgal, together with the majority of the Peasants’ Partyheaded by Advocate Pauliuk and Karl Ulmanis, favoured the confiscationof large estates, owned by the German nobility for the greater part; oncondition that compensation should be paid for confiscated areas. TheSocial Democrats and part of the middle-class Radical Latvians were infavour of confiscation without compensation.IllThe Jews in LatviaThe struggle between the public and political views of these two Latviangroups was a been one, and sometimes led to mutual charges of treason.The representatives of the middle class insisted on their demand of com-pensation for legal reasons, but even more for others of a political nature.They said that the bourgeois West would react negatively to an extremeagrarian reform without compensation, which might have a bad effect onthe financial credit and political confidence that Western Europe and U.S.A.would show the new country.The Social Democrats did their best to prove the reverse, relying onhistorical precedents and pointing to the French Revolution and the UnitedStates of America, which paid no compensation either to land-owners orslave-owners. They based themselves on the natural rights of the Latvianpeople whose country had been invaded by the Germanic Knights. Thesehad subjected the inhabitants to servitude, but the Latvians had never givenup their natural right over their land; and therefore the German Baronshad never acquired any rights to Latvian soil and there were no groundsfor the claim that they had been holding these estates for many centuries.The Germans took a very active part in the debates on the agrarianproblem. Baron Fircks opened on their behalf and was supported by Ad-vocate Magnus; and on occasion by Schiemann as well.Both the Russian and Jewish blocs openly avoided participation in thedebate on this matter. Truth to tell, the Russians did voice an opinion.But there were no Russian estate owners in the Baltic Provinces of Latvia.These were to be found only in Latgale. The Jews naturally were notdirectly concerned, because they had no landed property. Nevertheless theJewish bloc in the Constituent Assembly joined the Russians and Ger-mans; and all three as the joint representatives of the National Minoritiessubmitted a special Draft Law to the Agrarian Committee of the Assembly,with the following three main points:1) First should come the partition of state and public lands, andonly then should the partition of lands belonging to private in-dividuals be commenced;2) The divided land should be allocated to recipients as privateproperty;3) Land might be confiscated only after payment of reasonable com-pensation to the owners, and only if the land was required fordirectly productive purposes.It is unnecessary to remark that this reactionary proposal was rejectedby the Agrarian Committee. By appending their signature to it, however.112Political, Social & Cultured Lifethe members of the Jewish bloc entered into a moral and political asso-ciation with the opponents of the agrarian reform. Furthermore, they werecarried along by the Germans. For the latter, agrarian reform meant thecomplete destruction of their former status as masters of the country. ForLatvians it was an anti-feudal revolution which had been delayed for 130years as compared with the French, who disengaged themselves from Feu-dalism on 4th August, 1789. The Latvians, however, achieved their ownNational Revolution with this step, for their feudal masters had been theirnational enemies, the Germans. The latter did their best to exploit thesituation to their advantage, claiming that the Latvian Agrarian reformexpressed the national struggle against the Germans and was thereforeimbued with national animosity. Baron Fircks and his companions endea-voured to degrade the great and just historical reform in this way. It ishard to understand why the Jewish delegates had to identify themselvesin the eyes of the Latvian masses with the long-term oppressors of thelatter.Instead of wisely evading the entire issue as they should have done,the Jewish bloc adopted an even more right-wing and reactionary attitudethan that of the Latvian Peasants’ Party. At the first vote on the firstsection of the Agrarian Reform Law, which was conducted by roll-call,all the Jewish delegates voted together with the Germans against theSocial Democrats. They did the same in their further votes on the agrarianquestion in the Constituent Assembly.Naturally not one of the bourgeois Jewish delegates delivered even asingle speech in favour of agrarian reform. It seems that the solidarityof the national minorities, even more than the social approach, influencedJewish tactics. However it should be remarked that the representatives ofthe Jewish Left — Dr. Jacob Heilman on behalf of the Zeirei Zion — Hi-tahdut, with Isaac Berz and Y. Rabinovitch, the two Bund Representativeswho belonged to the Social Democrat bloc, — also never spoke in favourof Agrarian Reform. They rested satisfied with voting in favour of it to-gether with the Social Democrats.The only Jewish participation in the Agrarian debate was that of Ad-vocate Tron, who spoke on the minor issue of the sale of forests andtimber, and in the spirit of the opponents.The Jews also remained silent in the discussions on the second basicproblem of the Assembly, namely, the new Constitution.At first sight these was no reason to have been apprehensive aboutsuch delicate questions as might have arisen with the Agrarian problem.113The Jews in LatviaThe bourgeois approach to social and economic matters left ample rooirfor political liberalism, and certainly for active defence of the rights o!the individual and the collective rights of the national minorities. Unlikethe Jews, the Germans from time to time allowed themselves to makeliberal declarations; as was done, for example, by Dr. Paul SchiemannIn this way they did their best to atone for their social and economicbackwardness. The Jews however, did not take any appreciable part inshaping the Latvian Constitution; although they included among themAdvocate Z. Tron, a General Zionist who had actively participated in the1905-1906 Revolution under the Tsar as a Constitutional Democrat (Kadet)and had been persecuted as a result.The problem of the basic elements of the Latvian Constitution becameparticularly acute when discussion commenced on its second Section.The first Section specified the functions of Government institutions,beginning with the authority of the Seim (Parliament), and the rights ofthe President and the Delegates.In discussing this Section Dr. Schiemann of the German bloc hadproposed in the Constitution Committee that Latvia should introduce thebi-cameral system:* 1) An upper house to represent the interests of thevarious social groups; and 2) a lower house to represent the entire people.This system was desirable for the Germans because it would have increasedtheir political weight in the country. They were a minority amounting to3j% of the total population, even fewer in number than either the Russianor the Jewish Minority. They could hope that in the Upper House theirpolitical weight would increase thanks to the special representation of pro-fessionals, academicians, and religious representatives. However, their pro-posal was rejected by a large majority and the Germans did not submitit to the Plenary Session of the Assembly.The fourth part of the Constitution dealt with the President of theRepublic. The Social Democrats opposed the introduction of one-man ruleresembling that of a monarch, and tended towards the principle of col-lective rule, resembling the executive power in Switzerland and Esthonia.In the Constituent Committee the representatives of the Minorities votedwith the right wing; and the majority resolved to introduce in Latvia theoffice of President of the Republic, to be elected by the entire people for* See my essay : 1) Die Verfassungsentwicklung Lettlands; and 2) Das Verfassungs-recht Lettlands, published respectively in the Jahrbuch des Oeffentlichen Rechtsder Gegenwart, Vol. XI, 1922 and Vol. XII, 1923, Tuebingen.114Political, Social & Cultural Lifea period of six years (resembling the election of the President of Germanyaccording to the Weimar Constitution at the time). At the Plenary Meetingof the Assembly, however, a compromise resolution was adopted wherebythe President of the State was to be elected for a period of three yearsonly; and by the Seim, not by the whole People.As remarked, the Jews adopted an incomprehensible policy of silenceon these vital matters. Even in the General Debate they did not speakon the Constitution during September 1921, when the Germans did parti-cipate. In the discussion on the preamble to the Constitution, the Germansproposed the inclusion of the clause: “Thanking Almighty God for theliberty that has been won by the Latvian People” etc. But the Jewishdelegates did not vote either for or against this clause, nor did they refrainfrom voting in spite of being present at the session. They simply didnot vote.It is even more surprising that they adopted no clear-cut stand onthe question of proportional representation; a matter which could provedecisive for all the national minorities, and particularly for the Jews whowere dispersed all over the country. It could have made all the differenceas to whether they would or would not have representives in the Seim.In normal majority elections it was possible that only one Jew would beelected — from the capital city Riga, the one urban electoral district. Onlyby the method of proportional representation could the Jews hope to haveany permanent representation in Parliament, corresponding to their numberwithin the country.It should be noted that the proportional representation system wasalso to the advantage of certain political groups among the Latvian majority.The system therefore also had its protagonists apart from the Jews; but thelatter repeated the basic exile practice which they used, consciously orunconsciously, outside the Latvian Parliament as well. They did not defendpositions that non-Jews were in any case prepared to support. These tacticsconcealed the constant fear that a certain issue might be transformed intoa “Jewish affair”. It was the old fear of what the Gentiles would say. Butthe Jewish representatives forgot that these tactics also had another side.They left the impression that the Jewish representatives were not amongthe organic legislators of the country, because general problems were aliento them and they were concerned only with Jewish or anti-Jewish problemsand events. The Jewish delegates rested satisfied with voting on questionsto various Ministers, and expressing confidence or no confidence in newCabinets. They were delegates in order to try and stave off trouble. Indeed,115The Jews in Latviathey certainly participated actively in Commissions, but to our regretnothing is known of what they did in the absence of detailed Reports onthe work of those Commissions.The following Jewish representatives participated in the Special Com-missions of the Constituent Assembly:The Commission for Finance and Budget: Aaron Nurock, Mizrahi;The Commission for Organisation: L. Fishman, National Democrat;The Legal Commission: Z. Tron, General Zionist;The Commission for Social Legislation: Jacob Heilman, Zeirei Zion— Hitahdut;The Commission for the Constitution: 1) Jacob Heilman, Zeirei Zion— Hitahdut; 2) J. Rabinowitch, Bund;The Cultural Commission: 1) Isaac Berz, Bund; 2) L. Fishman, Na-tional Democrat;The Amnesty Commission: P. Mintz, National Democrat.*On the Commissions the Bund delegates represented the Social De-mocrat group and were bound by the decisions of the latter, whereas theother Jewish representatives were members of the National Minorities block.The Jews were not represented on the Agrarian Commission whichwas the largest of all with forty members, including both Germans andRussians. Nor were they represented on the Commission for Trade andIndustry, although Jewish commercial circles had ample interests of theirown when the new Latvia emerged.The active participation of the Jewish delegates in the general legislativework was important not only as helping to consolidate a democratic regimeon behalf of all the citizens of the country, but also as a means of in-creasing their political significance in the eyes of the other members ofParliament. The Germans understood this very well from the beginning ofLatvian Parliamentarism and endeavoured to participate in all Commissionsof the Constituent Assembly, including the Commission for Foreign Affairs.The Jewish delegates, however, did not properly assess the importance ofcommittee work. They ignored the fact that in a Commission of 15-20members there was considerable relative significance for a single Jewishdelegate who actively participated, since the representatives of other groups* Paul Mintz, Professor of Criminal Law, joined the Ulmanis Government on 11thJune, 1920 as State Comptroller General. He therefore served for slightly morethan one month as a delegate to the Constituent Assembly, and was replaced byEngineer Jacob Landau, another member of his party.116Political, Social & Cultural Lifewere compelled to reckon with him in Committee more than at plenarysessions of the Parliament. It would be far more important to persuade himto adopt a certain stand while the law was being formulated than to winhis single vote in Parliament proper. In general, however, Jewish delegatesrested satisfied with discussing the draft laws of others and did not offerany drafts of their own.* However, it should be noted that no specificlegislative style had fully developed at the Constituent Assembly.There was, however, one admittedly restricted branch of legislative workin which the Jewish delegates displayed their active interest both at theConstituent Assembly and in the Seims. This was the problem of citizen-ship, which had found unsatisfactory treatment in the Law of 1919. Onlyby the subsequent amendments of the years 1927 and 1928 was this Lawappreciably expanded. The first attempts to extend it were made duringthe Assembly. The earlier 1919 Law was more restricted in its range thanthe legal provisions subsequently provided in the Minorities Treaties of1919 and 1920, whereby it was sufficient for a person to have been per-manently resident in some country for him to be granted automatic citizen-ship there. The fact that much of Latvia had formerly been outside theJewish Pale of Settlement made the legal position of the Jews who hadsettled in Riga and Kurland under the Tsarist regime a very difficult one.The Latvian reactionaries and Chauvinists did not wish to recognise aspermanent residents in the country those Jews who were known as “Themen of the Eighties”, i.e., those who had settled in Latvia from 1880onwards; nor those Jews who had been legally resident there from 1906and who were known as “The Stolypinists”, because their residence hadbeen permitted by order of the Russian Minister Stolypin.In September and October 1921 the German Delegate Schiemann, to-gether with L. Fishman, J. Heilman and Z. Tron, demanded that the Citi-zenship Law should be extended to cover the men of the Eighties and theStolypinists. This demand was satisfied only after some years had passed,in the amendments to the Citizenship Law which were approved in theyears 1927 and 1929. But a beginning was made by the Jewish delegatesin the course of the Constituent Assembly.Let us now consider their share in the solution of the third basicproblem: The Consolidation of the State Budget.* At the Plenary Meeting of the Constituent Assembly, held on 16th September,1920, Z. Tron submitted draft legislation on the Agreements for the Exploitationof Forests, Water and Landed Properties.117The Jews in LatviaThe need to prepare a regular Budget for the State emerged for thefirst time only during the second year of the Assembly. The Law of theGovernment Budget was first presented on 26th April 1921, when a dis-cussion of principles began between the Society of Peasants and the SocialDemocrats. Representative Bushevitz, speaking for the latter, said:“There is much truth in the words of Mr. Klaube. It is true that wehave no stable currency and therefore the expenditures provided forin the Budget will not correspond to the actual amounts expended.It is true that we have no clear economic policy as yet. However,is that any reason for our Government and State economy to becosducted without any Budget? It seems as though that is the wishof Mr. Klaube.”Yet the Jewish delegates did not participate at all in the deliberationson this vital problem. It was as though the question of the Budget hadnothing to do with them.Furthermore, when the Budget was very belatedly submitted for dis-cussion, the Jewish representatives did not participate either in the GeneralDebate or in the itemized deliberations. This Budget was discussed from14th June until 14th July, 1922, during fifteen sessions. And if we do nottake into consideration the criticisms voiced by J. Heilman* on the Ministryof Justice, it may be said that the Jewish Delegates did not react even witha single word.It is possible to understand why in Autumn 1920 the Jewish delegatesdid not participate in the debates on the findings of the Enquiry Com-mittee about the activities of the wealthy Yankel Klein who owned anelectric mill, a sawmill and other plants in Autz, Kurland, and who hadpurchased vast stores of goods from the German Military Authorities be-fore they left Latvia. Here their silence was both comprehensible andjustified.However, it is hard to understand why they did not participate in thediscussion of even a single problem of an economic, financial or industrialcharacter. They had nothing to say even on the question of taxation, parti-cularly the Gradulated Income Tax; even though it was clear from the* S. Sap. 1922, p. 1889. The remarks of J. Heilman dealt with the prohibition ofthe use of the languages of national minorities in the Courts of Latgale and thenon-confirmation of real estate purchases by Jews. These remarks occupy only afew lines in the hundreds of pages dedicated to Debates on the Budget.118Political, Social & Cultural Lifebeginnings of the Constituent Assembly that the entire burden of taxationwould fall on the Jews of the country.Their silence in respect of these questions can be partly accounted forby the fact that among the six Jewish delegates there was not a singleeconomic expert. This phenomenon, incidentally, marked the four Seims aswell between 1922 and 1934. The Jewish delegates did not include anyeconomists, and therefore they had no reaction worthy of the name re-garding economic regulations and laws. Among them were merchants andindustrialists, but even these did not spend any time in preparing andmastering the legislative material affecting economic matters. However, itmust be noted that the considerable Shtadlanut (intercession activities) re-quired of them during the Seims took up much of their strength andtime so that they had no possibility of dealing with economic and financiallegislation.On the other hand, their activities were very noticeable, first in respectof the anti-Semitic behaviour of officials and hooligan attacks on Jews,particularly in streets and public parks; and second, when there werechanges in the Government.The first question to the Minister of the Interior was put about amonth after the first meeting of the Constituent Assembly on 3rd June1920, and was asked on account of attacks by hooligans at the BastionHill and elsewhere in the centre of Riga. These “minor” assaults on Jewsafterwards spread to the Provinces, particularly to Rezhitza. A letter wassent from Rezhitsa to the journal “Dos Folk” about these attacks, andwas tampered with by the Censorship. This was the subject of a specialquestion submitted to the Minister of the Interior and raised by J. Heilmanon 29th June, 1920.The next question asked by Delegates Heilman and J. Berz was sub-mitted on 8th February 1921 on account of disturbances in Libau. J.Heilman spoke against the Government and stressed sharply that he wouldvote against reposing confidence in it. J. Berz of the Bund said that theJewish Bourgeoisie was not concerned with the consolidation of democracy,and looked only after its own class interests. There was a sharp rejoinderto him on the part of Z. Tron.On 11th June 1920, immediately after the Assembly was convened,K. Ulmanis announced that he was setting up a new Government, in whichProfessor Paul Mintz would act as Comptroller General. He was the firstand last Jewish Minister in Latvia. J. Rabinovitz of the Bund was the119The Jews in Latviaonly lew to participate in the debates on the Programme of the new Gov-ernment, which was discussed on 17th and 18th June.The other Jewish Delegates including J. Heilman supported the UlmanisGovernment. Both L. Fishman and J. Heilman demanded that the Govern-ment should safeguard the national rights and institutions of the Jews thatwere recognised in the State Constitution and Basic Laws. Yet it was alsocharacteristic that when the entire second section of the Constitution, whichlisted individual and group rights, was subsequently rejected by the As-sembly, the Jewish delegates made no statement whatsoever.A year later the Ministerial Cabinet of Z. Meirovitch was presentedto the Assembly. J. Heilman sharply criticised this Government, stressingthat a Democracy conducted on the principle that it had no duties towardsminorities did not deserve the name Democracy. He declared that he wouldrefrain from voting for that Government even if it did include two or threedelegates with Social Democrat views, such as Dukurs and Holtsmanis.The other Jewish delegates did not speak but voted for the Government.One year later, on 19th July 1922, the Government known as the SecondMeirovitch Cabinet was presented to the Assembly. This time the entireJewish block was against expressing confidence and refrained from voting.Fishman, Dubin, Heilman and Tron criticised the activities of the previousCabinet. In his speech Dubin stressed that the previous Meirovitch Cabinethad not kept its promise to facilitate the return of Jewish World War OneRefugees to Latvia. He also bitterly complained of the fact that Anti-semitic pamphlets were being printed at the Press of the Ministry of War.Heilman spoke of the harm done to advocates belonging to the nationalminorities, including the Jewish lawyers, who were not allowed to use thelanguages of the Minorities in the Latgale Courts; and also of the ignoringof Jewish rights in respect of real estate.There were the final speeches of the Jewish delegates at the ConstituentAssembly, which was replaced by the First Latvian Seim in November 1922.HI. THE PERIOD OF THE FOUR SEIMS(November 1922—May 1934)THE Constituent Assembly firmly established the foundations of the LatvianState. On 26th January 1921 most countries announced their de jure recog-nition of Latvia. The USA alone deferred its recognition until 27th July,when it recognised all Baltic countries. Soviet Russia and Germany hadrecognised Latvia even earlier.This legal recognition was of considerable significance, and not only120Political, Social & Cultural Lifein respect of international relations. It meant that the victorious Allies whohad taken the initiative in establishing the League of Nations had finallydespired of any hopes they might still have invested in the anti-Bolshevikforces set up by Kolchak, Denikin, Yudenich and others; and had finallyaccepted the existence of Latvia. This in turn involved a certain stabilisa-tion of the economic and financial situation. The year 1922, which sawelections to the first regular Seim, was also the first year of full peace forthe state. From that year forward it was possible to lay foundations foreconomic consolidation and financial stability. The first of the three Balticcountries that succeeded in stabilising her currency was Latvia. The processbegan in Spring 1921 and reached its legal termination at the beginningof August 1922.*As was only natural, the commencement of the Agrarian Reform, whichwas intended to be complete by the time the Seim met, increased thestability of the country and encouraged both industry and foreign trade,two branches in which the Jews of the country had constantly played aconsiderable part. The latter were concentrated in particular in commerceand primary export industries (forests, wood processing, flax and canvas,leather, paper, textiles, etc.). In those days Latvia began to emerge as themost progressive industrial land among the three Baltic states.By the end of the Twenties the import and export turnover of the threecountries was as follows: Latvia — 326 Swiss Francs per capita; Esthonia— 294 Swiss Francs per capita; Lithuania — 133 Swiss Francs per capita.The cultural progress of Latvia is shown by the following statistics :Of 1000 children aged 6-16, the following attended elementary schoolduring the early Twenties: Germany — 734; Latvia — 664; Lithuania —309. The number of journals published per 100,000 of the population was:Latvia — 161; Esthonia — 152; Lithuania — 53.In the Baltic sections of Latvia, i.e., Livonia, Kurland and Zemgalen,where most of the inhabitants were Protestants, the illiterates numberedonly 5%, almost as in Scandinavia and England, whereas the figure forLatgale, which was largely Catholic and Russian Orthodox, amounted tomore than 30%, as in the neighbouring Catholic country, Lithuania.**To be sure, the in general favourable conditions in Latvia were notof themselves enough to ensure prosperity for all the Jews in the country.* See: The Baltic States, Esthonia, Latvia, Lithuania; Royal Institute of InternationalAffairs, P. 131, London 1938.**See M. Skujenieks, Latvija starp Eiropas Valstim, Riga 1929, pp. 85, 74, 68.121The Jews in LatviaBoth during and after the Constituent Assembly, and until the middle ofthe Twenties, the return of Latvian Jews continued from other lands,particularly from Soviet Russia. Most of these were broken and ruined,and without any economic roots. Those who were craftsmen returned with-out their tools, and could not start work at once. The Jewish People’s Co-operative in Latvia was established in order to help them.In any case it is clear that the new conditions in the country gave riseto much optimism and encouraged general interest in social and politicallife.Freedom of association, meeting and the press for the Jews of Latvia,particularly for those who had returned from Soviet Russia, made thecountry appear to them like heaven on earth. The absence of any restric-tions on expressing views other than those of the Government, legal Zionism,legal Folkism, official Jewish Communities, Jewish Banks and Loan andSaving Funds, legal opposition, — all these helped to bring about a funda-mentally new atmosphere of political democracy, without fear or appre-hensions.1. The First SeimTHE elections to the First Seim were held on 8th October, 1922 and thefollowing five Jewish deputies were elected :Of the Agudat Israel, 2 — Mordechai Dubin and Reuben Wittenberg,who appeared at the elections with their own separate list;Of the “Jewish Bloc”, 2 — Leopold Fishman of the AssimilationistNational Democrats, and Mordechai Nurock of the Mizrahi;Of the Zeirei Zion (Hitahdut), 1 — Max Matatiahu Laserson, whowas elected in Latgale.The Bund representative in the First Seim was Dr. N. Maisel, who waselected in Latgale with the support of the Latvian Social Democrats. Inthe Seim Dr. Maisel belonged to the Social Democrats and accepted theirdiscipline. His election to the various Committees of the Seim, as well ashis withdrawals from them, was dependent on the decisions of the SocialDemocrat group. For this reason he could not be regarded as a fullyJewish deputy who depended entirely on Jewish voters and was linkedexclusively with Jewish political and communal organisations.The total number of Jewish representatives, namely 5, correspondedprecisely with the percentage of Jews in the total population of Latvia.At the beginning of this period the Jewish deputies, who constituted122Political, Social & Cultural Lifepart of the General Bloc of minority representatives in the Seim, wereconcerned with matters of high policy. They made up a third of the Mino-rities Bloc, which in addition consisted of 6 German Delegates, 3 RussianDelegates and 1 Pole. The 4‘key” for the participation of the minorityrepresentatives in the various Committees was 15:100, as the Seim consistedof 100 deputies in all.This “key”, however, did not precisely reflect the political functionsor weight of the Minorities in general, and the Jewish Minority in parti-cular. In all Parliaments the world over, from the British Parliament withits one-time Irish minority to the Parliaments of Central Europe, the na-tional minorities used to turn the scales on occasion. Not only the 15 votesof all minority representatives, but even 2 or 3, might play a decisive partin adopting or rejecting a law or an interpretation. That is why the weightof the minorities in shaping the general policy of the country was actuallygreater than their proportion within the population.The views of the group, or more precisely the Bloc, of Minoritiesin respect of social policy were very variegated. The members voted to-gether only on issues involving the protection of the political and culturalrights of the minorities. In respect of general policy or economic andsocial legislation they were very far indeed from being united. While theGermans usually voted with the Right-wing Conservative Latvians, thevoting of the Jewish and Russian Delegates was not uniform. On generalmatters, some of them would vote with the Social Democrats, some withthe Centre and some with the Right. This was particularly striking in thecase of the Jewish deputies whose votes might cut across all the partiesfrom the Latvian Peasant Party as well as others that were still moreRight-wing all the way to the Social Democrats. This reflected the greatdistance between the Agudat Israel and the Zeirei Zion. On certain mattersthe Mizrahi deputy used to vote together with the Progressives. When itcame to the Housing Law, which protected tenants from house-owners,some of the German representatives would vote on occasion with theDemocratic and Progressive wing.The importance of the minorities was also enhanced because the pro-tection of Minority rights was not only a matter of internal politics butin some measure also involved foreign policy. The representatives of theLatvian majority knew that the League of Nations in Geneva was interestedin the Minorities question, and the Minorities were entitled to complainto that international body. Some of the deputies remembered that theLatvian representatives had stressed more than once, in official statements123The Jews in Latviato the League of Nations, that Latvia had undertaken to provide civicequality and cultural autonomy for its minorities.This link between the outer world and the Minorities did not serve tomake them more popular within the country. On the contrary, the olddistrust of the Latvians for their one-time masters the Germans and Rus-sians was awakened afresh. Both had lost their former dominant position,the German Barons as landholders and the Russians their privileges asofficials. They had been transformed from wolves to sheep and did theirbest to appear down-trodden and oppressed. This made them even lesspopular. The common interests of the minorities compelled the JewishDelegates to join with the others, and so we too were made to feel thesting of Latvian nationalism; even though historically speaking this hadnot previously been directed against the Jews and from time to time, inthe course of negotiations for the setting up of a new Government, theSeim deputies and Latvian statesmen used to proclaim that the Jews werethe most faithful minority because they made no political demands andlacked any territorial romanticism of restoration.This basic fact should be remembered in order to assess correctly thebalance of power within Latvian democracy during the twelve years thatfollowed. A measure of psychological animosity towards the minoritieswas inevitable in view of the fact that the Germans were among them, andmore precisely at their head. This feeling was shared even by the Left wingin the Seim, which for ideological reasons ought to have been anti-Chau-vinist.The Social Democrats were the largest party in the First Seim. Theyhad about 30 Delegates, slightly less than one-third of the total membership.It was true that those who voted for this large party did not consist ex-clusively of the urban and rural proletariat. Their supporters included manyof the petty bourgeoisie, the intellectuals, and part of the peasants, whohoped that they would help to bring about a complete implementation ofthe agrarian reform. The various satellites of the Social Democrats alsopreserved their prejudices against the Jews. These sometimes found ex-pression in municipal and Seim elections when there was a large-scalecrossing-out of the names of Jewish (Bundist) candidates; so that some ofthe latter were defeated and Latvian candidates whose names had followedtheir own were elected. Obviously these satellites very definitely includedthe anti-German and anti-Russian elements. The better elements in thegroup and the Social Democrat Party tried to combat these prejudices,but did not dare to strike too hard at their followers. This was the reason124Political, Social <6 Cultural Lifewhy the joint lists of the Latvian Social Democrats and the Bund had tobe separated in the course of time.Naturally Chauvinism was even stronger in the right wing, and someurban groups were even more Chauvinistic than the Peasants’ Party was.The neighbours to the immediate right of the Social Democrats, and theirformer comrades, were the "'Mensheviks” and the Village Workers, a smallgroup with 7 members. Next came the Democratic Centre with 6 members,the Society of Latgale Peasants with 6 members, and the Latvian Peasants’Society with 17 members. One of the most Chauvinistic and anti-Semiticgroups on the extreme Right was the National Peasant Society with 4 mem-bers, headed by Reinhardt.The Jewish representatives in the Seim had to find themselves a placeamong all these new bodies; and here from the beginning we observe twodistinct approaches. One, the more conservative, was that of Shtadlanut(intercession and mediation) with those deep roots in the life of the JewishExile that go all the way back to the Middle Ages and possibly beyond.The two deputies of the Agudat Israel were closest to this approach. TheNational Democrats held an approximately similar viewpoint in this respect.The Zionists were sharply opposed to all Shtadlanut. The struggle be-tween the two viewpoints developed in two areas, of which of the first wasin the negotiations between the Peasant Party headed by Z. Meirovitchand the Jewish deputies at the commencement of the First Seim. Here theZionists took the initiative and demanded that the Jewish communitiesshould be authorised to impose compulsory taxes. The Delegate of theZeirei Zion supported this demand as a means of imposing part of theburden for the economic rehabilitation of the Jewish masses on the weal-thier groups.*The Aguda, which had succeeded in establishing itself firmly withinthe provisional communities of Riga and other cities even before the meet-ing of the First Seim, tried to evade the issue of imposing a tax, and parti-cularly the introduction of this principle in the Law for the Jewish Com-munities. This was not the attitude of the National Democrats. But thetwo parties together refrained from insisting that this demand should beadopted and included in the programme of the Meirovitch Government;and that without it no support of the New Cabinet would be possible.The second area in which the Aguda adopted the approach of Shtadlanut* See: “Der Veg” 25 November, 1922.125The Jews in Latviawas that of establishing a “Beirat” (Auxiliary Council) for the JewishDelegates to the Seim.The idea of a “Beirat” derived from the past practice of RussianJewry after the year 1906, when the Russian Duma came into existence.Alongside the Jewish representatives in the Duma there were Councils ofJewish Communal Workers and outstanding lawyers who were concernedto deal with Jewish problems in Russia. They assisted the representativeswith a number of questions and helped to draft laws; and the representa-tives had very great respect for the requests, opinions and decisions of thisunofficial body. Such a Council could have been very useful in Latvia aswell for, as already remarked, the Jewish deputies needed to have theconsidered opinions of economic experts at their disposal. The differinginterests of the various groups of electors were not fully reflected in theSeim either, since the deputies were elected chiefly for political or culturalreasons. In addition, a “Beirat” in Latvia could have served as a substitutefor an elected Jewish autonomous institution.But as remarked, the Jewish Right Wing, and particularly the Aguda,was opposed both to modern autonomous communities and also to a“Beirat”.The Aguda obstinately and consistently held to this approach throughoutthe period of Latvian democracy and until the establishment of the Fascistregime when, as from Summer 1934, it became the only legally recognisedJewish political body in Latvian Jewry.The issue was revived from time to time, particularly at the commen-cement of the Fourth Seim when the Jewish Left-wing representation vanish-ed as a result of the defeat of Laserson and Maisel at the polls. A numberof discussions were then held, but no “Beirat” was established.The conflict of viewpoints between the Aguda and National Democratson the one hand and the Zionists on the other also found expression withregard to another important issue — the character of the Jewish bloc inthe Seim. The attitude of the Zeirei Zion in this respect had been clearlyexpressed in their journal “Der Veg” when the Seim first met.* The jour-nal demanded the establishment of a Jewish bloc; provided, however, thatits members would not be required to adopt an identical attitude to allpolitical and social and economic problems which were placed on the Seimagenda. As the journal pointed out, the Jewish delegates had not all beenelected on a common political platform; and any attempt to demand a* See “Der Veg”, 13 November 1922.126Political, Social & Cultural Lifeplatform of this kind meant the undermining of any possibility of seriouslyprotecting the interests of the Jewish masses.By the end of December 1922 both the Aguda and the National De-mocrats were clearly insisting that the Jewish Bloc should impose itsdiscipline on the delegates with regard to all the general political problemsof Latvia. As a result the Jewish bloc was set up in January 1923 with4 members : Dubin and Wittenberg of the Agudat Israel, Fishman of theNational Democrats and Nurock of the Mizrahi. M. Laserson of the ZeireiZion did not join, explaining that he could not do so because the policyof the bloc was influenced by well-to-do sections of the community only.In this connection “Der Veg” pointed out that it was not a matter of chancethat the representative of the Aguda had entered the Commission for SocialLegislation, where he would protect the interests of the wealthy. With regardto the protection of tenants and sub-tenants he would be on the side of thehouse-owners from whom the dwellings were rented. In those days therewas no Apartments Law yet, and even the Agrarian Reform and the SocialInsurance laws had not yet been passed. So it was natural that the repre-sentative of the Zeirei Zion could not join the Jewish bloc which, on thebasis of group discipline, could have compelled him to vote in the Seimand the committees in a manner opposed to the social principles of hisparty.* At first the Mizrahi delegate Nurock expressed the view that uniformopinions on social matters could not be demanded of all Jewish delegates.He proposed that only national unity be required. Finally, he gave in tothe right-wing delegates.** This state of affairs was not repeated until theFourth Seim, as long as the Zeirei Zion were represented in the LatvianSeims.To counter-balance this, however, the Zeirei Zion delegate joined theNational Minorities bloc. He represented all the national minorities onthe Committee for Public Law and National Constitution during the firstthree Seims, and served as its Secretary from 1925. He also representedthe National Minorities on the Committee for Legislation and the DraftingCommittee.During the first Seim there were still bright hopes that the Draft Lawfor National Autonomy of the Minorities would be adopted. This Draft* “Der Veg”, 19 January 1923. With regard to the Apartments Law the 6 Jewishdelegates voted with the Social Democrats for expediting discussion of the lawby the Legislation Committee.**“Der Veg”, 19 January 1923.127The Jews in LatviaLaw was divided into three separate draft laws: One each for the German,Jewish and Russian minorities. All of them were transferred to the Com-mittee for Public Law, which began deliberating on them very actively.This issue was of an importance reaching beyond the limits of LatvianJewry, and we shall therefore consider it in some detail.As told at the beginning of our survey, Latvia recognised the rightsof the national minorities from the commencement of her independentexistence. This recognition found expression in the “Political Platform”of 18 December 1918. The Law of that date laid the foundation for anetwork of schools of the national minorities, to be partly administered bythem. These laws expressed the free wishes of the Latvian people.The situation changed completely, however, when the question of na-tional minority rights passed from the field of internal legislation to thatof international securities. The recognition of Latvia by foreign nationsdepended in some degree on the latter’s readiness to give the nationalminorities full and equal rights, together with certain collective rights asminorities. On the proposal of Lord Robert Cecil on 15 December 1920,for instance, the General Assembly of the League of Nations resolved torecommend that the three Baltic States Esthonia, Latvia and Lithuania,as well as Albania, should enjoy full international recognition only afterthey submitted a suitable declaration as to their future attitudes towardstheir national minorities (religious, racial and linguistic). This led to clari-fications and a letter of Z. Meirovitch (Foreign Minister) to the Leagueof Nations, dated 1st September 1921, which pointed out inter alia:“With regard to the national minorities of Latvia I wish to point outthat the Constituent Assembly of Latvia has already taken measures en-suring the national minorities extensive autonomy in respect of schoolsand cultural matters — measures which in no way run counter to theapproved general principles included in the treaties regarding national mino-rities, to the precise observance of which the Government is scrupulouslyattentive.” *Immediately following the commencement of deliberations on declara-tions in connection with the minorities, Latvia (and Esthonia) raised anumber of reservations. Latvia stressed that her Constitution promised and* For details see: Max Laserson, Das Verfassungsrecht Lettlands, Jahrbuch desOeffentlichen Rechts Bd. XII 1923/4, Tuebingen, pp. 263—265. Also : League ofNations, Admission of Latvia to the League of Nations (28/15497/4393) 8 Sep-tember 1921.128Political, Social & Cultural Lifeactually provided ample protection for minorities and she had no intentionof diverging from this course; but since a number of other countries whichhad minorities had not undertaken the international obligations regardingminorities, there would be a certain disequilibrium in the relations of statesif undertakings of this kind were demanded only from a certain number.Latvia also argued that the internationalisation of minority rights was liableto provide an excellent excuse for intervention in the affairs of a state,and might lead to infringement of its sovereignty. Finally Latvia declaredthat the League of Nations declaration of 15 December 1920 did not inher opinion restrict her freedom of action, and she proposed to preservethis freedom until such time as a General Agreement for the protectionof the minorities would be signed in the future.These arguments were expressed even more clearly in 1922, in a Me-morandum submitted by Dr. Walters, Latvian Ambassador in Rome, tothe League of Nations.* This memorandum is very detailed and presentseconomic considerations (such as the claim, for example, that in Latvia48% of the Jewish population were engaged in commerce compared withonly 1% of the Latvian population), side by side with abstract legal postu-lates regarding the law of citizenship and minority rights in general.From which it can be seen that in the years immediately after the War,and within an exclusively democratic world, Walters was already raisingarguments and presenting viewpoints which were subsequently adopted byHitler and were uttered in 1934 by the reactionary Polish Minister Beck.Walters was of the opinion that the most effective minority treaties werethose of a bilateral nature; i.e., treaties signed by two states the majoritygroup of each of which had a minority in the territory of the other: Thismeaning that each state stands security for the rights of the “foreignminority”, in order that “its own” minority in the other territory shouldreceive the same rights there. It was characteristic that one of the finalpassages in Walters’ memorandum was formulated with an asperity remark-able for a small nation which had only just been accepted into the League.He wrote:“Latvia stands firm in her demand for bilateral international agree-ments in the question of minorities, after the manner mentioned.Latvia as a member of the League of Nations — an organisation* Protection of Minorities in Latvia, Memorandum submitted by Dr. Walters,Extr. No. 4 of the Official Journal, 3rd year, 1922.129The Jews in Latviawhich from the outset has stressed the principle of the juridicalequality of all states — is not in a position to agree to andertakean obligation which has not been undertaken by other states membersof the League of Nations, because all members of the League ofNations have to be equal.”With this approach when Latvia appeared in the international area inrespect of guarantees on the matter of minorities, it is not surprising thatthe internal policy evinced the attitude of grudging suspicion even morestrongly.When Walters returned to Riga in February 1923 he tried to persuadethe minorities to waive international supervision over their rights on thepart of the League of Nations. He seems to have been enchanted by thethought that before he presented the Declaration of Latvia on this matterto the Council of the League of Nations he ought to have in hand anagreement on the part of the minorities that they would do without anyinternational guarantees. This would have proved to the world that theminorities were happy in Latvia, and the government of the country wasbehaving properly. It would also have prevented the minorities from sub-mitting petitions to the League. What Walters envisaged for Latvia, KemalAtaturk afterwards endeavoured to implement by sheer force in Turkey.Walters had two unofficial meetings with the parliamentary representativesof the minorities in Latvia early in February 1923, but proved unsuccessful.As early as January 1922 the League of Nations had authorised itsrepresentative Da Gama to commence negotiations in this connection withthe representatives of Latvia and Esthonia. Lithuania was more amenableto a compromise, and in its Declaration of 12 May 1922 it accepted anumber of obligations with regard to its minorities, and announced thatthese obligations would be confirmed in the Basic Laws of the State. DaGama demanded that Latvia and Esthonia should give an internationalcharacter to their obligations towards their minorities. They objected, how-ever, arguing that they had granted rights to their minorities of their ownfree will and therefore should not be compared with Poland, Czechoslovakiaand other countries which had been compelled to sign minority treaties asa condition towards international recognition. Latvia demanded that theLeague of Nations should rest satisfied with recording that the protectionof minorities in Latvia was an established fact.Between January 1922 and 7th July 1923, when Latvia made its decla-ration, a struggle continued behind the scenes between Walters and Da130Political, Social & Cultural LifeGama.* Walters made every effort to obtain the agreement of the minoritiesin Latvia to the abolition of international guarantees for their rights. Butthe Germans proposed to complain to the League about the agrarian reformin the country and claim that it was an anti-German measure. The Jewsand Russians were likewise not in any great hurry to sell their internationalbirthright for a series of local rights and laws. The representatives of theminorities therefore refused to submit to Walters, and supported the inter-national position of Da Gama.**Walters finally achieved a partial victory when his Declaration wasaccepted on 7 July 1923. This Declaration recognised that Latvia had satis-fied the requirements for the protection of the minorities by internalmeasures (through her Constitution, etc.). The only obligation which Latviaundertook in this Declaration was that “the Governments of Latvia andEsthonia undertake as from this date forward to supply the Council ofthe League with all information that may be demanded if any memberof the Council raises any question regarding the situation of persons belong-ing to racial, linguistic or religious minorities in Latvia and Esthonia.”This was the political attitude towards the development of MinorityRights. At that very time the first steps were actually taken to restrictrights which the Minorities had already obtained in respect of autonomousadministration of schools. Gailet, the Minister of National Culture, com-menced the policy of restriction by issuing administrative orders wherebyhe deprived the Cultural Departments of the Minorities of their SchoolInspectors. These steps by Gailet proved how correct the representativesof the Minorities had been in resisting Dr. Walters, and in demanding thatthe Minority Rights should have an international character.In Latvia there was undoubtedly, as a rule, a united front of theMinorities which became even stronger when it was necessary to opposethe negative measures of the Government, or the propaganda of the na-tionalist groups and their chauvinist press. Nor can it be doubted thatbecause of the social and political variety within the Minorities Bloc* See the interesting exchange of correspondence and address of Da Gama, whichwere printed in the League of Nations documents: Latvia, C. 225.354, 1922.Esthonia, C. 129, M. 67, 1923.**See my article ‘Hypocrisy” in “Der Veg”, 5 February 1923, where I described thenegotiations with the representations of the minorities. “Although the deputiesof the minorities stand firm by the Latvian constitution, they are not in a positionto reject securities fashioned not by them but by international powers, and inparticular by the League of Nations.”131The Jews in Latvia(which consisted of 16-18 delegates) the Minorities of one or another wingexercised a measure of influence on the composition of the Governments.In right-wing Governments the Germans and the Aguda carried out thisprimary function for the Minorities. In democratic Governments it wasdone by the Zionists and the Russian radicals. This parliamentary ratio offorces, which influenced all the Governments of Latvia until the Fascistcoup d'etat of 1934, was the principal security for stable Minority Rights.Behind the external unity, however, there were sharp divergencies ofopinion within the bloc. This was particularly clear in the case of theGermans, who were the best organised Minority Group. They had noSocialist movement whatsoever, though a large part was played by the“little men”; the craftsmen, workers and close on 2,500 peasants withintheir total of 65,000. On the extreme Right was Baron Fircks, representingthe estate owners who had been dispossessed by the Agrarian Reform.Certain states of mind were expressed by the moderates, but they had nopolitical groups or currents, and appeared at elections with a single list inwhich all currents were combined. As a result of this and the fact that theGermans had several supporters among the small group of GermanisedLatvians, they had 6 deputies in the Seim. This number exceeded 3.8%,which was their proportion among the total population. The Jews hadthe number of delegates that corresponded to the number of Jews in thecountry, except in the Fourth Seim; while the Russians always had lessthan their proportionate number of delegates.For this reason, as well as the long centuries during which they hadstruck roots in the country, the Germans endeavoured to take the lead.They were aided by the fact that they had “exiles” in each of the multi-national States, who enjoyed minority rights either through internationaltreaties or by special clauses in their own legislation. Indeed, whereverthere were large German minorities there were also large Jewish minorities.Apart from the Baltic States the countries concerned included Poland,Roumania, Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Yugoslavia. This fact establisheda sort of relationship between Germans and Jews, which was strengthenedby the fact that Germany still served as a spiritual centre of sorts for thewhole of what is termed Ashkenazic Jewry.The contact in question found very queer expression after the establish-ment in 1925 of the “Congress of Nationalities”, which held annual con-ferences and had a permanent Executive one of whose members was Dr.Leo Motzkin. Of the Jewish deputies in the Latvian Seims, Rabbi M.Nurock and Professor M. Laserson regularly attended these Conferences.132Political, Social & Cultural LifeYet in spite of this there was an internal friction which emerged with theconsolidation and expansion of Minority rights, particularly when the draftlaw of National Autonomy was presented in the Seim.The first points of friction emerged as early as the beginning of 1923,when the Germans declared that in their opinion a single draft law coveringthe national autonomy of all the Minorities would not be effective. Theycalled for three distinct draft laws, for Germans, Jews and Russians respec-tively; and they immediately went ahead with preparing the draft law forGerman autonomy, and submitted it to the Seim Committee for PublicLaw.The Jews, together with the Russians and the Poles, regarded this asa disloyal step towards the other Minorities. Unquestionably the BalticGermans evinced their poor knowledge of psychology by this policy oftheirs. Although most of the Germans had not in any way supported theestablishment of the New Latvia in 1918-1919; although they had adopteda stand on Agrarian Reform at the Constituent Assembly that was dia-metrically opposed to the overwhelming majority of the Latvian peasantry;and although Agrarian Reform was still the subject of deliberations duringthe First Seim; nevertheless the Germans believed that the Latvians wouldagree more easily to German autonomy in order, it would appear, to atonefor their agrarian “cruelty”. They did not understand that the LatvianSocial Democrats together with other radical groups simply did not thinkthat any wrong whatever had been done to the Germans through theAgrarian reform, and felt no sense of guilt.For some reason the Germans believed that German autonomy hadgreater prospects of approval in the Seim than a general draft law pro-viding autonomy for all minorities; because, apparently, the Latvian major-ity must surely recognise and admit that the German minority had morerights in respect of the Latvian People than the others. The Germans appa-rently forgot that it was impossible to come to a people that had achievedpolitical maturity and constantly repeat: “Had it not been for us Germansand our help in cultural work, you would still have been savages like theRussian peasants.”In order to justify the isolation of German autonomy, the Germanswould offer every kind of reason, such as: The Latvians will oppose auto-nomy for the Russians because they have a long frontier in common withRussia. For the same reason they will also oppose autonomy to the Poles.They will oppose Jewish autonomy because the Latvians are Antisemites;133The Jews in Latviaand also because the Jews of Latvia are in any case not mature enoughto receive true cultural autonomy.The result was that the national minorities in Latvia split on thequestion of autonomy, whereas a united front on the part of the minoritieswas achieved in Esthonia and one general draft law for autonomy wassubmitted for all four minorities of the State: The Germans, Russians,Swedes and Jews.In the early summer of 1923 the draft Law for German autonomywas submitted to the Committe for Public Law, which selected a Sub-Committee consisting of the following: Arved Berg for the Right Wing;M. Laserson for the Jews; P. Schiemann for the Germans; and N. Maiselfor the Social Democrats.The Sub-Committee functioned slowly. Numerous clauses of the DraftLaw were approved, but from the very beginning of the discussion oppo-sition was shown to the proposed right to impose compulsory taxes. Insteadthe Sub-Committee adopted the principle of voluntary contributions. Thedeliberations made it clear that the Latvian majority did not incline to-wards any far-reaching autonomy which would include both the impositionof taxes and the "‘national cadaster” (precise register of names showingthe composition of each national group and local community) in certainparts of the country where local autonomy might be introduced.German hopes that their autonomy might be approved even if that ofthe other minorities was rejected collapsed early in 1924. But in view oftheir well-developed solidarity and absence of internal party struggles, theGermans were more easily satisfied with their substitute autonomy as soonas their independent education network was secured.The discussion of the proposed Law governing Jewish autonomy waseven more difficult.The Jewish draft law, like that of the Germans and the other minori-ties, consisted of three parts. The first specified the general principles ofthis autonomy. It repeated Articles 115 and 116 of the Second Sectionof the Latvian Constitution, which had been rejected by the ConstituentAssembly. Then rules were provided for “the national cadaster”, the localcommunities, the National Council and the structure of all these institu-tions. The second part included the (reformulated) Law for School Auto-nomy of 1919. The third part contained rules for the use of the minoritylanguage in tuition, etc.While the fate of the German draft law did not lead to any internalfriction, the Jewish Draft Law was the subject of savage debate before134Political, Social & Cultural Lifeit became law. Among the Germans only the extreme nationalist groupconsisting of Baron Fircks, Wolfius, etc., argued that the Latvians shouldrecognise the Germans as a second sovereign nationality like the Swedesin Finland and the Flemings in Belgium. Apart from them, however, theyremaining Germans were prepared to agree to all requirements of the DraftLaw regarding the autonomy of the German Minority.But among the Jewish Seim deputies and within their parties therewere three widely differing views of autonomy, represented by: The AgudatIsrael; the Assimilatinist National Democrats; and the Zionists. The Bundhad their traditional viewpoint on this matter but did not interfere withthe proposals for a general Jewish Draft Law, because they believed thattheir stand in any case would be supported by the Social Democrats ofthe Seim. It was therefore necessary to adapt this draft law to the abovethree points of view.At first the Agudat Israel was the most obstinate group. They an-nounced that they would not rest satisfied with an ordinary Jewish cadaster.The original draft law had contained a note that the name of any personwho was included in the Jewish cadaster would be expunged from it if hewent over to any other religion. In the discussion the Aguda representativedeclared that for the moment they would not raise the suggestion of asecond cadaster; but if in future the Seim were to resolve that the Jewishcommunity and Jewish autonomy were to have a secular character, theAgudat Israel reserved itself the right of demanding a second Jewish ca-daster to include those Jews who would not be satisfied with secularautonomy.*The Aguda relied largely on the experience of that party in Lithuania,where it had been almost excluded from Jewish life as a result of the se-cular Jewish autonomy established there at the beginning of the Twenties.The Assimilationist National Democrat Party was opposed to the ideaof a school network in either Hebrew of Yiddish, and was not enthusiasticabout the idea of Jewish autonomy in general. It attached importance onlyto the legal aspect of autonomy — the single organisational frame; for theleaders hoped that within that framework they could strengthen their un-certain position. The Zionists were the only group who faithfully defendedthe idea of autonomy without any other considerations. In those days the* See my articles: “On the Eve of the Autonomy” (Unser Veg, 12th January 1924);“Clerical Registration or Autonomy” (“Unser Veg”, 11th February, 1924).135The Jews in LatviaBund stood entirely to one side, for as a proletarian party it did not wishto join in the general “bourgeois” Jewish autonomy.The difference between middle-class Zionism, particularly that of theMizrahi, and Socialist Zionism was only that the former called for reli-gious functions to be included under the communal authority, whereas theZeirei Zion Party demanded from the beginning that the autonomous au-thority should be purely secular. This view of secular authority found fullexpression in the Jewish autonomy of Esthonia in 1925. But during theperiod of the First Latvian Seim the Zeirei Zion Delegate who was amember of the Committee of Public Law, which dealt with and passed allthe proposals for minority autonomy, was in a very difficult position. Whenthe Committee discussed the question of the competence of the JewishCommunity he was compelled, under the pressure of the Jewish bourgeoisrepresentations, to leave the committee and hand his place over to DeputyFishman. In discussing the proposals an important part was also playedby the intervention of the German deputies, particularly Dr. Schiemann.The latter published articles in the German “Rigasche Rundschau”, arguingthat while all the other minorities in the country could base themselves intheir demands for educational authority on their respective cultures andlanguages, the basis for autonomy among the Jews depended not on theirnational national culture but on the wishes of the parents only. In hispolemics against the stand of the Zeirei Zion deputy. Dr. Schiemann point-ed out that among Latvian Jewry the family language was quite frequentlynot Yiddish, and certainly not Hebrew, but one of the other minority lan-guages. The Germans therefore actively supported the Jewish National De-mocrats, for at the time they were interested in preserving their languageamong young Jews, particularly in Riga and Kurland.In “non-Baltic” Latgale the Germans, together with the Jewish Na-tional Democrats, were prepared to support the use of Russian as the lan-guage of instruction in Jewish schools. Thus the cultural imperialism of theGermans led them to the absurdity of expecting the Latvian Governmentto acquiesce in supporting the Germanisation and Russification of Jewishchildren with its resources.Such matters made it very difficult indeed to obtain approval for theDraft Law concerning Jewish autonomy in the Committee.In the version submitted there were parallel formulations in severalclauses. These were : a) The formulations of the Aguda; b) the formulationsof the Zionists; c) the National Democrat formulations. The sub-committeeof the Committee for Public Law had to clarify all these trifling yet corn-136Political, Social & Cultural Lifeplicated matters. So it was clear that the Jewish proposal would have faceddifficulties even if the German draft had been approved earlier. In actualfact, however, the German draft was also delayed for a long time, andwas finally shelved completely for various reasons.In the struggle for their rights the Minorities did not rest satisfied withefforts to secure their group status and national rights. They attached majorand fundamental significance to the principles of constitutional freedomand civil equality, i.e., the protection of what it has become customary sincethe Second World War to call the Bill of Rights; which includes freedomof association, liberty of the press, liberty of conscience and faith, andimmunity of the individual. The provision of all these freedoms assured aminimum of independent life for the minorities, even without full autonomy.The workers began to concern themselves actively with securing andstrengthening these rights in the law, and in having it enacted. This wasparticularly important since the second section of the Draft Law assuringthese freedoms had not been passed by the Constituent Assembly. TheFirst Seim therefore had to make good the deficiency. The only party tosupport the minorities in this constitutional struggle was the large SocialDemocrat Group of the First Seim, since the implementing of these civilliberties was vitally necessary for them as well.So it was no matter of chance that M. Laserson was invited to lectureto the Committee of Public Law on two fundamental Draft ConstitutionalLaws: 1) The Law of Companies, Societies and political organisations;and 2) The Law governing Public Meetings. After a prolonged strugglein the Committee, the Jewish deputy spoke on these matters at the SeimSession of 25th May, 1923.On this occasion the lecturer received the very active support of Y.Bastian, the Social Democrat leader. He particularly stressed the approachof the lecturer, who viewed this Draft Law as filling lacunae in the LatvianConstitution. Bastian supported the lecturer’s view that the Draft Law wasexceedingly moderate, did not reach the level of the German WeimarConstitution, and was assuredly a very long way behind the Constitutionsof the Anglo-Saxon countries.The basic principles of the said Law were opposed not only by theright-wing deputies but also by Arved Kalnin, representative of the Demo-cratic Centre. As against the speaker’s demand for a normal democraticlaw providing for freedom of association and political organisation, Kalninargued that Latvia had not yet achieved full normality. In the East she137The Jews in Latviawas threatened by the Communist peril, and therefore could not go theway of Western Europe or America.In spite of this the Draft Law was finally passed with minor amend-ments on 11th July, 1923.The Second Draft Law proposed by the lecturer and providing forfreedom of assembly also dealt with the important question of the use ofminority languages at meetings.This Draft Law was supported not only by the Social Democrats butalso by the German representatives, in whose name Dr. Schiemann spoke.It was opposed by the representatives of the Society of Peasants, whoargued against the principle that it was sufficient to give advance noticeof a meeting. They demanded that a special permit be obtained before itwas held. The Right Wing voted with them, but the Draft was adopted by52 votes with 24 abstentions, nobody voting against, at the Seim sessionof 11th July, 1923.It was also necessary to strengthen democratic principles in GeneralLaws of the country which bore no direct relation to Minority Affairs.Both symbolic and important were the debates on the law providing for apolitical police. This Law established a new political police whose functionwas to preserve and protect the regime against attack from Right andLeft; from the Fascist and Nationalist Right and from the CommunistLeft. These two groups of enemies of the New Latvia were very active,operating in part illegally and partly through legal organisations. However,the Draft Law of the Political Police, which was based on the old Russianmodels of the Tsarist regime, referred in its first clause to the protectionof “the existent system” without defining its character. Delegate Lasersonproposed an amendment to the Draft Law specifying that its purpose was“to safeguard the existent democratic regime.” While quoting one of theprotagonists of the Democratic regime of Weimar Germany, Lasersondeclared : “We do not wish to wait until the skull of the Democratic Re-public is smashed.”Delegate Petrevitch supported this amendment on behalf of the SocialDemocrats. None of the responsible delegates, even of the Right Wingbenches, offered any opposition and the amendment was passed by majorityvote. The symbolic significance of this vote was shown eleven years laterafter the Fascist coup d'etat of Ulmanis, when the Political Police, despitethe democratic first clause of its regulations, smashed the skull of localdemocracy, and placed the author of the amendment together with theSocial Democrat deputies of the Seim in a Concentration Camp at Libau ...138Political, Social & Cultured LifeIn this way the internal democracy of Latvia advanced step by step,gradually likewise implementing those freedoms which had not been intro-duced in the final version of the Constitution. Alongside political democra-tisation there was a parallel social one. Latvia did not rest satisfied withagrarian reform. It also had to take steps to improve the situation of urbanresidents. And here the question of dwellings was of major importance.The Law governing the Renting of Apartments was published on 16thJune, 1924, during the First Seim. This Law dealt not only with apartmentsbut also with the renting of single furnished or unfurnished rooms, likewiseshops, stores, workshops, etc. It imposed considerable restrictions on theright of landlords to exploit the dwellings and housing in their possessionas they saw fit. It therefore partially abrogated the old principles of theCivil Law. The passing of this law should therefore undoubtedly haveroused very keen opposition on the part of Conservative and reactionaryelements among householders.The first years after the War had been a period of urban stability andgrowth. The large number of houses that had been destroyed during hosti-lities, and the ceaseless flow to the cities, provided favourable conditionsfor raising rents. The householders clung to the favourable situation pro-duced by the old civil laws, which left no room for supervision of rentingagreements. The new Law provided the supervision, and also regulatedthe heating of apartments in houses with central heating. It provided forspecial Courts with professional judges as Chairmen, one assessor repre-senting householders and another for tenants. The second article in theLaw specified that if the renting agreements contained passages runningcounter to the Law they would be invalid, no matter whether the agree-ments in question had been signed before or after the Law came into force.The latter also provided a schedule of rental rates which were based onthe rents paid during the year before the War. This made matters difficultfor householders who wished to evict their tenants.The old Jewish town-dwellers of Latgale scarcely needed this Lawsave in Dvinsk, for there were few tenants among them. Most of the Jewishfamilies had little houses of their own. On the other hand, the law was veryimportant for the Jewish masses in the Baltic section of Latvia, and parti-cularly in Riga.As a result of the struggle for the Law, and in order to organise thetenants and safeguard their interests, a Tenants Society was established andwas joined by representatives of the Latvian and Jewish radical democratintellectuals. This Society had branches in all the provincial cities and also139The Jews in Latviain Latgale, and was one of the few non-political bodies in which the muni-cipal affairs of the Latvians and the minorities could be handled togetherin daily public life. Among the Latvian deputies the Radical DemocratPeter Bergis was exceedingly active, as was Nicolai Kalnin among theSocial Democrats. The active Jewish deputies were N. Maisel of the Bund,and M. M. Laserson. Among the Germans interest was taken by R. Knopp,who played a very modest part indeed.The left-wing Jewish deputies insisted that the Apartments Law shouldinclude not only residential dwellings but also the rents paid for shopsand workshops; for since 1914 these rents had increased more than three-fold, as compared with the rents for apartments. At the last moment thehouseholders agreed to the regulation of apartment rents, in the hope thatwhatever they lost there they would succeed in regaining from the rentsof shops and workshops. A large proportion of those renting these twocategories were urban Jews. And it was the mass consumer who finallyhad to carry the heavy load of high rent. The representatives of the ZeireiZion and the Bund supported the proposals of the Committee for SocialLegislation, while the representative of the Aguda supported the proposalsof the Legal Committee, which were more moderate.The whole range of social legislation was in essence prepared by theend of the First Seim. Among the more important laws mention shouldbe made of: Health insurance; Labour exchanges; a Law governing the hoursof work; the Social Insurance Law of 1923, which was based on thefamiliar Law introduced by Bismarck in 1871; aid for incapacitated sol-diers and their families; accident insurance (1925); and a Teachers Pen-sion Law. A Law dealing with cooperatives had already been passed on5th September 1919, when the State was being established.All these developments show that in October 1925, on the eve of elec-tions to the Second Seim, Latvian democracy had important achievementsto show, not only in respect of peasants and villages but also in its con-cern for the urban and labouring population.Despite inconsistencies in carrying out the agrarian and social legislationas far as it affected the Jews, the general democratic atmosphere had agood influence and made it possible to correct various anti-Jewish measures.For instance, the distribution of lands to the Jews was rarely approvedlocally. At the Central Land Committee, however, it was possible to changethe decisions of local Committees to the benefit of the mistreated Jews.During 1924 the Cabinet of Samuel was in power and was supportednot only by the Central Wing but also by the Social Democrats and the140Political, Social Sc Cultural LifeMinorities. This helped to calm the political atmosphere and deprived theSociety of Peasants on the extreme Right of their power. Attacks on Jewscame to an end. The Government took effective measures against theLatvian Fascists. This Cabinet has to be credited with the attempt tochange and expand the Law of Citizenship and to normalize the positionof the immigrants. Characteristically, the present writer succeeded in obtain-ing a written agreement from the Government that migrants from U.S.S.R.who wished to proceed to Eretz Israel — meaning pioneers who had beentrained in Russia, and also Zionist refugees — would be permitted to crossthe Russian-Latvian frontier without opposition on the part of the frontierauthorities if they could present an assurance by him. During 1924 andearly 1925 a large number of pioneers and Zionists crossed the frontier,sometimes with their families. After several months of recuperation theymade their way to Western Europe and Eretz Israel. At this period themembers of the Habima Theatre also left Soviet Russia and arrived inLatvia, where they presented their first European performances at theNational Theatre.The results of the elections to the Second Seim showed a large-scaletrend towards democracy among the Jews, and a considerable decline inthe assimilationist Right Wing. While the number of Jewish deputies re-mained the same, the National Democrats were defeated. The Aguda re-ceived 2 deputies: M. Dubin and R. Wittenberg; The Mizrahi 1 : M.Nurock; Zeiri Zion (Hitahdut) 1 : M. Laserson, N. Maisel, the Bundrepresentative, was again elected with the active support of the SocialDemocrats who had 32 members in the Seim.In the list of Seim deputies the Bund representative was registered asa representative of the Bund Jewish Social Democrat Party, but he tookpart in Committees on behalf of the General Social Democrats. The Na-tional Democrats vanished from the political scene, never to return.2. The Second SeimTHE Second Seim marked the best period of Latvian democracy. The firsttwo Governments of this period, those of Ulmanis from 24th December,1925 to 6th May 1926, and of Albering from 7th May, 1926 to 18th De-cember 1926, both represented the Peasants Party. However, the formerwas also supported by the Minorities while the latter retained controlwithout relying on a permanent majority and held to the principle: “Free-141The Jews in Latviadom from Minorities”. The minorities, including the Germans, did notvote for it.It seems that the relative inactivity of the Social Democrat group ascompared with the First Seim — in spite of its initiative in the agrarianreform — as well as the numerical stability of the Peasant Party’s re-presentatives encouraged this state of mind. In any case the fact remainsthat the two Peasant Party Cabinets felt that they were strong enoughnot to need to pay too much attention to those who did not support them.There was room for complaint not only by the Minorities but even moreby the poverty-stricken peasantry of Latgale, who were attracted not tothe Peasant Party which represented well-to-do farmers, but to the pettyLatgale groups. Shameful measures were taken in various places under theprotection of the Peasant Party, and sometimes even in the Central LandsCommittee itself. Nor did the latter prevent grave acts of exploitationagainst the small peasants and merchants of all nationalities in Latgale.Particularly distressing was the behaviour of the “Latvian Bank forTrade and Industry”, which led to an interpellation to the Minister ofFinance. This Bank charged a usurious interest of 36 percent and some-times of even more than 48 percent, thus causing the ruin of its clientelewhose property was put up for public auction. However, the interpellationson this unpleasant affair helped to bring about the organisation of a power-ful opposition, and prepared the ground for the unification of those dis-satisfied with the domination of the Peasant Party.December 1926 saw the Left-wing Cabinet of M. Skujenek, which re-mained in power until the end of January, 1928. The vote for this Cabinetwas by roll-call, and Skujenek received a majority of 52 votes. The Jewswho voted for him were Laserson, Maisel and Nurock; while the two re-presentatives of the Aguda, together with the German group, left thehall during the voting.During the period of this Cabinet the first complete split came aboutin the 16-strong Minorities bloc. It was brought about on the one sideby the right-wing section which included the five German deputies, theright-wing Russians and the two Aguda representatives, while against themwere all the 7 left-wing minority representatives.During this period the inner differences within Latvian democracy cameto a head. A Fascist orientation began to develop in the extreme right wing.The success of the Fascist putsch in Lithuania in December 1926, as aresult of which the first Baltic Dictatorship of Waldemaras was established,undoubtedly helped to encourage a similar state of mind in Latvia. The142jPolitical, Social & Cultural LifeLatvian National Club was outspokenly Fascist. The Skujenek Coalitiontook fright at the growth of Fascism and helped to organise the SocialDemocrat Workers’ Sports League, which it helped by the acquisition ofa certain quantity of arms. The suppression of the attempted militaryputsch at Wolmar in the second half of 1927 proved that Latvian Fascismwas certainly not asleep.As remarked, the seven progressive deputies in the Minorities votedfor the Skujenek Cabinet, thus contributing to the victory of the Left-wingCoalition. During the First Seim the minorities had not yet organised as apolitical force. Since they constituted a group of 15-16 members they hadconsiderable value in fixing the “key” of participation in the Seim Com-mittees, and were actually represented in all of them and in the Seim Pre-sidium. However, their main strength lay in their watchful stand to preventany reduction in or withholding of recognised rights in respect of self-deter-mination or civic equality. This had been the foundation of the Minoritiesbloc, which the Social Democrats used to define, either for purposes ofdispute or during serious discussion of the constitutional rights of thecitizen, as “the Bloc from the Socialist Laserson to Baron Fircks.” Thevarious parts of the bloc were never united in respect of confidence orno confidence in Cabinets. Sometimes it was hard to foresee which sectionwould prevail.However, as the Left-wing Coalition developed and united, there cameabout a basic differentiation between the various sections of the Minoritiesbloc. At the beginning of the Second Seim, as during the First Seim, theconservative majority of the Bloc aimed to isolate its two radical members,namely the Russian Kalistratov, representative of the Russian peasants inLatgale, and the Jew Laserson, with the aim of supporting the right-wingCabinets with the aid of the remaining 14 votes. At the establishment ofthese Cabinets (of Ulmanis, Tzelmin and others) the minorities were givenvarious assurances of a cultural and of a economic character which, how-ever, were either not kept or kept only in part. The freezing of the questionof (German and Jewish) autonomy, and the unceasing negotiations regardingthe problem of citizenship, are clear evidence that the minorities did nothave any real influence even on Cabinets they fully supported. However,after a prolonged period of disappointments there finally came about signi-ficant changes, at the end of 1926, in the balance of forces among theirparliamentary representatives.The active supporters of the Left-wing Coalition came to include twoRussians, Shkooliansky and Tikhonitsky, two Poles, Werzevicki and Wil-143The Jews in Latviafiszewski, together with Rabbi Nurock. These, together with the two Left-wing minority members, united as a Progressive Minorities Group of 7 depu-ties. As a result the minorities lost the stain of backwardness, conservatismand reaction that had been stamped upon them ever since the foundationof Latvia.It was clear that the new coalition was inevitably opposed economicallyto the Society of Peasants and the extreme right wing of the Seim. Matterson the Agenda included the strengthening of industry and the improvementof the conditions of the urban population. It was absolutely necessary toreduce considerably the support of and allocations for the well-to-do pea-santry. Every change of this kind was certain to benefit the Jewish masses:The craftsmen, workers and clerks, and the small and medium tradesmen.One might therefore have assumed that the Aguda would also support thenew Coalition. Instead, however, it adopted a hostile attitude.It warned the Jewish masses that when the Social Democrats came topower they would introduce a whole series of monopolies in the most vitalbranches of trade and industry. These would chiefly engage in economicexperiments, would be opposed to private enterprise, and would underminethe position of the Jewish merchant and middleman.All these prophecies proved false. The Left Coalition promptly coopteda member of the minorities to the Central Committee for regulating landmatters, in order to prevent favoritism in the grant of land to members ofthe National Minorities. The Nationality Law was reconsidered and amend-ed. And in the economic affairs of Latvia the Cabinet proceeded from theinternal policy of the country to its foreign policy.After prolonged negotiations between Esthonia and Latvia for a non-aggression pact with U.S.S.R., Latvia evinced a special tendency underSkujenek’s Cabinet to reach this agreement, largely for economic reasonsand also in order to strengthen the position of Latvia at the League ofNations. The Non-Aggression Pact was signed on 9th March, 1927, butit was clear that this was not enough, and that a trade agreement withSoviet Russia would also be necessary.This Agreement was signed by the Latvian and Russian Delegationson the 6th of June, 1927. Its final ratification was very carefully discussedby the Seim during two sessions on 25 and 26th October. In accordancewith supplementary clauses which were withheld from publication, SovietRussia undertook to order goods from Latvian industry to a total of 40million lat, while Latvia undertook to purchase 19 million lats’ worth of144LATVIAN GENERAL ZIONIST CONFERENCE, 1933Presidium: seated r. to I.: Dr. J. Shraga, M. Cohen, Z. Rabinovitch, B. Gurevitch,El. Ettingen, J. Tron, Dr. A. Zalkind, Dr. H. Wasserman.CONVENTION OF ZEFREI ZION IN LATVIAPresidium : seated r. to 1.: Zwi Gorfinkel, Yerachmiel Vinnik. Mendel Bobe.iimmmHIS-:-:m■'.*»l_mft)* —■<cI)• *-*XNXcdOSr>uOa■s©*c73<Gft)>«)S\)«-NcdXJ3■*-»BXft)edOS£3>< oJ •-5 §15K o!N3 oNu- £O f5w -4-Jc/5 >* .W -cQ S< >w 2J .5-DedoSuft)•S<CQ £acs •-J= hifi c*o ed* £ft)n4•*>*N*5C-US73>edQua mc x:vt>O40<o is *a ded ft)£ •§& sx os•g 5S 6Z edN3 ••§ <3ft) W)73 Gb *5o <uN W MsT ft)I *°O c*c ‘S.2 >s \a)X »GB tfSed O? )S x: ^&zft)73ft)150)5fti4JD30Ooedb4ed03ISJD• «Pcd£OSN>>• ••N■*-*oO**X•3lmhJmB£'S• p»«cdBX08-**U«3DLEADERS OF AGUDAT ISRAEL IN LATVIASeated r. to I.: Shalom Bag, —, Mordechai Dubrovsky, Avigdor Volshonok, MordechaiDubin, Zwi Hirsch Gutmann, Ben Zion Leibson.Seated r. to I.: Moshe Joelson, Arye Dissentchik, Moshe Gold, Ze’ev Jabotinsky, Dr. JacobHoffman, Moshe Budnia, Eliyahu Bergman.Standing r. to I.: Nachman Fain, Tuvia Machlin, S. Klishevsky, Jacob Zeitlin, MosheHeilman, David Karstadt.CONVENTION OF THE “BUND” IN RIGA, 1934Speaker: Isaac (Julius) Rabinovitch.FOR ISRAELr. to I.: W. Latzky-Bertholdi, Dr. J. Heilman, Prof. P. Mintz, —, El. Ettingen, J. Aisenstadt,Senator O. O. Grusenberg, H. Wolf, Rabbi M. Nurok, Kerber, B. Nurok, Prof. M. Laserson,M. Cohen, Dr. J. Jaffe.Seated r. to I.: —, Al. Livshin. Z. Jakobson, J. Landau, A. Rabinovitz, N. Mintz,M. Silpert, Dr. B. Meyer.Standing r. to I.: Ishurin, Izikson, Architect Mandelstamm, Goldring, Zusman, Dr. Reimami,Political, Social & Cultural LifeSoviet goods. In addition Latvia undertook to reduce its protective tariffsby 20 percent in favour of U.S.S.R.Jewish merchants, industrialists, craftsmen, workers and intellectualsall welcomed the Agreement, particularly because they saw that it offeredprospects of strengthening and encouraging trade and industry, benefittingports like Riga, Libau, Windau and leading to increased orders from SovietRussia. This also applied in part to non-Jewish industrial and commercialcircles. (See my lecture to the Trade and Industry Association which waspublished in the “Frimorgen” on 27th April, 1927; also my address to theBialik Club, “Frimorgen,” 27th June, 1927.)The arguments of the opponents were primarily aimed to prove thatthe Agreement was liable to lead to artificial production which wouldrequire the investment of considerable capital; so that if Russia did notkeep her promises to the full there would be a severe crisis. Factories wouldbe prepared and equipped exclusively for the consumption habits of SovietRussia. As a result their products would not suit the requirements ofWestern Europe, and would therefore remain unsaleable of Russia did notcarry out her agreement precisely.In spite of this it should be noted that a wave of optimism passed eventhrough those circles which were very far, politically speaking, from havingany feelings of friendship for Soviet Russia. And so it came about that inthe course of the vote by roll-call regarding the approval of the Agreementat the Seim session of 26th October, it gained the votes not only of thetwo Aguda opponents of the Coalition but also of all the German delegatesexcept Baron Fircks. The extreme right-wing Russians and two Poles werethe only ones who voted against the Agreement. Naturally enough, theJewish Commercial Association and craftsmen were in favour.No less interesting was the cultural life of Latvian Jewry at this time.Here we shall deal with this subject only in so far as it was reflected in theactivities and debates of the Latvian Parliament during the Second Seim.It is doubtful whether there was any other Parliamentary institution to befound in Europe or elsewhere which at any time dedicated so much atten-tion to the autonomous administration of Jewish schools and the mutualrelations between the Hebrew and Yiddish school networks. At the sametime it should be noted that between the two World Wars (1919-1939)Latvia was the only country where the Bund, the opponents in principleof Hebrew schools, had a parliamentary representative of their own. As aresult the views of the Bund exerted an appreciable influence on Latvianlegislation for the term of three Seims (1922-1932).145The Jews in LatviaDuring the period of the left-wing Coalition matters became acute be-cause two Zionist votes, of the Mizrahi and Zeirei Zion respectively, gavea majority to the Cabinet (52 out of 100). Although cooperation betweenthese two Zionist representatives was very close, there can be no doubtthat the main weight of the struggle for the Hebrew schools fell on theZeirei Zion representative. This was due in part to the fact that the struggleabout the schools was particularly sharp in Latgale, where the Bund en-deavoured to ensure the hegemony of Yiddish in Jewish education.Now although the Zeirei Zion had the same views as the Latvian SocialDemocrats on most political and social matters and were in closer touchwith them than the Mizrahi, it was the Zeirei Zion which came into conflictwith the Social Democrats, who included the Bund, in respect of Zionistculture. This conflict found expression not only in the Seim but also in anumber of municipalities. At the same time there were Social DemocratSeim members who openly disavowed the Bund on account of their fana-tical, anti-democratic fight against Hebrew. (See “Der Ruf \ 25 November,1927.) The Hebrew Movement grew particularly under the Cabinet of Sa-muel (1925-1926). At this time the Hamoreh Association was founded.Kindergartens were opened, elementary and secondary Hebrew Schools wereestablished. Above all, thenceforward the Hebrew Movement, with the sup-port of the Zionist Movement, set out to penetrate the ranks of the generalTeachers’ Federation, in which the Yiddishists had previously been thesole representatives of Jewry and of Jewish schools. Similarly a majorstruggle began everywhere, particularly in the Seim and the Municipalities,to obtain equal rights for Hebrew as well as Yiddish.This struggle promptly met with fanatical opposition on the part ofthe Yiddishists, for whom the Social Democrat Bund provided an organisa-tional and political basis. Even extreme left-wing Yiddishist groups, up toand including the Communists, endeavoured to exploit the special positionof the Bund, particularly its close ties with the Social Democrats andprogressive Latvian teachers. Hamoreh and the more active Zionist circlesendeavoured to obtain approval for the Hebrew schools in Latvian SocialDemocrat circles, among their Seim members and active personalities, etc.In June, 1926, a special publication called ‘Tvrit” (Hebrew) appeared inLatvian. Thanks to cooperation between the Zionist Bloc and the SocialDemocrats in the Seim and the municipalities, close contact was graduallyestablished between the progressive Latvians and the Hebrew Movement.The Mizrahi and the General Zionists abandoned this struggle entirely, so146Political, Social & Cultural Lifethat it became the almost exclusive monopoly of the Zeirei Zion and otherleft-wing Zionist circles.The apprehensions of the Yiddishists increased in particular during theperiod of Skujenek’s left-wing Coalition. Those special ties between left-wing Zionists and the Latvian Social Democrats proved of considerable usein the struggle to ensure the rights of the Hebrew schools. We still havea copy of an interesting essay published in a Yiddish journal which stoodconsiderably left of the Bund, called “Arbeiter Welt”. It appeared on4th February 1927, was signed T. S. and was entitled “Double Book-keeping’. When the left-wing Cabinet commenced its activities, this paperwrote inter alia:“We do not yet know what benefits can actually be expected from theleft-wing Coalition. Yet one thing at least is already perfectly clear: Noblessing will come to the Yiddish schools from this Bloc of Social De-mocrats, Zeirei Zion and Mizrahi. ... The daily press has published thenews that the Social Democrats have promised their Zionist companionsin the Coalition to secure for the Hebrew language the same legal rightsas Yiddish — which means, under present conditions in the Jewish street,the beginning of the destruction of the Yiddish school. At the ThirteenthConference of Latvian teachers the Zionists threatened to break up theGovernment Coalition unless their demand in respect of the languages wasadopted. Furthermore, these threats compelled the poetess Aspasia (wifeof the Minister of Culture) to appear with a pro-Zionist speech such asthe Zionists themselves never heard even in their dreams, while the SocialDemocrats gazed at her in astonishment...“In Riga itself the situation is far worse. A few years ago the Zionistssucceeded in imposing the upkeep of the Hebrew schools on the Munici-pality, and they achieved this thanks only to the help of the Social DemocratMunicipal Councillors who disregarded the present law regarding schools,which provides in so many words that tuition in school must be conductedonly in the mother tongue of the pupil. But the appetite increases witheating...“— Does the Bundist member of the Seim know of this calculatedattempt against the life of the Yiddish schools? Are the Bundist Councilmembers aware of it? Will they move at least a finger to stop the Zionistplottings ?”Truth to tell, the Yiddish schools were not in any danger, althoughfeelings of sympathy towards the Hebrew schools undoubtedly increasedsteadily in the progressive and Socialist circles of Latvia for a long time147The Jews in Latviabefore and after the Latvian coalition. Sympathy for the Hebrew schoolswas shown by a long list of Social Democrats, including Rdnis, Tzelens,Aspasia, Dekens and, above all, a great many teachers. Their opinion de-rived from the healthy feeling that in the choice between Yiddish, whichseemed to them to be only a variant of German, and classical Hebrew,they had to support the latter. This psychological rejection of Yiddish wasstronger even than the party discipline and political solidarity which theBund called for whenever possible. There was also some weight to thefact that the left-wing Zionists, many of whom had participated in theLatvian Revolutionary Movement as long before as 1905 and 1906, sup-ported the Social Democrats with greater and more disinterested affectionthan the Bund.It was therefore natural that the very existence of the left-wing Coalitionserved to encourage the cultural position of Zionism. That was why theperiod of this Coalition saw an open conflict in the Seim between the Bundand the Zeirei Zion. Undoubtedly the right-wing opposition did its best toexploit this internecime conflict in order to shake the Cabinet. A wholeseries of stratagems against the Hebrew schools and their teachers, whichwere prepared by the Bund and the Yiddishists behind the scenes, becameknown to the opponents of the left-wing Coalition, who decided to exploitthis material in their questions to Reinis, the Minister of Culture, in No-vember, 1927.In a critical speech regarding the Ministry, P. Sepp of the Farmers’Democratic Society of Latgale spoke of the situation of the Hebrew schools,relying on a circular sent out by the Yiddishist “Central School Organisa-tion” which he had received from a Municipal Councillor in Rezhitse.This Circular referred to a Miss Lutzow, teacher at the Jewish ElementarySchool, who had been employed there for one year in all. In his speechSepp remarked:“The institution known as the Central Committee of the Jewish SchoolOrganisation which is associated with the party of Mr. Maisel has sentseveral circulars to its members demanding that they should find someway of removing Miss Lutzow from her post and replacing her by amember of their party. The circular is written in Russian, and I shalltherefore read you some relevant sections in their very words:“As you can see for yourselves, the situation is very serious. It willbe impossible to continue working in this field unless a certain attitudeis established on the part of the Schools Council towards Miss Lutzow.If you have not yet done anything about this, please call an urgent148Political, Social & Cultural LifeMeeting of the Schools Council. (Summon all of them, let nobody beabsent!) Speak firmly, protest against the school administration. Atthis meeting you must give the principal a lesson, you must rebukehim for his stand in the school administration against the interests ofthe school and the wishes of most members of the Council. He mustbe warned privately (not at the Meeting) that he may have to leavehis post as Principal. The Council must also resolve not to allowMiss Lutzow to enter the school — in case you have not done thatyet. We are awaiting your telegram confirming the adoption of ourabove resolution by the School Council.We await notice by telegram because we shall have to take furthersteps by Sunday (we find that we shall not be able to receive lettersuntil Monday). In case you have in any case decided to take thesesteps, then if you have anything to inform us about the matter, pleasetelegraph without delay.“In this special case you must mobilise all of them and show moreactivity than in the case of Pinner. Our position in Rezhitse dependson this.”These and similar facts quoted by Sepp and other opposition memberswere intended to bring about a declaration of no confidence in the Minister,Reinis. At the following meeting which was dedicated to this question, along speech was delivered by Laserson who declared that although he couldnot approve the hesitant position of the Minister in respect of the activitiesof Municipal representatives who were subject to Yiddishist influence orinspiration from Bund circles, he would nevertheless vote against the motionof no confidence. A number of relevant passages are quoted from thisspeech, which serves to illustrate the tense atmosphere in which we werecompelled to protect the Hebrew schools.“I shall now pause to deal with a matter that has no direct connectionwith the complaints expressed in this motion against the Minister andMinistry of Culture. In order that my words may be properly under-stood, and to prevent conflicting interpretations, I must remark tobegin with that I do not for a single moment question the intentionsunderlying the orders of the Ministry of Education. I shall likewisestress that we have before us a question deriving from a public andcultural dispute, a dispute between a school network of a certain kindand a school network of an entirely different kind. I speak here ofthe Hebrew and the Yiddish schools. I do not in any way doubt thatin his treatment of the schools the Minister does not in any way dis-149The Jews in Latviacriminate between them. Yet in actual practice experience has beenquite different. We clearly see that in Latvia, and particularly in Lat-gale, the entire Hebrew school network is subjected to persecutionand interference, in spite of the fact that Mr. Reims has more thanonce expressed his affection for the Hebrew cultural movement. Oneof these facts refers to Kraslava and another to Dvinsk.“On 31st July the Elementary Municipal School Council in Kraslavaappointed Gorfinkel (a Member of Zeirei Zion — Hitahdut) to thevacant post of Principal. This Gorfinkel is not a desirable candidatein the eyes of our Yiddishist rivals. At the meeting of the KraslavaMunicipal Council held on 22nd August, the candidature of Gor-finkel was not even presented for deliberation. On the other hand acertain Mr. Glickman was appointed to the post on the Mayor’s re-commendation, although his name had not even been brought beforethe School Council.“Now this is absolutely contrary to Articles 17 and 36 of the Lawfor Cultural Institutions, according to which teachers may be appointedto serve in such institutions by school councils only. We must pointout that some time ago, after a protest on the part of parents of thepupils of the Kraslava School, the Ministry of Culture sent an orderon the 9th of September dismissing Glickman from his post as Prin-cipal, and replacing him by the candidate proposed by the SchoolCouncil; for on the basis of Article 17 and 36 of the Law the Ministerfound that Glickman had not been appointed in legal fashion. How-ever, the fortunate Glickman was not yet prepared to give up, andin order to strengthen his new position and likewise without considera-tion for the fact that his post had not yet been finally approved, hesummoned from Libau his fellow party-man to serve as teacher. Allthis was done in absolute disregard of the fact that Glickman had noauthority to act as School Principal. (Interruption by Maisel.) Mr.Maisel, please don’t be excited. You will obtain permission to answerafter me.“The Minister for his part sent the Government official Hochman inorder to find out precisely what had been happening in Kraslava. Andwhat did Hochman find when he came there? At the meeting of theschool parents the Mayor had appeared accompanied by four or fivepersons, who did not have any right to be present as their childrenwere not among the pupils of the school. However, by these artificialand illegal measures they provided themselves with a majority! AndPolitical, Social & Cultural Lifeindeed, why should these gentlemen care about the law when theyhave to fight their political rivals, the Hebraists? Gentlemen, it isdoubtful whether in any democratic country in the world there hasbeen such a scandal of acquiring a majority by such inproper measuresas this !“It is therefore clear to all of us why on the 10th of October theMinister of Culture issued an Order (No. 5023), drawing attention tothe Illegal cancelling of elections’ of the School Council on the 24thSeptember, and requiring the Kraslava School Council to hold aparent’s meeting again and elect a new Parents’ Council... However,among the inhabitants of Kraslava there are persons who feel them-selves so strong and powerful that they never event dreamt of com-plying with the provisions of this Order of the 10th of October; sincethey must presumably have supposed that this Order might prove ofbenefit to the supporters of Hebrew. It is quite possible that they hada basis to believe that they would find support for themselves in anycase, and they might therefore defer the matter even if it was againstthe rule of the Minister. So they did not obey the Order of the Min-ister of Culture at all. However, that was not the end of the affair.The Minister gave instructions that the Mayor of Kraslava should actas was required. But in view of this behaviour of rejection by defer-ment, the Minister issued a second Order (No. 5341 of 21st October)requiring the Parents’ Meeting to elect a School Council by the 1st ofNovember.“One might have supposed that this time the Minister of Culturehad fixed a final legal date to prevent any further delay. But no. Onthat very day there came about a kind of miracle which was entirelyto the benefit of the lucky Glickman. The Minister of Culture issuedan order to cancel his earlier decision. I very much doubt the justifi-cation for this sudden change. Yet undoubtedly the sudden changeon the part of the Minister encouraged the Mayor together with othermunicipal workers in Kraslava. The rivals of the parents celebratedtheir victory. They would decide entirely by themselves whether ornot to hold the Second Meeting. Why, this was as though the Ministerhad indirectly told the Mayor and his municipal companions: Gentle-men, you have permission to do whatever you see fit. You even havethe right not to hold a Parents’ Meeting at all.“I do not wish to spend too much of the time of the present sessionon this matter. Nevertheless I cannot but remark that similar things151The Jews in Latviaalso happened in Dvinsk. There as well the Parents for three timesin succession selected a candidate who was not approved by the Mu-nicipal Council. To this day the elected candidate cannot go and carryout the duties required of him. I shall not deny the fact that the lawregarding the division of powers between the two parties concerned,that is, between the Ministry and the local municipal administration,is not as precise as it should be with regard to the administration ofschools. Yet in spite of this I cannot agree to or accept the assumptionthat our present laws provide for a depriving of the Ministry of Cul-ture's right to issue Orders. (Italics in the Seim Report — M.L.).Such an interpretation of laws is not permissible, otherwise it wouldreduce us to a state of complete absurdity.”Continuing, Laserson analysed the Articles of the Law of Culture andproved that the demands and interpretations of the Yiddishists involvedthe assumption that the Minister had less rights in schools than the SchoolInspectors, who under certain conditions were entitled to dismiss teachers.“Now with regard to Glickman I am not prepared to consider hisbackground or the course of events from the beginning. On the firstoccasion the Minister was whole-hearted about his Order, but not thesecond time. Such hesitancies are connected with a state of affairswhich I am not prepared to discuss in this high institution. And yetthe fact that in this and similar instances the Municipal Councils actfrom the very beginning in accordance with political considerations— this, gentlemen, is a fact of which you can convince yourselves bythe case of Dvinsk, where the Municipal Council suggested a com-promise. This Council seems to have been very annoyed by the factthat Weisspap, the candidate proposed by the parents, is not suffi-ciently familiar with Yiddish. In any case the Municipal Council ofDvinsk informed the Minister that it has nothing whatsoever againstthe appointment of Weisspap to the Hebrew School as long as he isnot appointed to the (third) Yiddish School, even as a teacher ofHebrew. The Municipal Council agreed to appoint Weisspap to thesecond School and also to the fifth; but under no condition to thethird. What is the reason? Why is the teacher so-and-so desirablepedagogically in a certain school whereas he is entirely undesirablein another ? There is no official answer to this.“To sum up, you, Mr. Minister, are being dragged for purely politicalreasons into an internal dispute that concerns the cultural life of the152Political, Social & Cultural LifeJewish People. We do not request any concessions or privileges forourselves: What we are asking for is legality. Taking the existingsituation into consideration, under no conditions may a situation bepermitted such as the one which is steadily being established in Dvinskand Kraslava I fully support the view of Mr. Dekens the veteranpedagogue, who said on one occasion: ‘It is impossible to accept alocal authority which does not obey the Instructions of the Centre.’Gentlemen, are not these words well suited to what is happening nowin Dvinsk and Kraslava? Are we not in a position to declare thatthe local authority insists on going its own way ? That the Mayor ofKraslava, for example, feels himself quite in order even though heignores the decisions of the Minister, because he hopes that with theaid of the tactics of delay he will be able to bring about the com-plete cancellation of the Minister’s Orders.“— Here I wish to dissociate myself from those gentlemen on theRight who oppose the Minister of Culture from a completely differentpoint of view. In particular I wish to dissociate myself from Mr. Sepp,for example, who claimed that the struggle between the protagonistsof Yiddish and Hebrew is a purely political one, that the supportersof Hebrew are more general while the supporters of Yiddish are out-standingly Leftists... I do not wish to go into this at length. (TV.Maisel interrupts,) You, Mr. Maisel, as I have already pointed out,will still have an occasion to speak here about this matter, and I donot wish to deprive you of it. Gentlemen, Mr. Sepp spoke about ourstruggle and read out to the deputies present a Circular sent by theCentral School Organisation to its local supporters, in which it urgesthem to present candidates of their own who will fight against thesupporters of Hebrew at every step and by any means whatsoever...If the Central School Organisation or any other body fights by un-worthy methods which cannot be permitted in a democratic countrylike ours, I feel it necessary to state here that I do not intend to putthe blame for this behaviour of the Central School Organisation onthe Minister of Education. Today’s question is actually directed againstthe Cabinet as a whole. I shall therefore vote against the adoptionof the Question because here I represent that party which ever sincethe days of the Constituent Assembly has been dedicated to the prin-ciple of Democracy and has always supported purely DemocraticGovernments only. It is possible that the present left-wing Govern-ment tends, whether by virtue of one-sided influence or because of153The Jews in Latviaother considerations, to support the cultural current which is opposedto us. Maybe this is already an established fact. Unhappily the prin-ciple of equal rights has not been taken into consideration here at all.Unhappily, for in a Protestant country, where freedom of opinionand liberty of conscience have been recognised since the SeventeenthCentury, we are being persecuted thanks to slogans whose purposeis neither less nor more than the suppression of our ancient Hebrewculture. (K. Ulmanis from his seat: Who is persecuting you?) Thisdoes not refer to you, Mr. Ulmanis, but to Mr. Maisel (laughter).This time I wish to say that it is the duty of the Ministry of Cultureto speak clearly about this matter. Mr. Ulmanis, I do not knowwhether you will like my words or not, but here in Latvia there isautonomy of the schools — even if it is restricted. All the more, ifyou are entitled to speak against the Ministry of Culture as you wish,then I am entitled to criticise the Ministry in quite a different spirit.You cannot prohibit me from doing so. (Shouts.)“I think that the Ministry is not entitled to permit this autonomyhere in Latvia to become rule by a strong-arm group. Now in whataffects our direction, appointed Mayors and other fictitious personsappear at meetings of parents and act there as though the place be-longed to them, in an unheard-of fashion which cannot be permittedunder any conditions. However, in spite of what has happened I hopethat in the nearest possible future we shall reach the point whereequal rights will actually be established as between the two culturalmovements whose existence is a fact which must inevitably exist inthe country. It is my hope that the Ministry of Culture will in turntake all necessary steps in good time in this connection, and I there-fore express my opinion against adopting the motion.”At the following session Dr. Maisel did his best to reduce the impressionmade on his Social Democrat fellow-members by Laserson’s speech, whichhe described as moral support for the enemies of the left-wing Coalition.However, none of the Social Democrats reacted to Maisel’s words. Dr.Maisel was against the principle of equal rights for Yiddish and Hebrew,but his fight was foredoomed to failure. Indeed, the struggle was lost evenbefore the left-wing Cabinet was established in the second half of Novem-ber, 1926. At a historic session of the Cultural Committee Laserson’s for-mula was adopted, providing for equal rights of the two languages inJewish schools maintained by the Government and the Local Authorities.This formula was supported by a decisive majority of 8 representatives154Political, Social & Cultural Lifeincluding the Social Democrat Dekens. The only person to vote against wasDr. Maisel, the representative of the Bund. The Social Democrat Elias andthe German Teller refrained from voting.The Social Democrats held firm to this opinion in spite of all the effortsof the Bund. Undoubtedly the period of the left-wing Coalition strengthenedthe status of the Hebrew schools, and thus inoculated them against thepossibility of subsequent weakening.The left-wing Coalition lasted for rather more than one year, and inmany respects the brief period was the best for the Jews of Latvia. Thisapplied not only to local policy but also to foreign policy and internationalrelations in general. While the clerical Peasant Fascism of Lithuania wasbeginning to strike roots, there was a ceaseless struggle in Latvia andEsthonia for the implementation of democratic principles in the State asa whole, and for the Jews as well. Even Jewish towns like Glazmanka*Preil, ? reuzburg, etc., received rights of municipal autonomy, being with-drawn from the authority of the Village Councils, and hence from theirburdensome taxation system. In this respect the transformation of theseJewish towns into small municipalities afforded progress for the Jewishpopulation. In certain respects, however, the change involved several gravedifficulties, and first and foremost the allocation of lands in accordancewith the new agrarian reform. The change of Governments had its effecton the work of the Central Committee for Lands. As remarked, the RussianDelegate Shiomiansky was officially appointed to this Committee duringthe left-wing Coalition as a representative of the Minorities, in order tcensure unbiassed and unprejudiced deliberations. Hence during this Coalitionlands were transferred in a far fairer fashion than before.In practice two Jewish representatives, Du bin and Laserson, regularlyattended all meetings of this Central Committee (under all Governments)at which local complaints regarding the allocation of lands were broughtup for discussion. Sometimes Dr. Maisel was also present. M. Nurock alsoappeared on occasion, in connection with land matters affecting Kurland.After the fall of the left-wing Cabinet, however, there was a grave deteriora-tion in the position of the poor and impoverished Jews of the small towns,in respect of land allocation. This was not so much a disregard of the justclaims of individuals as an instability in the methods of settling landproblems within the small towns.The Jewish inhabitants had always made use of village common landsand the houses built on them in accordance with the rights of “Zinsch”155The Jews in Latvia(in Latgale); * and also as long-standing lessors. But many Jews had lostvaluable documents, contractual agreements, etc., particularly on accountof the upheavals of the First World War, the Expulsions, etc. Rural landswhich had previously been the property of the large estate-holders in Latgalewere transferred to the State Land Fund in order that their original ownersmight regain them. And what happened? The Agrarian Reform hurt theJews of the small towns and large villages far more than it did the peasantsand villagers.This came about not only in isolated Court cases as a result of whichJewish lease-holders were compelled to give up places where they had beenliving a very long time for the benefit of officials or persons from otherplaces, but also when it came to fixing the boundaries of the small townsand preparing the more general plans which were ostensibly intended onlyto serve as a basis for their growth and development... Furthermore, asa result of discussions on issues transferred to the Central Committee fromsuch places as Preil, Bagda, Vishki, etc., grazing grounds were taken awayentirely from the Jewish small town population or else were greatly reduced.After the fall of the left-wing Coalition in particular, the cattle and livestockof the poor Jewish villagers remained without any pasturage at all.In March 1928 it was found that the only way to improve matters wasby a set of new regulations. Documents disposing of land, even of con-siderable property value, were not infrequently prepared without the know-ledge of the village residents. It is obvious that the Village Councils werealways prepared to reduce the area of market towns. This tendency couldalso be observed in provincial land committees. It was therefore absolutelynecessary to ensure that the residents of market towns had the right ofsharing in the preparation and approval of land programmes in placeswhere there was a large concentration of inhabitants. In this connectionLaserson proposed the adoption of a provisional formula “to require theGovernment and the Central Lands Committee to ensure without delaythat in order to prepare and approve plans for densely populated areas itshall be necessary to invite representatives on behalf of the areas concerned,even if the said areas have not yet been granted the right of conductingtheir own affairs.”* The right of Zinsch, a relic of local Polish law, is the hereditary right of usingland belonging to others subject to a specific and fixed payment. The right ofZinsch applies to both rural and urban real estate. It is important to note that theright of Zinsch differed from the right of hiring or leasing, in that no time limitwas involved.156Political, Social & Cultural LifeTowards the end of January 1927 the Committee for Public Law beganto study the Law of Citizenship. Dr. N. Maisel was appointed rapporteuron the proposed law. He did not in any way intend to solve basic andvital questions in this field. His purpose was not to submit daring or ex-treme proposals, but on the contrary to present a proposal that wouldeasily obtain a majority in the Seim.As remarked, the National Council had already considered this matterin August 1919, but the Latvian legislative institutions had never recognisedthe principle of the Polish Minorities Agreement, according to which thenew State was required automatically to register as a citizen every personborn within the area of the State who had not received some other citizen-ship, in virtue of his place of birth. During the period of the earlier law of1921 the “Children of the Eighties” and their offspring were not entitledto demand citizenship. The law was based on the principle of registration.With the aid of his draft law Deputy Maisel aimed at securing rights ofcitizenship for those persons who on the date of the promulgation of thelaw were resident in the country, had never accepted any other citizenshipand had resided within the frontiers of Latvia for at least six monthsbefore the 1st of August, 1914 when the First World War began, or for sixmonths before the 18th of November 1918, when Latvia became indepen-dent. The latter date was included to make matters easier for those whowere unable to prove that they had resided in Latvia before the First WorldWar. He did not refer to persons residing elsewhere who wished to acquireLatvian citizenship.Deputy Dubin also demanded an extension of the period of choicefor receiving citizenship, but Maisel refused to introduce this amendmentin his draft. After prolonged discussion the Draft Law was passed andpublished on 2nd June, 1927. Admittedly it did not really satisfy thosewith extensive demands among the Jews and the other minorities; but onthe other hand it did constitute a considerable concession to public opinion,to the people of the Eighties and their offspring. At the same time thisgroup of citizens were not granted automatic citizenship but were requiredto submit special applications to the Ministry of the Interior.The most important supplementary clause provided:“Similarly the citizens of the State of Latvia shall include everyRussian subject without distinction of nationality or creed who hasresided within the boundaries of Latvia since 1st January 1925, anduntil this supplementary Law comes into force has not adopted anyforeign citizenship and who: — a) lived in Latvia for at least six157The Jews in Latviamonths before the 1st of August, 1914; b) lived in Latvia permanentlyuntil the year 1881; c) or who is a descendant of persons includedunder a) and b).”The discussions of the Citizenship Law gave rise to an incitement cam-paign on the part of the extreme Right, the Peasants’ Party and the De-mocratic Centre. At the final session the Peasants’ Party, even after theadoption of the draft, endeavoured to defer its final approval for five orsix days on the excuse of transferring it to the Drafts Committee, becauseof opposition to the supposedly “American tempo” at which it had beenpassed by the Seim. Deputy Laserson, as a member of the Drafts Com-mittee, proposed that the Plenary Session should be adjourned for half anhour in order to enable the Committee to inspect the wording of the lawon the spot and introduce its corrections if any. He pointed out that therehad also been precedents under right-wing Cabinets for the suspension ofPlenary Meetings in order to allow the Committee to inspect draft laws.This proposal was approved by a majority, and the law was passed thesame evening after an hour’s discussion by the Drafts Committee.The reason for this energetic opposition the part of the right-wingparties can be found, incidentally, in the fact that during the entire sixyears of parliamentary discussion of this law those parties had used it asan issue for bargaining and political extortion.The opinions and behaviour of opponents to this law were alwayscalculated and directed towards some clear and specific objective. This couldeasily be proved by the fact that as soon as it was passed by the Seim,Deputy Yurashevsky, the future head of the Cabinet and a member ofseveral earlier Cabinets, announced from the Seim rostrum that the newLaw did not represent the opinion of the majority, for which reason hisparty would have to demand a referendum on the matter.It should be remarked that under the left-wing Cabinet Latvia also ob-tained a satisfactory reputation abroad to some degree. During this time aCommercial Treaty was signed with U.S.S.R. Closer ties were establishedwith France and Great Britain. The country became wellknown abroad onaccount of its minority rights as well. The minorities of countries like Polandand Roumania regarded Latvia — and Esthonia even more — as a modelin respect of its minorities legislation. This explains why, at the meetingsof the World Congress of National Minorities, the representatives of theLatvian Minorities, particularly the Germans and the Jews, exerted moreinfluence than their numerical strength warranted. The Congress met inGeneva in 1927. At the same time a World Jewish Conference also met in158Political, Social <& Cultural LifeZurich and was attended by the Jewish Parliamentary representatives ofCentral and Eastern Europe.This year and the previous one (1926) were in some respects the periodwhen Exile optimism reached its highest point. The political and economicstability which had established themselves after the feverish years 1919-1923inevitably left their mark on the Jewish public as well. At this period, whenthe Kellog-Briand Pact was deliberated and signed after the de jure re-cognition of Soviet Russia, every shade of fear of an all-European SocialRevolution seemed to have vanished. Germany, which had settled downafter the final ending of the inflation and the firm establishment of thedemocratic Weimar structure, had been admitted to the League of Nations.Stresemann’s line of defence seemed to stress that Germany was once againfacing the West, including France. At the meetings of national minoritiesthe “Auslands Deutsche”, the Germans living outside Germany who num-bered ten millions, occupied a very important place beside the most dis-persed minority of all, namely the Jews. It seemed that these meetings werewell suited to the Democratic Order.Yet beneath this apparent unity, which was solemnly welcomed in Ge-neva by the outstanding Zionist leader Leo Motzkin and by various politicalrepresentatives of German, Hungarian and Slavic minorities, there was aninner conflict. Germany and the German Diaspora concealed their deepdissatisfaction with the Versailles Peace Treaty from the eye of the be-holder. As afterwards became clear from Stresemann’s Diary, they werenot orientated towards the principle of international democracy. The Leagueof Nations and Pacifism were tactical tools only, a kind of restorative poli-tical pause for the purpose of organising the forces of opposition. In theeyes of the Germans the Minority Conventions in Geneva were democraticweapons to be used for Pan-German aspirations, which were already gra-dually and systematically beginning to move into the channels of GermanNational Socialism.It may be that the time has not yet come for comprehensive assessmentor full revelation of the significance of this period. But undoubtedly eventhe Jewish representatives who participated in these Conventions, includingtheir central figures, did not realise the nature of the German moves behindthe scenes. Those who attended the 1927 Congress included not onlyMotzkin but other Jewish figures such as Isaac Gruenbaum, Dr. Reich,Dr. Heller and Dr. Rosmarin from Poland; Finkelstein from Lithuania,Margalit of Czechoslovakia, Nurock and Laserson of Latvia; Romano andTagger of Bulgaria; Dr. Nobel of Roumania; and A. Gurevitch of Esthonia.159The Jews in LatviaAt this Congress there was a split. The minorities from within Germanywho were represented were the Poles headed by Kaczmarek, the Danes andthe Slavs of the Lausitz region. The Slav inhabitants of Germany, who weresupported by the Polish representatives of Latvia and other countries, de-manded that the new minority in Germany, namely the Frisians of North-West Germany, should be admitted to these gatherings. The Presidency ofthe Congress refused to receive the Frisians as a minority, and as a resultthe majority of the Slav representatives withdrew from the Hall. (The issueof admitting the Frisians had already been deferred at the Congress of1925.) In explaining his withdrawal from the Congress, Kaczmarek, a Polefrom Germany, claimed that the Congress was rejecting the admissionof “weak” minorities of set purpose, whereas it was giving full encourage-ment to the “irredentist minorities”, namely, those of Germany and Hun-gary. Kaczmarek’s speech gives a perfectly clear explanation of the con-siderations which led the non-German minorities of Germany (the Poles,the Danes and the Slavs of Lausitz) to leave the Congress. “We do notdesire”, he declared, “to serve as a weapon of political action which aimsat seizing power.. We wish to direct our activities only according to therequirements of the policy of the minorities.”It should be noted that Leo Motzkin, the representative of the Jewishminorities at the Congress, supported the majority against the withdrawalof the minorities from Germany, for strictly formalist reasons.Apart from the official speeches, the withdrawing group explained thatthe Germans and Hungarians were using the Congress not to protect thecultural and political rights of the minorities but in order to organise theGerman and Hungarian minorities against the Peace of Versailles, and toexpand the boundaries of their own countries.At the time the Jewish representatives did not properly appreciate thisdemonstrative withdrawal from the Congress. In any case nothing happenedto prevent the Congresses from being gradually transformed into tools ofpan-German policy. Only when the Congress of 1933, after Hitler was al-ready ruling over Germany, refused to protest against the persecution ofthe Jews in that country did the Jewish representatives realise that in essencethey themselves had helped to strengthen pan-Germanism for eight fullyears. Only after it was too late did the Jews refuse to accept the officialjuridical reason which both the German and pro-German representativespresented, namely, that German Jewry had never been a national minorityand therefore the Minorities Congress was not entitled to take a stand re-garding the anti-Jewish activities of the Hitler regime. In 1933 the Jews160Political, Social & Cultural Lifefinally withdrew. It was learnt in due course that E. Amende, a BalticGerman who had been General Secretary of the Congresses for years, hadbecome an enthusiatic supporter of Hitlerism together with W. Hasselblatt.Of all the important members of these Congresses, Dr. P. Schiemann waspossibly the only one who was not won over to National Socialism. In thisrespect the Minorities Congresses were a very tragic proof of our ownJewish short-sightedness.However, let us return to our own subject. The left-wing Coalitionended at the beginning of 1928. On 21st January the Seim by a majorityof 51 votes against 43 gave a vote of confidence in the Cabinet of P. Yura-shevsky. The two Aguda Delegates were among the minority who did notvote against the Cabinet, while the German Bloc and right-wing Russiandeputies supported it. The debates on the Declaration of Policy of thenew Cabinet were quite prolonged, occupying two sessions.There was a sharp conflict between the Aguda deputy Dubin and theMizrahi deputy Nurock. At the session of 21st January, when the Seimwas due to decide the fate of the new Cabinet, Dubin delivered a speechin which he attacked the Social Democrats, the Jews of the Left, andDeputy Nurock personally, with an acerbity that had never been heardbefore in Latvian Parliamentary life. His central claim was that no partof the Latvian people were to be trusted; not the right-wing, not theCentre, and not the Social Democrats. Below we give a passage fromNurock’s reply. This was one of Nurock’s best speeches, which reflectsthe attitude of the first weeks after the fall of the left-wing Coalition. Thethree progressive Jewish Deputies were undoubtedly influenced by the moodof depression which affected not only Latvian Jewry but all progressiveLatvian public opinion, headed by the Social Democrats.The following is part of Nurock’s answer to Dubin’s attack:.. Mr. Dubin asks why I participated in the left-wing Coalitiontogether with the Democratic Centre, and why I persuaded the De-mocratic Centre to join the Left Coalition. And why, asks Dubin inastonishment, is it impossible for me to go along with that selfsameDemocratic Centre today?“To this I am prepared to answer. There is a vast difference betweenthe Democratic Centre when it was part of the left-wing Coalitionand that identical Centre when it heads the right-wing Coalition.Within the left-wing Coalition the group of three members is no lessand no more than a fifth wheel in the Government waggon, and there-fore it cannot do any harm. Yet the moment it became a harmful161The Jews in Latviaforce it had to leave the Coalition; which is what happened when ittried to destroy the quorum in the discussion of the Citizenship Law.The basic foundation of the left-wing Coalition was the strongest partyin our Seim, the Social Democrats. It is the cornerstone of our De-mocracy, and of freedom as well. Together with it the DemocraticCentre is not a danger. Yet when that Centre places itself at thehead of reactionary blocks which are filled with animosity towardsJudaism, it becomes dangerous and harmful to an overwhelmingdegree...“And now to the second question: Why did I enter a Coalition withthe Peasants’ Party ?“To begin with, that happened before the Peasants’ Party had re-vealed its antisemitic aspect. Second, I went there not of my ownfree will, as is generally known, but in virtue of a decision on thepart of the middle-class Jewish group which aimed to establish oneunited middle-class front. This was a marriage of convenience andmost certainly not a love match. I foresaw the results in good time.But I thought it was necessary to undergo this experience at leastonce, in order to prove how justified my opinion was.“In actual fact, after the popular vote and although the anti-Jewishattitude of the Coalition has already crystallized fully, the repre-sentatives of the Jewish minorities no longer have any place for twoopinions about this.“In this respect, my dear Mr. Dubin, you cannot and do not wishto understand. We talk different languages. I cannot sit at the sametable with people who trample on our national honour and our humanself-respect, who fling mud at all that is precious and holy to us, whomake proclamations of hatred against the Jews from this platformand even make use of the Bible for the purpose. And so, Bible inhand, they fight against the Bible itself and against the people whogave the world this Book of Books... For this reason, Mr. Dubin,I explained to Mr. Yurashevsky that for my part I am not preparedto discuss any ‘entry conditions’ whatsoever with him. I do not wishfor any act of charity on the part of persons who spit in the face ofmy people.“If all this seems to you to be just a bargaining matter, then let eachof you trade as much as you like. But I, for my part, am not inter-ested in bargaining. To fight back — that is my intention. That is the162Political, Social & Cultural Lifedifference between me and you. The question is one of attitudes, plans,regime, and not in any way a question of trading.“I know perfectly well that I am swimming against the stream, sincethose who have sent me here are the middle class whom everyone istrying to influence. And indeed, not all the Jews can understand mefully. But I shall not change my opinion...“As before, I shall continue to fight for our rights from the placewhere I stand. I am imbued with ideals, and therefore I cannotchange my place. That, Mr. Dubin, is the whole of the difference.“On this side (pointing to the Left) are freedom, democracy, humanqualities, understanding and a programme, a clear policy, outlook andfuture. While there (pointing to the Right) are misanthropy, Jew-hatred,outstanding reaction, deathly animosity, suppression of freedom, openand black Antisemitism. The past and the future of my people, theexistence of Latvia, the inner voice of my heart and my conscience— all these mark out for me the way which I have chosen. Absoluteequality for minorities and a free Governmental system can comeabout only as a result of proceeding with Democracy, step by step.”The relatively brief period which remained until the elections to theThird Seim in Autumn 1928 was not marked by any striking politicalevents. The majority of the Jewish population was firmly opposed notonly to the new Cabinet of Yurashevsky but also to every attempt to liqui-date the heritage of the left-wing Coalition. There were sound economicreasons for this. The commercial treaty with U.S.S.R., signed in Summer1927, led to increased exports to Russia, of manufactured goods in parti-cular. The Jewish industrialists, especially those connected with weavingand knitwear, plywood and timber processing, footwear and clothing, eitherexpanded their former businesses or established new plants equipped withup-to-date machinery. Trade within the country itself also expanded con-siderably. All these facts raised the prestige of the left-wing Coalition whichhad signed that Agreement, and therefore inevitably increased the Jewishfeelings of opposition to the Yurashevsky Cabinet; and also to every pos-sibility of establishing a Cabinet of the Peasants’ Party, which had beenstrongly opposed to the very idea of the Commercial Agreement. Thisinevitably lowered the prestige of the Aguda, which was the constant com-panion of the Peasants’ Party. And the reputation of the Jewish groupswhich had supported the left-wing Coalition was improved.All these internal factors found expression in the elections to theThird Seim. Although attempts were made to present new and non-political163The Jews in Latvialists, such as that of “The Jewish Economic Bloc” (List No. 22 in Latgale)instead of the long-standing party political lists, the majority of the Jewishvoters had a parliamentary experience of eight years, and showed thatthey were quite aware of their position in the inner contests of the politicalBlocs. The fourteen months of coalition proved to the ordinary voterthat the direction of the Aguda, that firm ally of the Peasants’ Party, wasopposed to Jewish interests.However, a technical obstacle emerged before the new elections. Thiswas the proposal made by the German group to merge all the five electoralregions (Kurland, Riga, Zemgalen, Livonia and Latgale), which were oflong standing in Latvia, into one single electoral region. This proposal in-volved a secondary danger in view of the fact that the two largest Latvianparties, the Social Democrats and the Peasants’ Party, also tended in generalto make an end of the carefully-planned division of the Latvian electionsystem, which enabled even the tiniest associations to make their way intothe Seim. The Germans worked in this direction for their own benefit only.With a uniform body of voters who did not have any internal politicalstruggle that concerned them, the Germans hoped that with a single elec-toral region they would be very successful; even though the percentage ofGerman representation in the Seim in any case exceeded their proportionof the total population.Other minorities, particularly the Jews, were undoubtedly liable to loseas a result of such a change. The Germans were not prepared to give thisany consideration, particularly because the united regional system wouldpermit the 3,000 German votes dispersed in Livonia and Latgale to beadded to all the other German votes.However, this proposal was exceedingly dangerous for the status ofthe Jewish parties, especially the Zeirei Zion and the Bund in Latgale.The struggle against the Single-region system was headed by Deputy La-serson, as Dr. Maisel was subject to the party discipline of the Social De-mocrats. In order to gain the time necessary to negotiate with the latterparty, Laserson made use of filibustering in the Committee for Public Law,to which the German proposal was transferred. At the first session he spokefor an hour and a half on the Proportional Representation System, aspracticed in Belgium and other European countries. When the Chairmanasked at the close of the session whether it was not possible to end theaddress in order to put the matter to the vote at once, Laserson repliedthat he had not yet presented all his material. As a result it was necessary164Political, Social & Cultural Lifeto defer further discussion to the next session, which was due to meeteight days later.Meanwhile the deputies of the progressive minorities engaged in cease-less negotiations with the Social Democrats and also with the Peasants’Party. At the following session of the Committee the whole picture hadchanged. Deputy Bruno Kalnin announced that the Social Democrats hadchanged their minds and would continue to support the five-region electoralsystem. Towards the end of the session the representative of the Peasants’Party also supported Laserson, stressing incidentally that in the opinionof his party the proposal should have been rejected right away becauseit was basically defective and liable to cause complaints, particularly amongpeasant voters; for the method of the united list, which would permit theentry of persons whom they did not know, was alien to them and did notaccord with their interests. Laserson’s proposal was adopted against thewill of the Germans and several of the Catholics of Latgale.This saved the progressive minorities, some of whose candidates hadbeen elected in their districts even without the full proportion of votes.Under the influence of these factors there was a strong leftward shiftof the Jewish representation at the elections. The Agudat Israel lost R.Wittenberg, its second representative. Dubin himself was elected by a re-latively small number of votes. The Mizrahi gained a second Deputy, Dr.Aaron Nurock of Libau. Laserson was elected by a far larger number ofvotes than he had received for the Second Seim. In Latgale Meisel waselected on the Bund list as part of the Social Democrat party. Of the fourJewish Deputies elected on an independent list, three were Zionists andone a member of the Aguda. These results were liable to change the futurepolicy in respect of Jewish schools. Immediately after the elections, at theparty deliberations of the Zeirei Zion, Laserson announced that there mustbe considerable changes in the conditions of the Hebrew schools. A Zionistmust be appointed as Director of the Jewish Section in the Ministry ofCulture, as that was the only way to prevent future irresponsible measuresagainst those schools. And Laserson stressed that no steps whatever werepermissible against schools whose language of instruction was Yiddish. Com-plete equality of rights for the languages had to be the basic principle ofeducational policy.3. The Third SeimALTHOUGH it is correct that the left-wing trend grew stronger in the Jewishrepresentation to the Third Seim, it must be admitted that the process ran165The Jews in Latviacounter to the general mood of the Latvian public; for the Social Democratrepresentation declined to 25 where it had been 31 in the Second Seim.This does not mean that the left-wing as a whole was weakened. It shouldnot be forgotten that the left-wing and extreme Left ranks included theIndependent Socialist Kurtzi-Korchinsky, six Communists and Ofentsak,an extreme Left-winger from Latgale. However, those who were seatedleft of the Social Democrats did not take any organised or active part inthe political affairs of the country, and were not in the least interested instrengthening Latvian democracy. It should also be added that the “Men-sheviks”, who sat to the right of the Social Democrats, ceased to exist poli-tically speaking when their numbers declined to the Deputies Skujenek andStern.*During the period of the Third Seim there were two Cabinets whichwere dominated by the leaders of the Peasants’ Party. These were the Ca-binet of Hugo Zelmin, from 1st December, 1928 to 26th March, 1931, andthat of K. Ulmanis from 27th March to 5th December, 1931. Only in thelight of these facts can it be understood how difficult the situation of theDemocratic minorities (e.g., that of the Russians) was in general and thatof the Jewish minority in particular. The Zionists, who constituted a majorityamong the Jewish deputies, could not implement their political ideas;whereas Dubin of the Aguda, who was the sole representative of his group,retained as much influence as ever on the right-wing Coalition, which alwaysshowed him favour thanks to the begemony of the Peasants’ Party. Thisstate of affairs, for example, explains why it was impossible to obtain theapproval of a series of amendments which were absolutely necessary for theJewish minority. It was of the utmost importance to replace Jacob Landau,Director of the Jewish Department in the Ministry of Education, by aZionist. Landau, as a National Democrat who was close to the Peasants’Party from the time of the Constituent Assembly, in which his fellow partyrepresentative Professor P. Mintz had been State Comptroller, was fromthe beginning persona grata for Premiers Zelmin and Ulmanis, far morethan some Zionist candidate or other might have been. Naturally the Agudaalso approved of him.Of this period it can in general be said that it was one of petty deeds.Yet the left-wing Zionist and Bundist representatives of Jewish democracycould not dissociate themselves from what consisted of a series of minor* See the speech of Klieve before the election of Kwesis as President at the sessionof the Seim held on 9th April, 1930, III Saeima, V sesija, pp. 1014—1015.166Political, Social & Cultural Lifeskirmishes in the process of governing the country. Furthermore, this poli-ticking was a necessity which could not be avoided on account of the wor-sening economic situation. An end had come to the temporary boom periodand the juncture which had developed thanks to the Soviet-Latvian TradeAgreement and lasted from 1927 till the middle of 1930. The world eco-nomic crisis, including the American financial collapse of 1929, graduallybegan to spread and swiftly affected Latvian economy and finance, whilethe State was interested in maintaining stable prices and exports. However,the Crisis of 1930 and 1931 led to a fall in prices and a shrinking of exportsbecause the steadiest Western markets of Latvia, England and Germany,began to reduce their imports from abroad.What did the Coalition led by the Peasants’ Party do during thissteadily deteriorating crisis? Did it take urgent steps to improve the eco-nomic situation of the country ? No. Its primary measures aimed to improvethe position of the average and well-to-do peasantry. Yet this was onlypossible at the cost of the urban population in general, and the Jews inparticular.Yet middle-class Jewish circles, whose views resembled those of theAguda or who approved of the Cabinets of Zelmin and Ulmanis, consoledthemselves with the assumption that once the left-wing Coalition had beenbroken up, private enterprise would flourish; that the Government wouldprotect trade and industry; and that there would no longer be any reasonto fear the imposition of excessive taxes or the development of cooperativesat the cost of private business.They made a bitter error. While the Social Democrats and their Coali-tion had been very cautious in their regulations and financial activities,in order to avoid failures due to daring experiments, the Peasants’ Partywas quite prepared to adopt a legislative line of a distinctly class character.To be sure, at mass meetings of the Jewish Association of Industrialistsand Merchants and other organisations the members of the Aguda kepton menacing the Jewish petty bourgeoisie with the danger threatening them,ostensibly, from the Social Democrats if a left-wing Coalition were to bereestablished. Meanwhile, however, the class and Chauvinist appetite of theUlmanis Government increased, and it began to establish fresh monopoliesin addition to those already existing. Apart from the monopoly on spirits,flax and fells a semi-monopoly on grain was set up.The economic problem of Latvian Jewry was characteristic for theentire Jewish dispersion in Central and Eastern Europe. The Jewish radicaland Socialist parties were compelled to soberly face the fact that monopolist167The Jews in Latviaand cooperative measures and all others taken by the dominant peopleswere definitely directed not towards progress but first and foremost to theextrusion of the Jews.With regard to monopolies in particular there was room for two diffe-rent kinds of economic legislation. One was a range of measures based onprinciple, with the purpose of regulating the economy as a whole. Thesecond kind of legislation was intended to protect the chauvinistic interestsof specific groups and associations. To be sure, the foundations of the BreadLaw had included the healthy and correct idea that the condition of thepeasantry should be improved by regulating the marketing of this vital com-modity. However, the Bread Monopoly fixed the price of one pood (about161/3 kg. or 36 pounds av.) of local grain at 4 Latts, together with aGovernment subsidy, on the express condition that local grain should bemixed with an equal quantity of foreign grain. This arrangement by itsvery nature could not satisfy the small-holders, nor the cattle-raising farmersof Latgale and Livonia. It was a semi-monopoly serving the interests onlyof restricted circles, namely the independent and well-to-do peasants ofSemgale and Kurland. Naturally enough, the satisfying of a mere restrictedcircle of peasants by a semi-monopoly roused those who supported themonopoly system in principle, particularly Social Democrat circles, and ledthem to demand the implementing of their programmatic demands, namelya system of full monopoly over bread. This in turn caused the Social De-mocrats to seek supporters in other peasant circles, even if the latter main-tained close ties with the Chauvinist Democratic Centre.The Zeirei Zion Party, which represented the poverty-stricken Jewishtownsfolk, was in a difficult position. It had originally given full supportin principle to the Agrarian Reform, the Sick Funds and social legislationin general; but now it did not dare to support the semi-monopoly overbread, and certainly not the principle of full monopoly. Indeed, it was quiteclear that the draft law would not really change the economic situation inLatvia or liberate it from the international situation on the com market.Finally the Zeirei Zion deputy in the Seim voted against both drafts of theBread Monopoly Law. After very careful consideration his Party resolvedto dissociate itself from all other monopolies, including that on tobacco, nomatter what their origin might be. For these monopolies ran counter tothe interests of the Jewish masses and helped to raise prices and cause thecomplete collapse of petty agents and craftsmen without giving the ordinaryconsumer anything in return. Not to mention the fact that the Bread Mo-168PoliticalSocial & Cultural Lifenopoly imperilled the Jewish bakers, millers, flour dealers, clerks and work-ers in this branch.By this time the Peasants’ Party had already begun to implement itseconomic aims more meticulously, not only in respect of monopolies butalso as regards income tax and customs duties. The fact that A. Nurock,M. Nurock, Laserson and most certainly Maisel were opposed to the existingCoalition was exploited in the propaganda of the Aguda, which set out toprove, particularly amid commercial and industrial circles, that the Jewishvoters of Latvia had returned four deputies who were encouraging theharmful influence of the Social Democrats and were incapable of givinganything of value to the Jewish population of the country. Dubin un-doubtedly received budgetary support and contributions from “his” Coali-tion; and the propaganda apparatus of his party naturally and convenientlyignored the fact that in this atmosphere of lively reaction one or two orthree votes of Jewish deputies, even if they had supported right-wing Coali-tions, would have been unable to change the fact that the Peasants’ Party,supported by the Aguda, was actually the initiator of all anti-Jewish financialand economic legislation.As the situation grew worse on the world market in 1930, while manu-factured goods became more plentiful, imports increased and exports dimi-nished accordingly; particularly in the cloth-making and goloshes industries,which were largely in Jewish hands. The Zelmin Government changed thecustoms tariffs in a new law of January, 1931 with the basic aim of pro-tecting the Latvian industrialists; or more correctly a small group of majorindustrialists who, together with the well-to-do peasants, were the favouritesof the Peasants’ Party. It is interesting that at the Seim session of 30thJanuary, 1931, when this new Customs Law was debated, not a singlemiddle-class Jewish deputy took part, presumably in order to refrain fromany definite statement of opinion; on account of the differences betweenthe interests of consumers in general, including the Jews, and those of theindustrialists. Laserson was the only one who participated in this debateand declared his opposition to the proposed law.A second basic dispute on economic issues among the Jewish Deputiesdeveloped during the identical session with the appearance of the new Ca-binet of Ulmanis, which was actually the political continuation of that ofhis fellow party-man Zelmin. Nurock, Laserson, Maisel and Dubin all parti-cipated in the Debate on the Government Statement, Dubin speaking twice.The dispute turned on the fact that they were preceded by a nationalistaddress on the part of Skujenek, former President of the left-wing Coalition,169The Jews in Latviawho claimed that the new Government was under the influence of theminorities, for which reason the proposal to expropriate the “Dom” churchproperty from the German Community had been defeated for the bene-fit of the Government. Since Skujenek had been one of the initiators ofthis confiscation, which was carried out only on the 23rd of March, hebitterly complained while criticising the Government that “our State isincreasingly losing its national colour”, and invited the new Governmentto abandon its dependence on the natioal minorities. In their speeches Nu-rock and Laserson dissociated themselves from Skujenek, while Dubin madeuse of the latter’s address in order to engage in polemics against his Jewishcolleagues.In his speech on the new Ulmanis Cabinet, Laserson spoke as follows:“... I wish to dissociate myself from Mr. Skujenek because I, no lessthan he, am a member of the Opposition. During elections Mr. Sku-jenek knows only one thing — a Chauvinism that blinds him. Hecannot see the wood for the trees, as the saying goes. I do not knowwhich circles will continue to call for the service of the former Men-sheviks. Will those gentlemen defend the new village owners, or maybethe urban population ? It is necessary to approach these issues rathermore seriously. Things will be impossible otherwise! To speak todayon Jewish and German affairs and those of the minorities in generalin the way that is now being done by Mr. Krivensh, who was formerlysupported by the Minorities and does not need them now — thatmeans behaving like the donkey towards the aging lion in Krillov’sfable. I regard Mr. Skujenek as a cultured person, and therefore itseems to me that the statement of the Government should not beattacked by such measures as Mr. Skujenek recommends here. — Ishall vote against the Cabinet.”M. Dubin did his best to settle accounts with his fellow-Jews who hadformerly supported the Skujenek Cabinet, exploiting the Nationalist utter-ances of Skujenek in discussions of the Cabinet and on the question of the“Dom” churches. Politically speaking this was in order. But to our regrethe went too far by proceeding to make personal attacks, more particularlyon M. Nurock.Nurock replied, and Dubin was permitted to speak again in order toanswer. He spoke in favour of the Ulmanis Cabinet, thus saving the latterby securing it a total of 51 votes.170Political, Social & Cultural LifeUnder the economic and cultural conditions in which the Third Seimoperated, the basic aim could only be that of maintaining the establishedsituation. From this point forward there was particular importance in thestruggle for the right of self-administration in the smaller towns of Latgale,and improved living conditions in larger centres such as Dvinsk, Rezhitsa,etc. At the time the Agenda dealt with the building of new roads, highwaysand railway systems, particularly in Latgale.The question of preserving the special Jewish way of life in some ofthe small towns deserves the attention of every sociologist and student ofJewish history in the period between the two World Wars. Very charac-teristic in this respect were the Jewish centres of Varkliani and Glazmanka,which preserved their Jewish majority even after the First World War.Varkliani had two Jewish mayors named Schwartz and Hanoch, who wereelected by purely democratic measures. The preservation of these positionsduring the period under discussion was a matter of great importance fromthe viewpoints of both the Zeirei Zion and Bund deputies. At a distanceof several decades the matter is now perfectly clear. The two deputies foughtfor the right of Sabbath rest in accordance with the Torah, as well as thefull implementation of the principles of the Agrarian reform for the Jewishpopulation, particularly in Latgale.By the beginning of the Thirties the Jewish small town communitieswere already being viewed with envious rancour by the leaders of the localpeasantry, and particularly the central and right-wing association, whosemain purpose was to obliterate their Jewish character. They set about thisprimarily by expanding their administrative boundaries, thus permitting theneighbouring rural population to supplement the earlier urban populations,which consisted so largely of Jews and other minorities such as Russians,Poles and the like.The Seim did not learn of every such case, although all cases alike hadone basic aim in common, namely, the Lettisation of towns and countrytowns. Another method for reducing the weight of the urban minorities,which was employed in both the Baltic cities and Latgale, was to includethe local military garrison in the list of municipal voters. Naturally suchgarrison troops when voting misrepresented the true ratio of local politicalforces. Since they had no interest in or approach towards the local municipalproblems of those cities in which they happened to be carrying out theirmilitary service, they completely distorted the character and ratios of normalrepresentation. In March 1930 the Minorities submitted a proposal wherebyonly those soldiers living regularly in a given locality for at least four171The Jews in Latviamonths prior to military service would be entitled to participate in electionsthere. This proposal was defeated.There was a quiet stagnation with regard to educational affairs. Theexternal reason for this was the “Livenhof Affair”. At the elementary schoolin Livenhof a majority of the parents decided that Hebrew should be thelanguage of instruction. The minority, who supported Yiddish instead, re-solved to appeal against this in accordance with paragraph 39 of the Cul-tural Institutions Law in Latvia, which provided: “In every compulsoryschool studies shall be conducted in the family language of the pupils.”The matter reached the Senate which was also the highest Court, and on16th of May, 1929, the Administrative Department of the Senate decidedin favour of Hebrew at the school in question. “Although in accordancewith the official data of the Latvian Statistical Department Yiddish appears,numerically speaking, as the vernacular of most Jewish families in Latvia,the Hebrew language is nevertheless the language spoken by an appreciablenumber of Jewish citizens... And in case the Parents’ Council finds itimpossible to reach a uniform resolution on this matter, instruction has tobe provided in the language which the majority of the parents indicate asthe family language of the pupils.” *This decision on the part of the highest Court in the country provedto the wiser Yiddishists that in Latvia they would not succeed in deprivingthe Hebrew language of its juridical position of equality with Yiddish, sinceboth had been recognised as languages of instruction in the Jewish element-ary and secondary Schools of the State. In addition, it had already becomeclear by then that steps; .against the language of the Bible by means ofdevious schemes and party attacks was meeting with the energetic oppo-sition of Jews and non-Jews alike. Thenceforward it was plain that theteachers and cultural leaders of both groups must devote themselves entirelyto their proper tasks, disregarding everything else. The result was a stateof relative mutual acceptance and, in due course, the joint organic existenceof the two school networks, which undoubtedly helped to serve as anexample for larger centres of the Diaspora, such as Poland and Roumania.Although the period of the Third Seim was, politically speaking, oneof reduced achievements and the strengthening of anti-democratic elements,it must be regarded as a relatively quiet period for the schools; for the* See Max M. Laserson : “Minority Rights in the Baltic Countries,” in “Zeitschriftfuer Auslaendisches Oeffentliches Recht und Voelkerrecht”, Vol. II, No. 3—4,1931, p. 414.172Political, Social & Cultural Life\municipal administrations continued to maintain the principles of democratictradition.The construction of elementary and secondary schools continued inboth central cities and country towns, and included both Hebrew andYiddish schools. During the three years of this Seim the Jewish agriculturalschool received budgetary grants of 31,000 Latt, while the elementary schoolswere granted 45,000 Latt. As a result of the special intervention of DeputyDubin, who was a member of the Budgetary Committee and the only JewishDeputy to support the two Cabinets of the Peasants’ Party, the Seim allo-cated a sum of 30,000 Latt for the needs of the Batei Midrash (JewishHouses of Study of traditional literature) throughout Latvia, and 18,000Latt for the Riga Yeshiva. Finally it should be noted that during this periodthe Seim allocated a total of 195,000 Latt to the Jewish Vocational TrainingSchools in Riga, Dvinsk and Libau. This does not include municipal allo-cations. In brief, the Jewish elementary and secondary schools were finan-cially strengthened. The influence of Hebrew and Yiddish culture on Jewishschoolchildren and secondary school students increased steadily, togetherwith the declining influence of the German and Russian cultures.“Coming events cast their shadow before...” This saying certainlyapplies to law and legislation, an area which does not particularly interestthe masses but is particularly sensitive with regard to the political changesof the future; as could be seen in Germany long before Hitler’s rise topower. There a number of parties of the Right and Centre, which were“tired of” or dissatisfied with the Weimar Constitution and the Democracy“that had been forced on the Germans”, began to propose changes in theConstitution. They wished to expand the powers of the President bound-lessly, and to restrict the rights of the Reichstag. Throughout the fourteenyears of the Weimar Republic, and particularly during the second half ofthe Twenties, Democracy was constantly on the defensive.A similar state of affairs had already become observable in Latvia andgrew very clear during the Third Seim.In particular Article 81 of the State Constitution was misused. Thisarticle authorised the Government to issue “Special” Ordinances duringperiods when the Parliament was on vacation, and read as follows:“During the period of time between two Seim sessions the MinisterialCabinet is entitled, if it sees any special necessity in doing so, to issueOrdinances that shall have the force of law. Ordinances of this kind,however, have no force in respect of the Law governing Elections to173The Jews in Latviathe Seim, in respect of laws governing the practice of the Courts andthe hearing of legal cases, and also in respect of the Budget andbudgetary rights. Similarly these Ordinances shall not apply to par-dons, to laws governing the Ministry of Finance, the taxes of theStates, the budgetary tariffs and the railways. These laws shall ceaseto be valid if they are not introduced in the Seim within the threedays prior to the commencement of the session.”In its spirit this article was a reformulation of Article 87 of the RussianBasic Law of the year 1906, and also of a number of similar provisionsin the Austrian and German Constitutions. A very considerable legal lite-rature can be found dealing with this matter in the countries of WesternEurope, also in post-1906 Russia. Yet of all the conclusions drawn in thisextensive literature mention needs to be made here only of one basic andgenerally accepted principle : The issue of such special Ordinances is justifiedonly when they are absolutely and urgently necessary, while their utilityas such is not sufficient. Special Ordinances which are of a temporarycharacter do not as a rule affect matters which are provided for in the basicand organic legal codes, whether they are juridical or social.One of the outstanding examples of the misuse of Article 81 was thestep taken by the Zelmin Cabinet for the issue of a new law regarding SickFunds. This law changed the management of the Funds by requiring theparticipation of the employers, and also affected the financial resources ofthe Funds. In his official statement to the Seim, the Prime Minister couldnot explain the precise nature of the grave emergency that had induced theCabinet to adopt this resolution. Zelmin’s only argument was that whilethe Seim had been discussing the Draft Law on the Sick Funds the oppo-sition had engaged in organised obstruction, delivering speeches that nevercame to an end, thus not permitting any other points of view to be expressed.The Cabinet could not agree to an act of dictatorship on the part of theOpposition minority in the Seim, and therefore found it urgently necessaryto issue its special Ordinance in accordance with Article 81. Yet it may benoted that the rules did not permit the promulgation of a special Ordinancewhen the Government was especially waiting for the interval between onesession and the next in order to pass laws without the Parliament.During the Third Seim the Cabinet used Article 81 very freely withthe intention of restricting the powers of the Seim. Close on thirty specialOrdinances of this kind were issued and presented to the Seim for approvalwhen the session was resumed. These were primarily amendments to theLaw of Meetings and Public Associations, the Law of Citizenship, the Law174Political, Social & Cultural Lifeof Cultural Institutions, of Cinemas, of Compulsory Military Service, thefunctions of Civil Servants and the grants made to them, the administrationof Rural Councils, and a large number of minor regulations on agrarianand village matters. In brief, there was a stream of legislation here whichwas not the result of urgency or extreme necessity. Zelens announced inthe name of the Social Democrat bloc that as a protest against this misuseof Article 81 his party would vote against referring any of these urgentOrdinances to the Committee.This misuse of Article 81 led to much dissatisfaction. Speeches of pro-test were made not only by the Social Democrats and the Jewish DeputiesLaserson and Maisel, but also by Breikesh of the Democratic Centre. Thedeliberations lasted for three meetings, at the third of which criticism wasvoiced particularly by the Social Democrats and the Communists, on theamendments affecting the insurance of workers and clerks against illnesses.It should be noted that the entire Debate on Article 81 at these threemeetings constituted the first major breach in the Social Democracy ofLatvia.However, matters did not end with the misuse of Article 81. During theperiod of the Third Seim the first attempts were made to change the youthfulConstitution of the country. The initiative for this came from the right-wingand other circles in the ruling Coalition, including the German minority.First they spoke of extending the term of the Seim to four years, althoughthe Third Seim was elected for the period of three years only. The Com-mittee for Public Law as well as the plenum of the Seim dealt with thisquestion. Subsequently a similar extension was proposed for the term ofoffice of the President of the State as well.This is not the place to give details of changes in the Constitution. Inthe Third Seim these might have appeared, relatively speaking, as distinctlyunimportant, although it was already quite clear that all the proposalsoriginated in right-wing and Peasant circles. Indeed, they heralded the tem-pest which was to rage so powerfully during the final months of DemocraticLatvia. Those months, as we shall see, were all overshadowed by the changesin the Constitution.Two proposals discussed during the Third Seim indicate the Chauvinismand Antisemitism that marked the eve of the elections to the next, Seim.These were the Law for the Expropriation of the “Dorn” Church whichbelonged to the German Community, and the Law requiring those who175The Jews in Latviahad completed their medical studies at foreign universities to sit for supple-mentary examinations in the Universities of Latvia.The left-wing Jewish deputies were at the heart of these deliberations.In accordance with the principle of the joint interests of the minoritiesthey voted against the expropriation of the “Dorn” Church. A decisionabout this matter was regarded by the dominant majority as of the utmostimportance, so that voting was by Roll-call. It should be noted that DeputyMaisel, who did not agree to support his group which was in favour ofexpropriation, temporarily withdrew from the Committee for Public Lawwhile the proposal was discussed there. He was absent during the voting byname at the plenary session. So important was this vote regarded, as re-marked; and all this in spite of the fact that even then, two or three yearsbefore Hitler came to power in Germany, the schools of the German Mino-rity in Latvia were imbued with the venom of Nazism. The teachers andpupils alike were already recognised in the Seim as open enemies of theDemocratic and Independent Latvian Republic.4. The Fourth SeimTHE elections to the Fourth Seim were lively and even feverish. Never hadthe list of each and every one of the parties been in such peril. Lookingback, it seems as though there must have been a general feeling that thesewere the last parliamentary elections in the State of Latvia.One thing at least is clear. There was a general feeling that Democracywas about to be defeated. Yet in spite of this there was a desperate inter-party struggle. Alongside the regular lists of the old established parties therenow appeared a new middle-class Jewish list — that of Dr. Hoff, whobelonged to the family of the major industrialists and presented himself inthe Zemgalen District (Mitau). His list directly threatened the Mizrahi.The fact of the defeat of the Aguda in elections to the Third Seim, whenWittenberg, the second Aguda representative, failed completely in Latgalewhile Dubin, their first representative, barely scraped through, now servedto increase the apprehensions of Conservative groups in Latvian Jewry andled to greater activity on the part of the two Jewish Socialist lists: that ofthe Zeirei Zion — Z.S.* on the one hand and of the Bund on the other.* Deputy Laserson made a special statement about the union of the two Zionistparties, whose new united name was registered in the Report of the Ninth Sessionof the Third Seim.Political, Social Sc Cultural LifeThe two parties felt apprehensive of a swing to the right in Latgale, andfor two reasons: a) There were signs of a general rightward turn in thewhole of the country; and: b) At the very commencement of the electioncampaign the Aguda had announced that “as the experience of the previouselections had shown” the candidature of Du bin was in danger. There wasthe further fact that during the two final years of the Third Seim the Agudahad made special efforts to win over the Jewish Craftsmen’s Association ofLatgale, and particularly of Dvinsk. Since Du bin had participated in theCoalition of the Peasants Party he had succeeded in obtaining a grant forthese craftsmen, who had previously voted either for the Bund or for theZeirei Zion.In order to increase their prospects the two Jewish Socialist partiesresolved to arrange a “transfer” of their supporters from Riga, a “hopeless”electoral district for both alike, to Kreuzburg (Krustapils) the closest elec-tion point in Latgale. This was possible because the Latvian election systempermitted every citizen to vote wherever he wished; either in his place ofdomicile or anywhere else in the country. Two special trains, one charteredby the Zeirei Zion and the other by the Bund, travelled backwards andforwards with the Jewish voters. Yet these “reinforcements” were not ofmuch value.In order to understand the results of the voting it should be mentionedthat under the Latvian election system votes were counted twice. The firstcount determined the number of votes given to a specific list as such, andfixed the list that received a deputy for the Seim. However, the voter mightalso choose specific candidates of one party or another by crossing outnames of which he did not approve and replacing them by other candidateseven if they belonged to other parties. So the first candidates of a list mighteasily be defeated while the last were returned. Furthermore, if there weremany erasures and additions the list might lose, during this second count,the one deputy it had gained at the first count. This was what happened toLaserson in the elections to the Fourth Seim. He was elected on the firstcount but defeated as a result of the second count. N. Maisel was defeatedin the first count. In absolute figures the latter was more than 400 votesshort, while Laserson lacked less than 100 for entering the Seim. Alsodefeated was Aaron Nurock of Libau for the Mizrahi, whereas the Agudagained a second Deputy in Latgale, namely, Simeon Wittenberg, a youthfullawyer and secondary school director. As a result the Jewish representationin the Seim fell to three deputies only, where it had formerly been five.The Germans remained stable with six, but Dr. Schiemann their most177The Jews in Latvialiberal figure ceased to take an active part in the activities of his Bloc.The number of Latvian Social Democrats fell from 25 to 20, and they losta third of what had been their total membership in the first two Seims.The diminished image of Jewish democracy had a depressing effect notonly on the defeated parties but also among non-party groups. It wascharacteristic that the publication “Ahdut” (Unity) which was published bya group of non-party personalities and those who had been associated withthe former National Democrats, drew attention to the loss caused to LatvianJewry with the defeat of its most active representatives, Laserson and Maisel.The weekly “Der Neier Freitik” (The New Friday) dedicated an essay tothe former Deputy Laserson and quoted the words of Dr. P. Kalnin re-garding the defeat of the Jewish Deputy: “If there was any man amongthe Jews of Latvia who was most suited to preparing legislation, that wasProfessor M. Laserson.” Isaac Gruenbaum in Warsaw also dedicated aspecial article to the defeat of the democratic Jewish deputies in the elec-tions to the Fourth Seim, and the victory of the Aguda. In the course ofthis essay he drew attention to the fact that Polish Jewry was showing thesame trend towards Shtadlanut (politics by personal intercession and inter-vention).Indeed, Shtadlanut had played an important part in the history of In-dependent Latvia. Undoubtedly the great popularity of the Latvian Agudawas very largely the result of the ceaseless personal intercessions of M.Dubin. In spite of this the conclusions drawn by Gruenbaum were in noway justified. In no country of the European Jewish Diaspora did politicaland communal differences play so important a part as in Latvia. Yet at thesame time it must be noted that in France as well, for example, and mostcertainly in the United States of America, the intervention and intercessionof all parliamentary figures on behalf of individuals still continues to playa leading part even today. Those who intercede also include non-Jewish re-presentatives who have been elected by the general public. This is not theplace to enter into details about Jewish Shtadlanut in Latvia, but one thingis beyond all doubt: Dubin was not the only one. Other Jewish deputiesalso dedicated most of their time and energy to various kinds of intercessionand steps in the various Ministries, with the possible exception of theForeign Ministry; even though they intervened there on occasion with regardto passports. It should be added that most of those who demanded such“help” were Jews of Kurland and Zemgalen, who lived in far better con-ditions than the average Jews of Riga and Latgale.In general the Shtadlanut did not put the political awareness of Jewish178Political, Social & Cultural Lifevoters in Latvia to sleep. The successes and failures of the deputies inrespect of their acts of intervention mostly rounded one another off. Theleft-wing Jewish deputies were not defeated because of their poorer Shtad-lanut, but as a result of the general course of events in the country.It may be said without fear of exaggeration that the Fourth Seim didnot give Democracy any opportunity to recover. This marked its downhillperiod.The fatal development of the entire period was the firm establishmentand, in due course, absolute victory of Hitler in Germany in March, 1933.Various cultural, historical and economic factors caused Germany to be aconstant source of influence over Latvia after the years 1919-1920. Longbefore Hitler’s final victory, nationalism was shaping and influencing allGerman minorities everywhere. The German Deputy Fussul, speaking at theCommittee for Public Law and at a Plenary Session of the Seim, coulddeclare that Parliamentarism was expiring day by day. In the German“Rigasche Rundschau” the influence of the small liberal minority headedby Dr. Schiemann was declining daily, while that of the pro-Nazis was onthe increase. The Herder Institute, which had been granted academic pri-vileges by a 1927 Law, became the Nazi Centre. Among the Latvians Na-tional Socialism also found supporters, though theirs had a Latvian flavour.Replying to a question in Parliament, the Director of the Press Departmentof the Ministry of the Interior promised journalists that in spite of thepublication of the Latvian National Socialist “Ugunskrust”, Nazism had nofuture among the Latvians.In actual fact there was no longer place for serious legislative activitiesin the Fourth Seim. The feverish yet collapsing regime paralyzed everyattempt in this direction. After the defeat of Laserson and Maisel the LegalCommittee, the Committee for Public Law and the Committee for Cultureand Drafting remained without the members who had helped to guide themfor a decade.It should be noted that in S. Wittenberg the Aguda gained an out-standing politician, particularly with regard to financial and economic prob-lems, who was also a powerful force in other fields as well. His appearanceswere far more impressive than those of his older companion M. Dubin,whose speeches were not particularly distinguished. It is only proper torefer here at least to Wittenberg’s important address on the Budget of theMinistry of Finance in 1932. In the opening passage he demonstrated quiteclearly why the Government which was in power from December 1931until March 1934 was not entitled to make use of the excuse of a world-179The Jews in Latviawide economic crisis. Citing a long series of facts, he displayed the inca-pacity of the Government in handling credit affairs and coordinating bankactivities. In the final part of his speech he proved that the Ministry ofFinance jointly with the Bank of Latvia had retarded private enterprise intrade and industry. Structurally this was a very effective address. He drewattention to the great harm done to the country as a result of the misman-agement of general economic and financial affairs, without especiallystressing the Jewish share in private enterprise.But this economist was too late. The Seim was already busy with thepolitical struggle between its two wings, as became perfectly clear in March1933. The enemies of Socialism and Democracy were busy sharpening theirknives, and it was no longer possible to negotiate with them.Germany had its widely-branching industry and its millions of workersbelonging to the Social Democrat or Communist parties, and its TradeUnion Movement whose traditions went back for eighty years; and yetFascism struck deep roots there. In a semi-agrarian country like Latvia ithad far greater prospects of succeeding. Considerations of this and similarkinds exerted their effect on persons like Ulmanis, Skujenek, etc. And pro-longed visits paid by Ulmanis to Germany, ostensibly for medical reasons,gave additional confirmation to the existence of unofficial ties between Latviaand Hitlerist Germany.The Seim session on 23rd August 1933, at which the struggle withFascism was discussed, demonstrates the deep tragedy of the Jewish par-liamentary representation. The speech delivered by Dubin on this occasiondiffered entirely from all his other political speeches at earlier Seim sessions.There was no sign of the old attacks on the Social Democrats, who werealso worthless or in any case were very little better than the Right wing.Meaning that in the Fourth Seim, after Hitler’s victory in Germany, Dubinhad also come to realise that it was time to change his style. He now drewa clear distinction between the Social Democrat Sports Organisation, theS.S.S., and the “Aizsargi” or semi-military right-wing National Guard. Hetoo was now prepared to defend the Social Democrats — though far toolate — because he could see that they were a weighty anti-Fascist force.And he said to Breikesh: “Do not imagine that Fascism and Hitlerism aredirected only against us. When they come to power, Mr. Breikesh, theywill not disregard you either!”During the Debate on the budget for 1933-34 Deputy Nurock stressedthat Latvia was not behaving towards Germany like a sovereign and inde-pendent State but was degrading itself before Hitler. The speech of Dr.180Political, Social & Cultural LifeCarlebach on developments in Germany was permitted only on conditionthat Germany should not be mentioned by name. With regard to the boy-cott of German goods by Latvian Jewry Nurock declared: “We LatvianJews solemnly declare from this lofty platform that as long as our brethrenthe Jews af Germany are deprived of their most elementary rights, we shallboycott everything that has any connection, no matter how slight, with theHitlerist Reich. That is what we have done until today, and that is whatwe shall go on doing.”It should be noted that in spite of the grave decline in economic andfinancial conditions the centre of gravity of affairs began to shift fromeconomics to politics, particularly after Hitler’s victory in Germany. Thiswas in spite of the fact that at the end of 1931 and during the whole of1932 the credit crisis and unemployment were having their effect. In 1932the monthly number of unemployed reached an average of 14,000. In addi-tion there was a special Jewish unemployment which resulted from theconscious and systematic liquidation of Jewish industrial and commercialenterprises in connection with the introduction of the monopoly. Du binspoke of this in the Seim. Yet while general unemployment could find somealleviation by transfer of the unemployed to agriculture, the Jewish unem-ployed who had no agricultural experience could not leave the towns. TheJewish charitable institutions did not have the means to provide the neces-sary help.Blodniek’s Cabinet together with the Peasants’ Party were engagedchiefly with the affairs of the most privileged of the peasantry and did notgive the necessary attention to the situation of the urgan population. InAutumn 1933 grants to peasants for butter and flax exceeded 2 millionLatt.In Autumn 1933 Latvian independence had lasted for fifteen years. Thecelebration of the occasion coincided with plans for replacing Democracyby “small-scale Fascism”. Blodniek the Prime Minister himself referred tothe necessity of introducing the system of general elections in respect of thePresident, instead of having him elected by the Seim. Furthermore, he de-clared that the rights and powers of the President had to be extended. TheMinisterial Cabinet had to be responsible not only to the Seim but also tothe President of the State, who was entitled to demand its resignation inwhole or part.This proposal placed the Ministerial Cabinet at the parting of the ways.Would it be better for it to support the Seim or submit to the President ?181The Jews in LatviaFor under this expansion of his functions the latter would be entitled, evenin normal times, to restrict or abolish such civil liberties as freedom ofspeech, freedom of association, rights to hold meetings or strike, and theright of privacy in the home.By the end of 1933 Social Democrat circles and the left-wing minoritieswere already perplexed and concerned. The Social Democrats had not onlylost 5 votes when their representation had fallen from 25 to 20, but hadalso lost the two additional votes of the Zionist Socialists and the Bund.The 7 Communists continued to remain faithful to their former politicalapproach, attacking and slandering the Social Democrats without attemptingto participate positively in the life of the country or to cooperate with theSocial Democrats in order to weaken the reaction. They continued to actin accordance with the old French saying: “Tant pire tant mieux”.The shadow of the increasing danger from Nazi Germany, after GermanSocialism so shamefully abandoned its positions without a fight, also helpedto paralyse the Latvian opposition.By the end of 1933, that is, less than a year after the Hitlerist victory,the Nazi “Gleichschaltung” in Latvia found expression not only in the factthat the German minority including schools and press had become Nazi,but also in the growth of an independent Latvian Fascism — “The Perkon-krust”. The latter clearly and openly proclaimed its intention of destroyingall the other political parties. It was declared illegal in Autumn 1933, thoughFascist activities were not entirely prohibited. At the close of this surveywe shall learn how Ulmanis succeeded in exploiting the existence of LatvianHitlerism in order to seize power in May 1934.Towards the end of December 1933 the third and last Conference of theUnited ZZ and ZS parties met in Riga. After analysing developments thepresent writer stated in his address that in the situation which had developedthe two Baltic countries, Latvia and Esthonia, “are once again nothing butcandidates for a transformation into German Provinces.” To our regretthis harsh forecast was fulfilled some time later, in Summer 1941. However,I was not correct when I said in the course of the same address that theloss of Latvia was to be envisaged through Hitlerist Fascism only. Nowthat everything is over we have seen that it was Soviet Russia which wasalso prepared to swallow Democratic Latvia...However, the Latvian intellectuals could not see, even after Hitler’svictory in Germany, that Latvia was moving towards destruction. There wereno far-sighted persons to see the writing on the well and point out thedanger.182Political, Social & Cultural Life1 he second half of the year that preceded the liquidation of Democracywas marked by one outstanding detail. A new and final Cabinet appearedbefore the Seim on 16th March, 1934, replacing the Blodniek Government.The Democratic Centre, the Skujenek group, together with that of Blodniekconsisting of 8 members, and 2 members of the Leikart group were againstthe new Cabinet in addition to the Social Democrats. In preparing his newCabinet Ulmanis had to fall back on the Minorities, whose aid was givenquite generously. The Cabinet was supported not only by the Germans andthe Aguda but by all the Russians as well. In the usual Debate on theprogrammatic address of the new Government, however, not a single mem-ber spoke on behalf of the Minorities. This time even the Aguda was silent,though it had hitherto participated in all such debates on the statementsof the new Cabinets. On the other hand, the Minorities played a significantalthough passive part in the debates. They were quoted in all the oppo-sition speeches. Menders the Social Democrat, Leikart of the New PeasantsParty, Breikesh of the Democratic Centre and others all quoted them. Thestatement of Ulmanis included a section about “attracting all nationallyconscious forces to the new patriotic task.” He incidentally referred to anew Education Law for the benefit of all citizens, and the inclusion of theminority schools in the general control network of the Ministry of Culture.In his major speech Menders stressed that he recognised the right of theMinorities to take an active part in determining the fate of the country andparticipating in the Government. At the same tme he warned the Minor-ities, and the Germans in particular, not to identify themselves with reactionand the rise of Fascism. “The present Ulmanis Government is not supportedby the petty bourgeois Latvians, and therefore it enjoys the full supportof the Germans and the other minorities.” Therefore the fact that Ulmanishad also introduced a passage regarding the recognition of nationality in hisdeclaration was nothing but a ridiculous piece of demagogy. It was clearthat the Minorities could not be nationally conscious in the bourgeois Lat-vian sense. “You are actually violating Dubin when you try to transformhim into a nationally conscious Latvian. He has never been anything of thekind, nor does he wish to be.”Menders’ address also referred to the Fascist tendencies of Ulmanis,and his trips to Germany. But a far sharper and more carefully preparedaddress was delivered by Leikart, the only deputy who declared in so manywords that Ulmanis was preparing to establish a dictatorship. Breikesh inhis address, however, severely rebuked the Social Democrats for their inabi-183The Jews in Latviality to gather around them the members of the Democratic petty bourgeoisgroups, which had actually been the cause of Ulmanis’ return to power.The new Cabinet received 50 votes against 40 in all.Without in any way altering the financial or economic situation, althoughthe programmatic address had expressly referred to increased exports andaid for vital branches of industry, the Cabinet preferred to choke the Seimwith pure politics, and in particular with constitutional amendments.The following clauses were added to those already mentioned :The term “the People of Latvia” was to be replaced everywhere bythe term “the Latvian People”. The President was to be elected by generalpopular vote for a period of five years. The ministers were to have doubleresponsibility, towards both the President and the Seim.Leikart also proposed the election of a new Legislative Council in whichthere would be no place for the minorities... Only a purely Latvian Na-tional Assembly would be capable of shaping the suitable Constitution.In view of all these witches’ revels the silence of the Jews was surprising.Throughout the Ninth Session of the Seim the only Jewish speech deliveredwas that of Deputy M. Nurock, explaining his refusal to vote for the clause-by-clause reading of the Draft Law for altering the Latvian Constitution.This leads to the conclusion that during the final weeks of the Seim theAguda had given its approval for this Draft Law, whose purpose was tostrangle Latvian Democracy. It is quite possible that this was one of thereasons for the special status which the Aguda enjoyed during the Fascistperiod under Ulmanis.The last legal Parliamentary Session lasted two months, from 17thMarch, 1934, until 15th May, the day of the Fascist coup d'etat.Indeed, the inertial strength of the perishing democracy was quite power-ful. Naturally there were people in touch with Ulmanis who knew what wasgoing to happen. It cannot be claimed that the Social Democrats wereentirely blind to the Fascist take-over. Yet at the same time there can be nodoubt that not only the moderate Social Democrat elements, but also themost left among them such as Lorenz, for example, were misled by Ulmanis.When the Social Democrat Seim Deputies turned to Ulmanis on the eveof the take-over and on the very day it happened, demanding an explana-tion for the presence of so many military forces and “Aizsargs” in Riga,he informed them that he had ordered a concentration of military forcesand additional volunteers in order to suppress the Latvian Hitlerists, whowere preparing a Putsch. This referred to the “Ugunskrust”, etc. The con-184Political, Social & Cultural Lifecentration of forces was not intended against the Left, i.e., against theSocial Democrats, but on the contrary against the Right. Many SocialDemocrat leaders believed this. After the coup d'etat there were rumoursthat Ulmanis had concealed from his moderate companions, such as thewell-known jurist Pauliuk, the fact that any such step was intended, in orderto prevent inner party friction.On the night of 15th May, after the Seim Meeting was over. Dr. PaulKalnin went to a party given by the French Ambassador. While Kalninand other Seim members attended this diplomatic gathering the membersof the political orders and the units of the “Aizsags” were breaking intoSocial Democrat Clubs, Sport Centres, and the homes of outstanding SocialDemocrat personalities in order to arrest them. When Paul Kalnin returnedfrom the party he was also arrested; and that was likewise the fate of BrunoKalnin, head of the S.S.S.That was how a Fascist coup d'etat was carried out by the legal PrimeMinister of a democratic country. Ulmanis was the person who murderedLatvian democracy. He closed the way to the Latvian Nazi gangs anddeprived them of the privilege of slaying the democracy of the country. Thepoor “Perkunkrust” were politically “unemployed” for some time. It turnedout that the legal Prime Minister was more of an adventurer than they were,despite their semi-illegal status.The suddenness of the coup d'etat found tragi-comic expression in thestenographic report of the last Session of the Seim on 15th May, whichended with the regular phrase: “The next meeting will be held on Friday,18th May.”Was it? It was never held at all. To make up for this, about a quarterof the Seim deputies met elsewhere: In the Libau Concentration Camp.They included the representatives of the United Zionist Socialists and of theJewish Bund.185Z. Michael! (Michelson)JEWISH CULTURAL AUTONOMY AND THE JEWISH SCHOOLSYSTEMSTHE resurrection of the Hebrew language and culture between the two worldwars took place not only in the Land of Israel but also in Czechoslovakia,Poland, Roumania, Bulgaria and the Baltic states (Lithuania, Latvia andEsthonia). Nowhere were its achievements more impressive and far-reachingthan in the latter where the national minorities, and the Jews in particular,were for the first time given an opportunity to develop their creative geniuswithin the limits of cultural autonomy.In Lithuania the cultural prerequisites for a network of modern Hebrewschools had long been in existence. In the relatively recent Latvian Jewishcommunity, however, no such conditions were to be found. Neverthelessthis community contributed a great deal to the development of Hebreweducation. At the beginning of the 19th century only a few dozen Jewishfamilies were to be found in those northern districts of Tsarist Russiawhich ultimately became the independent Latvian state. By 1940 this com-munity numbered 100,000; and if it contributed so much to the Hebrewcultural renaissance in spite of its limited size, this was largely due to thecultural autonomy accorded it by independent Latvia.THE AUTONOMY OF THE NATIONAL MINORITIESOn December 8, 1919, the Latvian National Council approved theGeneral Schools Law and passed special legislation for the schools ofminorities. This was based on a plan for cultural autonomy for the mino-rities put forward by the Government in cooperation with the represen-tative of the Jewish community. Professor Paul Mintz, who was thenChief State Comptroller. The general law governing the Latvian schoolsystem regulated the rights and duties of teachers and school principals,school commitees and pedagogical committees, relationships between muni-cipalities and minority schools, the financial and economic administrationof schools, the language of instruction, the methods of teaching the Latvianlanguage, geography and history; and it instituted free compulsory educa-tion in the schools of the minorities.The Law of Autonomy for the Minorities, also passed by the NationalCouncil on December 8, 1919, set the limits of the autonomy to be enjoyedby the minorities in managing their cultural institutions, and specified re-186Political, Social & Cultural Lifelationships between the minority school system and the government, andthe authority of the central management of the minority school systems.The law, which entrusted the management of schools and other cul-tural institutions to the minorities, contained not only the constitutionsof central governing bodies but also regulations governing the financingof secondary schools. It required the central government and municipalbudgets to provide funds for minority secondary schools at the same levelas for the Latvian secondary schools, in proportion to their numbers ineach city.This law, unique and unprecedented at the time, was an outstandingachievement by Latvian statesmen who, at the historical moment of settingup their state, succeeded in rising above the ancient quarrels betweennationalities and ingrained hatreds of Russians and Germans, and sur-mounted the fears expressed in many quarters about the danger of culturalautonomy to Latvian sovereignty.No doubt the law had shortcomings which were subsequently amendedin a truly democratic spirit. Later, when representatives of the minoritiessubmitted to the Latvian Seim a law of complete autonomy for the mino-rities, encompassing social as well as cultural autonomy and parliamentaryrepresentation, the paragraphs regarding cultural autonomy scarcely dif-fered from those passed originally by the Latvian National Council.The law passed on December 8, 1919 awarded educational autonomyto three minorities only: Russian, Jewish and German. Later it was ex-tended to the Poles and White Russians and ultimately it included theeven smaller minorities of Esthonians and Lithuanians.DEPARTMENT OF JEWISH CULTURE (BOARD OF JEWISHEDUCATION)Immediately after the ratification of the Education Law the representa-tives of the Jews in the National Council and the Municipal Council ofRiga met and elected Engineer J. Landau (who before the War had beenthe principal of the Jewish Secondary School using the Russian language)to the post of Director of the Board of Jewish Education. Dr. M. S. Salkindwas appointed secretary and Mr. Z. Poloczkoi and Mr. M. L. Hochman as-sistant secretaries. Soon after Mr. Hochman passed away and was replacedby Mr. Greenman, a teacher. When Mrs. Salkind quitted her post, Mr. A.L. Gurewitz was appointed as secretary. Later he was replaced by Mr. L.Hochman, who served in this post until the end of Jewish autonomy.Together with the Board of Directors a public committee was set up.187The Jews in Latviaconsisting according to the law of three Jewish members of the NationalCouncil who were at the time Mr. M. Dubin (Agudat Israel) Dr. Lipma-novicz (National Democrat), Dr. J. Jaffe (General Zionist, replaced laterby Dr. Salkind), and three representatives of the Jewish Teachers’ Asso-ciations: “Hamoreh”, the Hebrew Teachers’ Union, the Union of the“Zentrale Iddishe Schul-Organisatie” and the Union of Orthodox Teachers“Moriah”. The representatives of the teachers were changed from time totime by their respective unions. Two Inspectors were appointed at first:Engineer Dov Kulman, and Engineer B. Zivian. Later the total number ofGovernment employees was reduced, and Zvi Gorfinkel became the onlyInspector.THE HEBREW SCHOOLS AND THE LANGUAGE OF TUITIONAlmost all the nationalities in Latvia had possessed schools of theirown before World War One, with their established curricula and text-books. When they were granted cultural autonomy they needed only tointroduce certain changes and adjustments to satisfy official requirements.However, the Jewish minority, although enjoying a high cultural level, hadno schools of its own before the advent of Latvian independence. Jewswere not allowed to serve as teachers in Tsarist Russia, the only exceptionbeing a Jewish Boys’ school and Girls’ school in Riga which had beenmaintained by the Tsarist Government for many years (the Boys’ Schoolever since 1840). The Jews therefore had no teachers, no text-books, andno curriculum. Bitter quarrels began among them regarding the generaldirection of their schools and the language of tuition. Three brands ofopinion existed :1) The Yiddishists, who were centred round the very popular “Bund”party. These regarded Yiddish as the language of a new mass culture,spoken by the majority of Jewry and destined to become the only languageof the entire Jewish people.2) The supporters of Hebrew, backed by the Zionist Organisation,who regarded Hebrew as the historic language of the nation, as well asthe language of Jewish prayer and of the restored Land of Israel.3) The Assimilationists, consisting of those who were primarily in-terested in the material well-being of the Jews, and who thought it wasin the best interests of the younger generation to be taught in Russian orGerman (and not necessarily in Latvian, now the official language of thecountry).The pedagogical principle underlying the Law of Education was that188Political, Social & Cultural Lifethe language spoken in the family should determine the language of tuition.This principle, however, was not congruent with the needs of the JewishNational Renaissance Movement, whose advocates found considerable diffi-culty at first because the languages of the Jewish masses in Latvia wereYiddish, Russian or German to begin with.THE GERMAN OCCUPATION (1.8.1917 — 17.9.18)Riga, situated outside the Pale in which the Jewish masses were per-mitted to reside, was known for the assimilationist trend of its Jews. Al-though the ‘Instructions of General Hindenburg”, issued on 22nd December1915, required the language of tuition in schools within German-occupiedterritory to be the mother tongue, the Jewish community was not anxiousto exploit this provision. The language of tuition for all three Jewish schools(in Cossack Street, at 141 Romanow Street and at 4 Popow Street) wasthen German.In May 1918 a group was formed aiming at the establishment ofYiddish schools. It consisted of A. Vorobeiczik, a student, B. Wolfson,a teacher, L. Levitas, Shlomo Schatz, Jacobson, Judovin, S. Zacharowitzand M. Donskoy, all active figures in the Jewish community. They werenot permitted to pursue their aim, and the group was soon disbanded.Between 15th June and the end of August further attempts were made byYiddishists to obtain a licence for a Yiddish school, but the Germanauthorities refused to grant it. The first reports of German military defeatsand revolutionary movements at the Front and in Germany itself reachedRiga at this time.DEMOCRATIC SELF-GOVERNMENT IN RIGA (18.11.1918 — 2.1.1919)On November 18th, 1918, Latvia was proclaimed an independent Re-public. The city of Riga was still dazed by the destruction left behind afterthe German occupation. Eastern Latvia and the city of Dvinsk were still inBolshevik hands. In the Town Council of Riga the Latvian Social Demo-crats were the dominant group. Upon the invitation of the veteran Latvianteacher D. Dekens (for many years Mayor of Riga) the Jewish school com-mittee sent its representative, A. Vorobeiczik, to the Municipal ElementarySchool Committee.An event oecured at this time which had a decisive effect on thebalance of power between Yiddishists and the supporters of Hebrew formany years to come. On 29th December, 1918, the general registration of189The Jews in Latviachildren of school age was called for. The registration of Jewish childrenwas entrusted to the Yiddishist Committee of Jewish Education. FaithfulYiddishists were installed at the registration stations, and under their in-fluence parents declared Yiddish as their mother-tongue. The results weredefinitely in favour of the Yiddishists.THE DEMOCRATIC JEWISH TEACHER’S ASSOCIATIONThe first Teachers’ Assembly took place on January 1, 1919. The par-ticipants (teachers in existing schools) were A. Vorobeiczik, N. Vildikan,N. Vorobeiczik, G. Nis, Silbermann, R. Bovshover, T. Meirson, M. Braun,R. Jakobson, L. Wolfson, R. Levinson, G. Rom, S. Sudarsky, Z. Gabbai,M. Gabbai, P. Rapoport, R. Zack, R. Levinson, B. Rosenfeld, A. Shirman,S. Shirman, B. Wolfson.This Assembly set out the foundations for new schools and passed thefollowing resolutions:a) Elementary education should be compulsory, free of charge, uniform,autonomous and lasting 6 years at least (passed unanimously).b) Education should be secular, national in spirit, and its languageYiddish (passed unanimously, with two abstentions). For Jewish childrenwho did not speak Yiddish schools would be maintained in their mother-tongues.c) Schools should be coeducational (passed by majority vote againstthree objectors).The Assembly elected the Yiddishist teacher, G. Rom, as representativeto the Convention of Latvian Teachers.The second meeting of teachers, presided over by Vorobeiczik, tookplace on January 2nd 1919. Only 17 teachers were present. It was thendecided to establish the Democratic Union of Jewish Teachers, based onthe decisions of the Assembly. All teachers recognising these decisions wereeligible as members, also laymen active in education, in an advisory capa-city. Twelve of the 17 participants enrolled as members and a presidiumof A. Vorobeiczik, G. Rom, M. Braun, B. Wolfson, L. Wolfson was elected.This led to the first split among the Jewish teachers. The little groupof Nationalist Zionists could not come to terms with the others. They didnot join the Union and planned for a union of its own. On 3rd January1919, however, power was seized by the Bolsheviks. All preparations forthe setting up of Yiddish schools were suspended. Hebrew schools couldnot even be dreamt of.190Political, Social & Cultural LifeTHE SOVIET PERIOD (3.1.1919 — 22.5.1919)On January 9th 1919 the Soviet authorities proposed to set up 4 Yid-dish schools with 34 classrooms for 1380 children, at 141 Romanov St.,55 Romanow St., 4 Strogan St., and 4 Popow St. They were opened bythe end of the month. Yiddish was the language of tuition in the first twoclasses only, Russian was taught in the other classes because of the short-age of teachers who could teach in Yiddish. The Soviet authorities didnot interfere with the internal affairs of the schools, save that the teachingof Hebrew was banned entirely. It should be noted that the newly-foundedpermanent Board of Teachers of all Jewish schools appealed to the au-thorities to recognise Hebrew as a voluntary subject. The teachers expressedtheir readiness to teach Hebrew on their own account. The authoritieschanged their mind later and recognised Hebrew as a compulsory subject.On May 22nd, 1919, the Soviet regime fell and the Government wastaken over by the Baltic Barons under the presidency of Andrei Niedra.At the time (19.5.1919) the Board of Teachers of the four Jewish schoolshad split over the question of the language of tuition. Of almost 50 teachers,25 declared their unwillingness to teach in any schools except those in whichYiddish was the language of tuition.AUTUMN 1919In August 1919 a Democratic Municipal Council was set up. Two Jewswere elected to the Municipal Committee of Education : Dr. Jaffe, repre-sentative of the General Zionists, and A. Vorobeiczik, a representative ofthe Yiddishist Democratic Teacher’s Union. They constituted a subcom-mittee within the Municipal Committee of Education, and were empoweredto organise the Jewish schools. The Yiddishist Union promptly submitteda list of its 25 members for official recognition as teachers. Their requestwas granted.The subcommittee prepared a curriculum and organised the registra-tion of children of school age; but soon very acute differences of opinionarose on the question of language. The Yiddishist Union demanded thatchildren in classes 1 — 4 should be taught in their mother-tongue, i.e.Yiddish, and that the language of the higher classes should provisionallybe left as it was. Dr. Joffe, on the other hand, demanded the introductionof Hebrew as the language of tuition. Finally a compromise was agreedupon and the Riga Jewish newspaper, the “Yiddische Volksstimme”, an-nounced on behalf of the Subcommittee of Jewish Education of the Muni-cipal Committee, that 24 classes would open in Yiddish, two classes in191The Jews in LatviaHebrew and additional classes in Russian and German for children whoknew only those languages.The demands of the Yiddishists were based upon the registration ofparents on December 29th 1918, the results of which, as already mentioned,had been in their favour. As a result three schools were opened with Yid-dish as their language. The number of their pupils in Autumn 1919 was2060, or 50-60% of all Jewish children of school age.The Zionists withdrew their demand for two classes in Hebrew, to bemaintained by the Municipality, and opened two Hebrew elementaryschools, sponsored by the Jewish community of Riga, at 141 Romanow St.and 4 Popow St. A number of children remained in the by then old-fashion-ed “Heder Metukan” (reformed Heder) schools, and a considerable per-centage in Russian and German-speaking private institutions.THE JEWISH SECONDARY SCHOOL IN RIGAAmong the surprises in store for the Jews of Riga in Autumn 1919was the Municipal decision to open a Jewish secondary school, althoughthe prerequisite conditions were non-existent: No teachers, no text-books,no teaching equipment. The Jewish representatives on the Municipal Coun-cil were led by national pride to demand the establishment of a secondaryschool for the Jewish minority as well, at the time when such schools wereopened for the other national minorities.A Committee consisting of Dr. Jaffe (General Zionists), Engineer Pessisand L. Fishman (National Democrats), representing the Jewish fraction inthe Municipal Council, and Messrs. Vorobeiczik, J. Berz, B. Wolfsohn andM. Braun of the Yiddishist Sub-committee of Education, was formed todeal with all matters concerning the establishment of the Secondary School:The body of teachers, the curriculum, etc., etc. Because of acute differencesof opinion, the non-Yiddishist members of the Committee resigned andmatters were left entirely in the hands of the Yiddishists.The secondary school opened in Autumn 1919 with eight classes, threeof which were elementary. The language of instruction that year was Rus-sian, with Yiddish and Hebrew taught as separate subjects. The teacherswere mostly non-Jews.THE HEBREW SCHOOLSAt the Declaration of Latvian Independence on November 18, 1918,two schools of the Jewish community had been in existence for severaldecades in Riga. The first was a boys’ school in Romanow Street, founded192Political, Social & Cultural Lifeby Dr. Lilienthal in 1840. The author taught in this school from 1920 until1934 and served as its principal. It was generally known as the “KaplanSchule”, because of the writer Aharon Kaplan who had once been Prin-cipal. The second was a girls’ school in Popow St. (known as the “StopelSchule”) headed by Mrs. M. Gabbai.These schools underwent several changes under the influence of theRussians and the Germans, and their language changed accordingly. Onlywhen Latvia became independent was it decided to make Hebrew theirlanguage of instruction.I wish to dwell on the history of these schools in some detail, and tomention those colleagues who worked there from the time they wereestablished as Hebrew schools. The Boys’ School at 141 Romanow Streetwas reopened in September 1919 after a short period under Soviet rule,when the language of instruction was Yiddish. It contained 4 classes, thefirst two in Hebrew only. In the two higher classes Russian remained thelanguage of teaching for another year or two. The Jewish community ap-pointed Mr. J. D. Horwitz as principal of the school. Horwitz was a Cantor(Kazan), pupil and spiritual heir of the famous Hazan and composer Ro-sowsky. The teachers were: Abraham Kaplan who emigrated next year toEretz Israel as an early Halutz of the Third Aliya and is now superinten-dent of schools for working youths in Haifa; Mrs Rosa Cohen, who nowlives in Tel-Aviv; S. Litwin, a teacher of gymnastics; and Ruth Hirschberg.In the second year the teachers was joined by the writer, Reuben Rotsteinwho taught for one year only, then left for Eretz Israel and is now a mem-ber of Kibbutz Ashdot Yaakov; L. Itigin and Shalom Reichsrudel, whohad already taught Jewish Studies in Hebrew to a whole generation andwas of outstanding character, with manifold talents in general subjects.(His sons are in Israel; Moshe Ben Elul, one-time editor of “Devar Hasha-vua”, and the veteran teacher and school principal, Joseph Reichsrudel).Two years later (1923) I became Principal of the school and retainedthat post until 1934 when, on the demand of the Fascist regime of K.Ulmanis, I had to resign, since I was regarded as “unfaithful to the spiritof the new regime.”I wish to mention some other teachers who taught here under my direc-tion. Ida Bovshover, teacher of the Latvian and Russian languages, a mostdevoted member of the staff, taught from 1920 till the school was closed;Lea Mayofes-Epstein, from the Teachers’ Seminary of Alterman in Warsawwho excelled in the lower grades; Pintsov, teacher of the Natural Sciences;J. Taitz, teacher of music; J. Mittel, teacher of gymnastics; J. Weispap, an193The Jews in Latviaactive member of the Zionist Socialists who went to Eretz Israel and thenreturned to Latvia; Zvi Gorfinkel, a leader of the Zionist Socialist Move-ment and Principal of the Elementary school affiliated to the Hebrew Se-condary School in Riga; Samuel Gram, who afterwards taught at theHebrew Secondary School, was a founder of Municipal Hebrew SchoolNo. 9 in Riga, its principal for many years, and one of the active membersof the Central Committee of the Hamoreh Hebrew Teachers’ Union. Allthese perished during the Holocaust. Survivors were J. Pisetzki and FishelWeissman, and those who succeeded in time in reaching Eretz Israel: RivkaShereshevsky, who taught from 1924 till she arrived in Eretz Israel in 1935and is now Principal of the Mizrahi Girls’ School in Tel Aviv; MiriamBag, an active members of the “Noar Hazioni” Movement and the ZionistSocialist Students’ Union “Hashahar”; Shoshana Schattenstein-Lev, whotaught at the School from 1924 until she went to Eretz Israel in 1934,and now teaches at the Mizrahi Girls’ School in Tel Aviv; Judith Gram,who came to Eretz Israel and joined Kibbutz Ashdot Yaakov with herhusband Yitshak Maor (Meirson), a leader of the Zionist Socialist Move-ment in Latvia; Baruch Bag, teacher of Gymnastics, a founder of “Maccabi”and the Jewish Boy Scout Movement in Latvia, now principal of the Win-gate Institute.This school laid a foundation for organised Hebrew education in Riga.Many of the pupils came to Eretz Israel as pioneers and now live in kib-butzim and moshavim, in cities and villages. The school building servedas a meeting-place for all pioneer Zionist youth movements, their meetings,councils and assemblies; and especially for the Labour Zionist Movement.The same building held the secondary evening school of the HebrewTeacher’s Union, which was established on the initiative of the author. Itsprincipal was M. Michelson, one of the handful who survived the SecondWorld War after twice escaping from extermination camps. The secondaryschool provided a Hebrew education and general culture for hundreds ofworking-class boys and girls who had to go to work upon leaving elementaryschool and could not afford to attend day secondary schools. The samebuilding also gave accomodation to the “Froebel Institute”, the only HebrewTeachers’ Seminary, which during its first year trained 100 Kindergartenand School teachers. Half of them are now in Israel, and most of themcontinue to teach.The second school sponsored by the Jewish Community from the ad-vent of cultural autonomy was at first intended as a Girls’ School, butlater admitted boys as well. The principal was Mrs. Mina Gabbai, an ex-194Political, Social & Cultural Lifecellent organiser who, with the aid of her husband, Selig Gabbai, raisedthe school to a high educational level.I wish to record the excellent teachers who dedicated themselves mostnobly to this school: Rivka Vinnik-Razby, an outstanding figure in theJewish Renaissance movement of Latvia and one of the first Hebrewteachers, a pioneer and founder of the Zeirei Zion Movement (her husband,Yerahmiel Winnik, leader of Latvian Jewry and of the Zionist SocialistMovement, was a gifted journalist who died in a Siberian concentrationcamp during the Second World War); Esther and Miriam Rapoport; SoniaRapoport-Michelson; Noama Vildikan; Relia Zak; Rosa Cohen; YochevedSeligman; Sarah Polotzkoi; Sarah Gideon; Eliyahu Kauffman, first presidentof the Central Committee of “Hehalutz” in Latvia, who came to EretzIsrael in 1920 and died there; E. Dissenczik (Dr. Sinai, eye-specialist inTel Aviv). At a somewhat later period I recall the teachers Zvi Wasserman-Maimon, active member of the Hamoreh Hebrew Teachers’ Union and itshonorary Secretary, and his wife, Dina, who continued her work in EretzIsrael, later Israel, with maladjusted children; T. Majofes, an outstandingpedagogue, and A. Kofian.CONDITIONS IN THE TWO HEBREW SCHOOLS OF THE RIGAJEWISH COMMUNITYDuring 1919-1921 the Jewish community received funds from the Amer-ican “Joint” for educational and social needs. When this ended in 1922,the financial position of the Jewish community entered on a critical phrase.The teachers in the two schools were not paid for months. In those circum-stances, when there was no pay, no firewood and no essential teachingappliances, the Hebrew schools remained in existence solely because of theunprecedented devotion of the teaching staff.At the same time the Yiddishist schools received plentiful municipalbudgets, regular salaries, teaching appliances, furniture, etc. It was underthese conditions that the struggle for Hebrew had to be carried on againstaggressive Yiddishism, against the religious fanaticism of the Agudat Israel,against the assimilationists and against the indifference of Zionists. It washard to demand that parents who sent their children to the Hebrew schoolsshould accept hardships for their children when there was such plentyelsewhere.The teachers in the two community schools resolved to take theirdestiny and that of Hebrew education in Riga in their own hands, anddemanded that the community transfer its schools to the municipal network.195The Jews in LatviaThe Community Council opposed this on grounds of principle, being afraidof losing its influence in the schools; while Zionist members feared thatthe Municipality might compel the schools to teach in Yiddish. A bitterstruggle developed between it and the teachers, who were backed only bythe “Zeirei Zion” party. The outcome was that in January 1923 the schoolswere transferred to the Municipal network. From then onwards they beganto develop properly.THE SOCIETY FOR THE ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCEAND ARTIn 1921 an additional Hebrew school containing both elementary andsecondary classes was founded by the “Society for the Advancement ofScience and Art in Latvia.” This society was initiated by Dr. HermannWasserman, and in the same year, 1921, it founded a popular music schoolheaded by the composer Shlomo Rosovsky. This music school contributeda great deal to musical education in Latvia. Many music teachers who wereexcluded from the state-controlled Conservatoire in spite of the democraticConstitution found in the Jewish institution a framework for their teachingactivities. Several of them came to Israel in due course, including its thenDirector, Shlomo Rosovsky, Dr. S. Heilman and Mrs. Esther Michelson-Rapoport. The Society also founded a Hebrew kindergarten under the direc-tion of Mrs. Klass, who had grown up in Eretz Israel and brought the spiritof the Land to Latvia.Worthy of mention is the Treasurer of the Society, Mr. Baslavski, whowas dedicated to the resurrection of Hebrew and the Hebrew school. Hisson, L. Baslavski, a leading member of Kvutzat Kinneret, is a graduate ofthe Hebrew Secondary School.THE HEBREW SECONDARY SCHOOL IN RIGAIn its first school year the Hebrew Secondary School which, as alreadymentioned, was founded in 1921, contained only 3 or 4 lower grades wherethe language of instruction was Hebrew. In the other classes general sub-jects were taught in Russian, but Hebrew and Judaistic subjects were alsotaught. During the first year of its existence many Jewish youths left theirformer Russian or German schools and joined the Hebrew SecondarySchool. Within a few years all classes had adopted Hebrew as the languageof tuition, and the school soon assumed a central position for Hebreweducation in Latvia, transmitting culture and education to thousands ofyoungsters many of whom became leaders in Zionist Youth organisations.196Political, Social Sc Cultural LifeThe principals of the school were (in order of succession: Senior Lec-turer Weintraub, later Director of the Pedagogical Institute of the Direc-torate of Jewish Education, a man of high culture but with insufficientknowledge of Judaism and Hebrew. After him Dr. Rosenberg was broughtfrom Germany, but served only for a short time. The next principal. Dr.Eliyahu Segal, was invited from Kovno (Kaunas). He was a man of widegeneral and Jewish culture, who directed the school for many years andmaintained it at a high educational level. After a long period of fruitfulwork, not only as a school principal but also as an active functionary inthe Hamoreh Hebrew Teachers’ Union, he left Riga and returned to Kovno(Kaunas) where he worked as a medical practitioner till the outbreak ofWar. During the war he lived in the Ghetto of Kovno, was deported toDachau and after much tribulation reached Israel. His wife, Sonia Segal,was a teacher of rare pedagogical gifts with a thorough knowledge of Heb-rew who also taught subjects in the Secondary School and the Teachers’Seminary. She too passed through the Ghetto and the concentration camps,but finally reached Israel and was reunited with her husband.Dr. Segal was replaced by Dr. M. Nadel, Lecturer in Jewish Studiesat the University of Dorpat. He was a man of pedagogical distinction, agreat expert on Judaism and author of books on general history who con-tributed a great deal to the high educational level of the school. He wishedto continue his work in Eretz Israel. During the School Year 1936-37 hewent to Moscow in order to take leave of his brother, but fell ill on thejourney and never returned. His successor was Engineer J. Perniack, aveteran teachers at the school in whom a thorough knowledge of Judaismwas blended with great erudition in the National Sciences. He was activein the Teacher’ Union which he represented for many years on the Direc-torate of Jewish Culture in Latvia. He served as principal of the SecondarySchool till its abolition.I wish to mention other members of the teaching staff, with whom Ihad the privilege of being in daily contact through our activities in theTeachers’ Union:Moshe Breitbord, teacher of Jewish studies, honorary secretary of theschool for many years. (His book on Hebrew grammar is also widely usedin Israeli schools.) He was one of the few who succeeded in fleeing fromRiga during the war, but afterwards returned and died there.H. Gordon came to Latvia in 1926, when “Habimah” left Russia. InMoscow he had taught the members of “Habimah” Hebrew, and wasactive in the Teachers’ Union from his arrival in Latvia. He was of a197The Jews in Latviapeaceable, optimistic disposition. He taught Jewish studies at the MunicipalHebrew School in Popow Street as well as at the Secondary School.Meir Weinberg taught science at the Secondary School. He was anenthusiastic fighter for the Hebrew cause, was a member of the CentralCommittee of the Teachers’ Union for many years and Treasurer of theeducational institutions it established. He and his wife Bertha, one of thefirst Hebrew kindergarten teachers in Latvia, were among those few wholeft for Eretz Israel before the war.Rabbi M. Levin taught an elegant Hebrew. He was a permanent memberof the Executive of the “Hamoreh” during 1924, and served as principalof the Seminary for Teachers and Kindergarten teachers. He was a greatfighter for the Hebrew cause. Before the outbreak of the war he and hiswife went to visit their daughter in France, and from there they ultimatelysucceeded in reaching Israel.Moshe Latt was a leading member of the Central Committee of the“Hamoreh,” a lecturer on pedagogy and psychology at the “Froebel Insti-tute,” a man of great erudition, with a thorough knowledge of the Latvianlanguage. He died in the Riga Ghetto.Dr. L. Kantor was also one of the members of the Central Committeeof the “Hamoreh” in the critical year 1926. He lectured on history in the“Froebel Institute” in addition to his work at the Secondary School. Laterhe left the teaching profession and was a lawyer in Mitau.Also worth of mention is Mr. Lemel, an active member of the “Ha-moreh” Union who died of a heart attack while still relatively young, atthe beginning of 1931; Mr. Piter, a history teacher, and Mr. J. Shraga,teacher of classical languages.THE UNION OF HEBREW TEACHERS IN LATVIAThe Union was started by a few devoted people whose only asset wastheir firm belief in the cause they wished to serve. They were a handfulagainst many who did everything to thwart their efforts. The situation amongLatvian Jews was itself against us: The mother-tongue of the children wasYiddish, Russian or German. Most of the children went to Russian orGerman schools, which belonged to Christians or assimilated Jews. A mino-rity studied at traditional “Heder” schools. A second discouraging factorwas the shortage of teachers and teaching facilities. Within the Jewishcommunity there was a bitter opposition to Hebrew on the part of theYiddishists, disparagement and unbelief on the part of the assimilationists,and passivity and indifference among the Zionists.198Political, Social & Cultural LifeIt was therefore the teachers’ task to carry out a mission which theorganised communities in other countries would have considered it theirduty to carry out.The teachers not only had to perform their educational duties, but alsoto fight for the legal rights of the Hebrew schools, to engage in propagandafor them and to ensure their natural needs in order to secure their mereexistence.Let us now review the early history of the Hebrew Teachers’ Organisa-tion.“IVRIT” TEACHERS’ ASSOCIATION (JANUARY 1920 — 1923)As already mentioned, some of the teachers participating in the firstteachers’ meeting in Riga on January 1st 1919 were against the Yiddishistmajority, but only at the beginning of 1920 did they form an associationwhich was recognised by the authorities as the “Hebrew Teachers’ Asso-ciation, Riga”.The first letter of this Association, dated April 12th 1920, was addressedto the Director of the Office of Education and Culture at the ZionistExecutive in London. It said:Dear Sirs,After numerous difficulties we have succeeded in forming a new typeof Hebrew Teachers’ Association. Its main objective is to establish newschools in the spirit of a Hebrew, Zionist education. Most of our membersare young. They number 25 male and female teachers. Not all of themknow Hebrew and we particularly lack teachers of general subjects capableof teaching in Hebrew. Next year new classes will be added in these schoolsand the burden on the teaching staff will be even heavier. It would helpus greatly if a Hebrew Teachers’ Seminary could be founded here. Wealso lack text-books, and have to teach by lecturing only. Please send usa list of all Hebrew text books on all possible subjects that have beenpublished and, if possible, some of the books themselves. Also please sendus the latest pedagogical literature in Hebrew.Awaiting your urgent reply,with the greetings of ZionE. RAPOPORTVice ChairmanA. KAPLANSecretary199The Jews in LatviaIn the month of Si van, 1920, Esther Rapoport was the first representa-tive of the Association on the Board of Public Education of the MunicipalDirectorate of Jewish Culture. She was succeeded by L. Gabbai. Later thisoffice was filled by J. A. Horwitz, Z. Michelson, J. Perniack.The Association's main weakness was that its best pioneering membersleft the country for Eretz Israel one after the other.In July 1920, the Vice President of the Association went to Israel asone of the first Latvian pioneers of the Third “Aliya.” In June 1921 MoshePolotzkoi moved on to Eretz Israel (M. Palmon, a director of the KerenKayemet in Haifa). He was one of the founders of the Association and anexcellent advocate of the Hebrew language, which was the language usedin his home. His father was a veteran Hebrew teacher in the “Reform”Hadarim. His brother, Zeev Polotzkoi, was an outstanding teacher andmember of the Directorate of Jewish Culture throughout its existence; athird brother, Shachna Polotzkoi, was also a wellknown teacher and a publicfigure, active in the Teachers’ Union and its Central Emergency Committeeduring the crisis of 1926. Their sister, Sarah Polotzkoi, was also a veteranteacher and later taught in Tel-Aviv.However, the greatest handicap of the Hebrew teachers was theirlack of an ideological basis. In a leaflet sent to teachers in the provinces, thebasic principle of the Association was formulated thus: “The main purposeof our Association is to resuscitate the Hebrew language among our youth.We want our youngsters to finish primary school knowing the Hebrewlanguage sufficiently well to use it easily and fluently in speech and writing,and get acquainted with its literature.” No mention is made in clear termsof the need to make Hebrew the only language of instruction in schoolsfor Jewish children. The main intention was to win over teachers who didnot full-heartedly adhere to the Yiddishist camp.The first consultation of Jewish teachers from all over Latvia tookplace on July 29th 1921, its purpose being to establish a Hebrew Teachers’Union and formulate its ideological basis.THE FOUNDATION OF THE HEBREW TEACHERS’ UNION“HAMOREH”A meeting of Hebrew teachers with 16 participants took place on June28th 1922 under the chairmanship of J. Wiener and decided to set up acountry-wide Federation. Its decisions were: a) The Federation aims toorganise all teachers who advocate a modern, nationally-spirited Hebrewschool in which the language of instruction will be Hebrew (9 for, 1 against).200Political, Social & Cultural Lifeb) The Federation will disseminate pedagogical and general scientific in-formation among its members (adopted unanimously), c) The Federationwill spread Jewish national culture among the people (adopted unanimously),d) It will defend the professional interests of its members (unanimous), e)The Federation will be called “Hamoreh” (8 for, 3 against), f) Membersof the Federation may be either people with long teaching experience inthe past or people who actually teach (unanimous). The first General As-sembly of the Federation met on August 15th 1922, and approved the re-gulations drawn up at the previous meeting.From June 22nd 1922 until Summer 1924, Shmuel Herr served as Chair-man of the Teachers’ Federation. From 1924 till May 1926 the post wasfilled by Dr. Levinson. Till 1926 the main activities of the Federation wereconfined to the professional and cultural fields (e.g. lectures on pedagogy,etc.).THE TURNING POINTDuring the final days of December 1925, while attending the Assemblyof the Hebrew Teachers’ Federation, we received news of the resolutionpassed by the Progressive Latvian Teachers on the language of instructionin Jewish schools. This resolution led to a sharp change in the activitiesof the Hebrew Teachers’ Federation, and the course of the Hebrew Move-ment as a whole.At the same time the General Assembly of the All-Latvian Teachers’Federation took place with the participation of teachers from the Yiddishistcamp.In the name of the Yiddishists, J. Neuschloss submitted a memorandumrequesting assistance in their “struggle against assimilationists and againstHebraists, whose influence in Jewish circles threatens to become dominant.”The Jewish teachers, according to this memorandum, demanded that theYiddish language be recognised as the official language of the Jewish people.In an address to the Assembly Israel Braun declared that the problem ofYiddish was not merely an internal Jewish concern but a general one. Hecalled on all progressive, democratic elements in Latvia to support theYiddishist Educational Organisation, and concluded with the followingwords: “Jewish democracy opposes the Russification and Germanisationof Jewish youth, and fights the tendencies to attempt to inculcate the deadHebrew language among the younger generation.”The following resolutions were adopted by majority vote:1) The Tenth Convention of the federation of Latvian Teachers ex-201The Jews in Latviapresses its deepest sympathy and support for the democratic Jewish publicin its struggle for the rights of the popular Yiddish language.2) The Convention supports the demand that Paragraph 3 of the Lawof Education should include the following clause: “In all Jewish schoolswhich are supported by Government or municipality, the language of teach-ing must be Yiddish.”The resolutions were an obvious warning of the dangers the youngHebrew Movement was facing. In spite of this, nationalist circles continuedto be paralyzed by internal strife for months. As a member of the CentralCommittee of the “Hamoreh” Union I demanded a complete change ofapproach towards the objectives of the Union, which until then had regardeditself solely as a Trade Union. The Chairman, Dr. Levinson, a man of wideEuropean culture, devoted his attention mainly to the professional needsof the members, and arranged a few lectures on pedagogy during the year.I proclaimed that we ourselves and no one else had to take upon our ownshoulders the furtherance of the Hebrew Movement.In May 1926 the Chairman admitted the need for a change of policy,but was unwilling to carry it out personally, and resigned from the CentralCommittee. Four members remained : Dr. Kantor, Moshe Latt, ShachnaPolotzkoi and myself. I was elected Chairman and accepted on conditionthat the Central Committee regard itself as a “Fighting Committee”. Theprogramme I proposed contained the following points:a) Energetic political activity against Yiddishist aggression;b) Constructive action for the establishment of Hebrew schools;c) Organisational activity.This programme was accepted.At the beginning of June 1926 we submitted a memorandum to theLatvian General Federation of Teachers, asking for the admission of the“Hamoreh” Union and expressing explicit dissent regarding the resolutionon the language of instruction in Jewish schools. The Yiddishists, whohad been members of the Federation for a long time, fought bitterly againstthe admission of “Hamoreh”. They slandered the supporters of Hebrewas “a camp of reactionaries”, “anti-pedagogues”, etc., etc. The non-Jewscould not understand why they should exclude a new Teachers’ Union whichdeclared its progressive intentions and undertook to obey the regulations ofthe General Federation. Moshe Latt and myself were entrusted with thetask of submitting our memorandum and addressing the Assembly of theGeneral Federation on June 6th, 1926. I shall never forget the tense hoursas we waited for the Assembly’s decision. We knew that the Yiddishists202Political, Social & Cultural Lifewere doing everything they could to thwart our design. The Latvian teachers,on the other hand, rose to the occasion and understood our arguments. Bya great majority the Assembly decided to admit our Union into the Fede-ration.This was our first political victory. From then on we were able tofight for Hebrew from within. A fortnight later (17.6.1926) another Assemblyof the Latvian General Federation of Teachers was due to take place.Although only pedagogical matters were on the agenda, we decided to callfor a revision of the previous resolution about the language of tuition inJewish schools.Within a few days we enlarged our membership from 50 to 120. Thisenabled us to sent 12 representatives to the assembly. We organised twolarge public meetings in Riga: One on June 14th for the parents, and onethe next day for the Jewish Youth. On the eve of the assembly we publisheda newspaper in Latvian for the representatives in the Assembly. The papercontained articles written by our best members and supporters, includingProf. M. Laserson, member of the Latvian Seim, J. Vinnik and Latzky-Bertholdi, who had just arrived in Latvia and, although not a Zionist at thattime, came out in our support, realising the danger to the Hebrew Move-ment from the extreme Yiddishists. We turned to the Minister of Culture,the Latvian poet J. Reinis, and asked him to support us publicly in theAssembly. The Minister expressed his sympathy for our cause, but ex-plained that in his official capacity he could not take sides in a disputebetween Jewish factions. However, he promised to send his wife, Aspasia,on his behalf.Our great moment at the Assembly came when Professor Lasersonstated the principles of the Hebrew language as the basis of the Jewishrenaissance. He was followed by N. Maisel, a “Bundist” member of theSeim, who described the Hebrew language as a language of clericals andreactionaries, and the followers of Zionism and the Hebrew Movement asreactionaries.The situation of the Yiddishists became really miserable when thepoetess Aspasia spoke in moving terms of Hebrew as the language of theProphets Isaiah and Jeremiah and the pioneers who were building a newfatherland in Palestine. How could such a language, she asked, be calledreactionary? — As it was not within the jurisdiction of the Assembly torule on this matter it was decided to defer the execution of the previousdecision regarding the language of instruction until the next regular As-sembly.203The Jews in LatviaOur representatives at this Assembly were: Prof. M. Laserson, M. Latt,Dr. A. Segal, Z. Michelson, Z. Gabbai, Dr. L. Kantor, J. Vinnik, A. Bov-shover, Tscherow, R. Vinnik, Dr. Levinson and M. Weinberg.The results of this assembly could be considered as almost a victory.We now had time to prepare, to enrol new supporters, to conduct propa-ganda and engage in constructive work for the enlargement of the Hebrewschools. In Summer 1926 I proposed to the Central Committee the settingup of a Seminary for Kindergarten teachers and teachers of the lowergrades of elementary schools. The institution was envisaged as the foun-dation for the whole superstructure of Hebrew schooling. A network ofHebrew kindergartens was to be spread over all the towns of Latvia, andwas to become the basis for new Hebrew schools or the conversion ofother-language schools into Hebrew schools.THE “FROEBEL INSTITUTE” IN RIGAThe meeting of the Central Committee of the “Hamoreh” on August17th 1926 decided upon the foundation of the “Froebel Institute” as aseminary for the training of Kindergarten and school teachers for the lowergrades of elementary schools. On October 26th of the same year the openingceremony of the Institute took place. It was solemnly inaugurated by theDirector Z. Michelson and an opening address was delivered by Prof. La-serson on “Social Pedagogy”.In its first year the institute had 11 students, 4 of them from Lithuania.The lecturers in its first year were: M. Schattenstein — Hebrew language andBible; Dr. J. Michaelis — Pedagogy and Psychology; Dr. Segal — Hygiene;M. Rapoport — Natural Sciences; L. Kantor — History; J. Taitz — Singing;Prof. M. Laserson — Social Pedagogy; Z. Michelson — Education ofInfants and Methodics of Arithmetic; Theresa Gottlieb — Rhythmics andHandwork; R. Shereshewski — Drawing and Painting.All graduates of this first year obtained employment in Latvia andLithuania. As a result 41 students enrolled in the second year, 32 of themfrom Lithuania, 1 from Esthonia and 8 from Latvia. This second year newlecturers joined the Institute: M. Latt — Pedagogy and Psychology (replacingDr. Michaelis who had left Latvia); M. Kramarow — Painting and Hand-work; A. Antik — Rhythmics (replacing Teresa Gottlieb-Goitein who hadleft for Eretz Israel),For the first year most of the lecturers volunteered to teach withoutpay. By the end of the first year, however, we had succeeded, thanks tothe intervention of the Seim members Prof. M. Laserson and Rabbi M.204Political, Social & Cultural LifeNurock, in obtaining a handsome budgetary allocation from the Govern-ment, approved directly by the Budgetary Committee of the Seim. Thisenabled us to cover the expenses of the first year and put the remainderaside for the second year. Our service to the Hebrew kindergartens ofLithuania was appreciated there, and we were granted a contribution of 200lats per month.During five years the Seminary produced 100 graduates who found em-ployment, mostly in the kindergartens of Latvia, Lithuania and Esthonia,and some in the lower grades of elementary schools. Great assistance wasprovided by the first Municipal Hebrew Kindergarten, directed by Esther(Sonia) Michelson, which served as a centre for demonstration and practicalwork by the students of the Seminary during all the years of its existence.The “Froebel Institute” exercised a considerable influence on the wholenetwork of Jewish education in the country. The Central Committee of“Hamoreh” began to receive requests for new elementary grades in Hebrewfrom different parts of the country, as a direct continuation of the kinder-gartens. Parents in the Yiddish schools began to demand the introductionof Hebrew as the language of instruction instead of Yiddish. This largelydepended on the will of the parents and the availability of teaching staffin Hebrew. Each vacant post was hotly contested. Regulations coveringthe appointment of teachers in Latvian elementary schools are worth review-ing here.In many schools there was a Board, consisting of representatives ofthe parents elected yearly at a general assembly, one representative foreach class, and one teacher for each class. All vacant teaching posts wereannounced in the press. The school principal presented the names of thecandidates to the assembly, expressed his own choice and the assemblythen chose two of the candidates for consideration by the Municipal Com-mittee of Education, which made the final decision. The candidates thuschosen still had to obtain approval by the Directorate of Schools at theMunicipality. The Committee of Education was composed of municipalfunctionaries only, but the Directorates of Schools at the Municipality wereautonomous and consisted of a representative of the Municipality, repre-sentatives of the teachers (one Latvian and one from each minority) and asuperintendent from the Government. If the decision of the EducationalCommittee and the Directorate conflicted the matter was resolved by theMinister of Education.The struggle of the “Hamoreh” Union for new teaching posts had tobe carried on along the whole front: at the School Boards, meaning election205The Jews in Latviacampaigns at the yearly assemblies of parents, and election campaigns amongthe teachers in schools when their single representatives to the MunicipalDirectorates were elected each year. In a number of cases the MunicipalDirectorates appointed teachers against the wishes of the parents, and thismade intervention with the Minister of Education necessary. Much to ourregret this intervention required by-passing the Directorate of Jewish Edu-cation, which never had the courage to resolve disputes between the parti-sans of Yiddish and Hebrew.Besides this political activity, which consumed ample energy and time,the “Hamoreh” Union continued its constructive work. During the periodof 1926-1931 we set up most of the Hebrew educational institutions, amongthem 4 kindergartens in Riga and 14 in country towns: All of them onthe initiative and with the financial support of the “Hamoreh” Union. Anumber of Yiddish elementary schools passed over to the Hebrew language;parallel classes in Hebrew were set up in Municipal schools, and newschools and classes were founded under the auspices of the “Hamoreh”and with its financial support until they were taken over by the Munici-pality. A Hebrew secondary evening school for working boys and girls inRiga and elsewhere was opened. It started as a continuation of elementaryclasses and later became a complete secondary school whose graduates wereadmitted to the University.Here I wish to mention the assistance afforded to the Hebrew causeby such devoted public figures as Slavjaciski in Tukum, B. Zenziper inKraslavka, the teachers B. Neufeld and Sachs in Libau, Ginsburg andKajatzki, principals of the first Hebrew school in Dvinsk, Chanutin, Weis-man. Grinberg, Rabinovitz in Rezhitze, and many others.During the summer vacation “In-service Training” courses for teacherswere organised by “Hamoreh” in Judaistic and pedagogic subjects. Theparticipants were awarded certificates issued on behalf of the Directorateof Jewish Education.BALTIC CONVENTION OF THE HEBREW CULTURALORGANISATIONSThe burden of maintaining these courses weighed heavily on the ‘Ha-moreh” Union. At the meeting of the Central Committee on September 1st1927 I proposed to hold a Convention of all Hebrew cultural organisationsin the Baltic States. Its purpose was to arouse the activity of the dormantforces in the Latvian Zionist Organisation, Youth and Student movementsby bringing them in contact with external, especially Lithuanian, Hebraist206Political, Social & Cultured Lifeinfluences. The Convention took place during the Sukkot Holiday of 1927and a delegation of 16 of the most active members of the Hebrew culturalMovement in Lithuania took part. Among them were M. Cohen, N. Grin-blat (Goren), D. Lejser, Porochovnik, and others. There was an Esthoniandelegation headed by Dr. Asher Bavli (Bernstein) and representatives ofseveral organisations in Latvia.The representative of the “Tarbut” Organisation of Poland, MosheGordon, also took part as a guest observer.The Convention lasted for three days. Its presidents were Moshe Cohen(Lithuania), Z. Michelson-Michaeli (Latvia) and A. Bavli (Esthonia). Itwas an effective demonstration of the strength of the Hebrew CulturalMovement at a time when we were engaged in a bitter struggle for therights of Hebrew as the language of instruction, and inspired the settingup of the “Tarbut” Federation in Latvia. Nevertheless daily practical workremained in the hands of “Hamoreh”. With an expanding network ofHebrew schools under its tutelage, it also took care of organisational im-provements, of thorough-going pedagogical work and of the expansion anddeepening of the Eretz Israel element in the Hebrew educational pattern.In-service pedagogical training was carried out in cooperation with theAll-Latvian Teachers’ Federation which set up a special “Bureau of Peda-gogy” for this purpose.Our educational institutions established contact with corresponding in-stitutions in Eretz Israel, which were a constant source of inspiration for us.In Summer 1929 I visited schools in Vienna and reported to our Unionon the educational innovations I found there. As a direct consequence Iattempted, with the approval of the Municipality, to introduce the Daltonsystem in the school under my direction.THE LATVIAN TEACHERS' TOUR IN ERETZ ISRAELThe Union’s activities reached their peak in the organisation of aTeachers’ Tour to Eretz Israel (Palestine of those days), with the parti-cipation of 35 teachers under my leadership.The Latvian authorities’ attitude to this venture was favourable andsympathetic. The Ministry of Education and the Municipality of Riga agreedto exempt those teachers who participated in the tour from attending schoolfor 3 weeks.The school under my direction, many of whose teachers were parti-cipants in this tour, was closed down altogether for this period. It wasarranged that the participating teachers would, refund the teaching time207The Jews in Latviathey had missed after they returned. They were accorded a long-term loanby the Bank of the All-Latvian Teachers’ Federation to cover travellingexpenses. Funds were also allocated by the Municipality of Riga, whichrecognised the educational nature of the tour and its potentially beneficialinfluence on the development of the Hebrew schools under their auspices.The tour was the first of its kind and became an event to which muchattention was devoted, even in Eretz Israel. Its programme was preparedby the Teachers’ Federation of Eretz Israel, which also provided guidesfrom among its members. We spent our first evening in Palestine at a meet-ing in the home of J. Azaryahu, who had planned our visit to Tel-Aviv.Next day we attended an official reception at the Tel-Aviv Municipality,by Mayor M. Dizengoff and Mrs. S. Persitz, head of the Education Depart-ment. On the same day we met C. N. Bialik in Ravnitzki’s house. Hegave us his promise to visit Latvia, and did so some months later. Thatbecame the greatest event in the life of the Latvian Jewish community. Aseries of lectures was given by him, and he was received everywhere withthe greatest enthusiasm.Receptions in honour of the Latvian Teachers were held at the HeadOffice of the Keren Kayemet by M. Ussishkin and Nathan Bistritzky, andat the Head Office of the Keren Hayesod by Leib Jaffe, with the Latvianconsul, Mr. Caspi, participating. Parties in our honour were held by localgroups of teachers wherever our group happened to visit (Tel-Aviv, Jeru-salem, Nahalal).Several projects were worked out during our stay in Eretz Israel. Oneof them provided for an exchange of visits of teachers and pupils betweenEretz Israel and Latvia. While visiting the Central Committee of the Fede-ration of Teachers in Jerusalem, it was decided to convene a World Con-gress of Hebrew educators. I was entrusted with the organisation of theteachers of Central Europe and the Baltic States in preparation for this.After our return the teachers who had participated gave many lecturesin Riga and all over the country, described their impressions and did theirbest to infuse the spirit of the builders of Eretz Israel into the Hebrewschools of Latvia.MEETING OF HEBREW KINDERGARTEN TEACHERS IN THEBALTIC STATESIn accordance with the decision to hold a World Congress of Hebreweducators reached with the Teachers’ Federation in Eretz Israel, I conveneda preparatory meeting of Hebrew kindergarten teachers from the three208Political, Social & Cultural LifeBaltic States in Summer 1931. The meeting took place in Kovno and lastedfor three days. Sixty kindergarten teachers attended. A report was pre-sented on the activities of the Troebel Institute” during the 5 years of itsexistence, and lectures were delivered on the role of the Hebrew Kinder-garten and its merits, and the juridical and professional status of kinder-garten teachers. The latter themselves reported on their work, and it wasdecided to maintain lively contact with Eretz Israel and set up an organisa-tion of Hebrew kindergarten teachers in the Baltic States.Very soon, however, there were radical changes on the political scene.The influence of German Nazism could be felt in other European countries,including Latvia. From time to time new laws were passed reducing nationalminority rights; and abolishing their cultural autonomy after the Fascistregime of K. Ulmanis came to power in May 1934. Before speaking ofthose events, however, let us pause a moment to review the achievementsof Jewish cultural autonomy in Latvia during the 15 years of its existence.ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS OF THE DIRECTORATEOF JEWISH CULTUREUnder the law it was the duty of the Municipality to set up elementaryschools for Jewish children and finance them. At first not every Municipalitycomplied with this duty because of their financial straits after the war. Withthe help of the Ministry of Education, however, the situation soon improved;and in due course of time the state of Jewish education in Latvia reacheda level which had no parallel in other lands of the Diaspora.NUMBER OF PUPILS ATTENDING SCHOOLS OF THE DIRECTORATEOF JEWISH CULTURENumberof TotalSchoolyearHebrewYiddishRussianGermanTotalnumberpupils numberin non- ofJewish JewishNumber % Number % Number % Number %schoolspupils1922/231928/291,863 213,204 315,209 584,978 48988 11705 7896 101,438 148,95610,3252,2631,69711,21912,022JEWISH ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS DURING THE FIRST DECADESchoolyearNumberofschoolsNumberofteachersNumberofpupilsSchoolyearNumberofschoolsNumberofteachersNumberofpupils1919/20211804,1571924/25674819,5941920/21443547,2671925/26785689,9341921/22513938,7381926/277457610,1711922/23663788,9561927/288359310,1921923/24614728,6991928/298559910,325209The Jews in LatviaTHE “HEDER METUKAN” SCHOOLSUntil the establishment of the Latvian State these were the main sourceof Jewish traditional education. They had to adapt themselves to the pro-visions of the Law of Compulsory Education, and the circles supportingthem had to agree to adopt the elementary school curriculum and includetheir schools within the general elementary school network. Otherwise thoseparents who wished to give their children a general as well as religiouseducation would have been compelled to send them to the general schoolsand maintain a “Heder” for Jewish religious and Hebrew subjects.SECONDARY SCHOOLSAlthough attendance in Secondary schools was not obligatory or freeof charge, according to the law, the Government allocated considerablesums for secondary education, and the national minorities received theirshare in proportion to their numerical strength. At first two governmentsecondary schools were set up, one in Libau and one in Rezicza, and weremaintained with financial support from the local Jewish communities. InRiga the Municipality opened the secondary schools and maintained themat its cost. When the sums allocated for secondary schools in the govern-mental budget were enlarged, the Jewish secondary schools also received alarger share. The Directorate of Jewish Culture spent these allocationslargely on the maintainance of the two state schools in Rezicza and Libau,and the rest on the commercial and private secondary schools, the numberof which increased from year to year. This, of course, involved a reductionin the amount allocated to each separate school.In the two state schools of Rezhitze and Libau Russian and Germanwere the languages of instruction. For the Municipal secondary school inRiga it was Yiddish. In addition there were in Riga six publicly-maintainedsecondary schools: The Hebrew Secondary School founded by the “Societyfor the Advancement of Science and Art”; the Evening Secondary Schoolset up by the Teachers’ Union “Hamoreh”; “Tushiah”, the secondarystage of the “Heder Metukan” type of school, supported financially aswell as morally by the Mizrahi Movement and the wellknown philanthropistA. Sobolevitz; the secondary stage of the “Torah vederech-eretz” type ofschools, set up by the Agudat Israel movement. All these had Hebrewas the language of tuition. There were also the “Ezra” secondary schoolof the assimilationist circles, which taught in German, and an eveningsecondary school in Yiddish, set up by the “Zentrale Iddische Schulorga-nisatzie”. In addition there were the following four privately-owned second-210Political, Social & Cultural Lifeary schools: Rauchwarger, Liebermann, Bergman and Landau (later S. Gor-finkel). All of these employed Russian or German as the medium of in-struction. In Dvinsk, Lutzin, Karsava, Libau and Mitau there were muni-cipal secondary schools, in Windau — a school owned by the community.In all these schools except Dvinsk the language of instruction was Russianor German, but Jewish subjects were taught.In Dvinsk there was a municipal secondary school the majority ofwhose pupils were Jewish. The Directorate of Jewish Culture proposed onseveral occasions to the parents’ meetings of this school that it should betransferred from the Russian to the Jewish Directorate, but the parentsrefused. Only when a regulation of the Ministry of Education ordered thetransfer of schools in which at least 60% of the pupils belonged to a cer-tain minority to the Directorate of this minority did the parents agree thatthe municipal secondary school in Dvinsk be transfered to the Directorateof Jewish Culture.The language of instruction at the Secondary School in Dvinsk wastherefore Russian to begin with but in due course classes in Hebrew wereopened and it gradually became a Zionist institution. Special mentionshould be made of the success of Joseph Seh-Lavan, a graduate of theTeachers’ Seminary in Jerusalem who was summoned by the HamorehUnion, in transforming the Russian Secondary school in Dvinsk into aHebrew school. He devoted a great deal of his energy to the organisationof a Zionist Youth Movement, which succeeded in attracting a great numberof youths who had previously been drawn to Communism. In time thenumber of Jewish Secondary Schools increased through the transfer ofschools with a majority of Jewish pupils to the Jewish Directorate.NUMBER OF PUPILS IN SECONDARY SCHOOLS UNDER THEDIRECTORATE OF JEWISH CULTURESchoolyearHebrew Yiddish Russian German      TotalNumber % Number % Number % Number % numberNumber of Jewishpupils in non-Jewish schools1922/2395 826122818646561,2392,6171928/29427 1853824937413%172,2981,391211The Jews in LatviaDEVELOPMENT OF SECONDARY SCHOOLS DURING THE FIRSTTEN YEARSSchoolyearNumber ofschools under Dir. Number ofof Jew. Culture pupilsTotal numberof sec. schoolsin LatviaTotal numberof pupils1919/203599657,3301920/2189098011,8281921/2281,0259713,8141922/2391,23910614,6011923/2481,22610315,4061924/25131,63010415,5891925/26202,33410215,7841926/27192,36010015,9991927/28192,4769815,7211928/29192,29810016,026In the school year 1928/29 the Latvians possessed one secondaryschool per 15,388 persons, the Russians one school per 13,832 persons, theGermans one school per 5,914 persons and the Jews one school per 4,349persons. Of the 16,026 pupils who attended secondary school in 1928/29,14.4% were Jews, whereas their percentage in the population amountedto 5% only.VARIOUS EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONSa) Government Courses in Pedagogy.These were set up in 1920 to expedite the training of teachers forJewish elementary schools. The courses afterwards continued for one year.When the acute scarcity of teachers had been overcome they were trans-formed into a Biennial Pedagogical Institute. Eligible to these courseswere graduates of secondary schools. They were given a general coursein Pedagogy and in Hebrew, Yiddish, and Judaistic subjects. The languageof instruction was Russian. As a result the state-owned Pedagogic Institutecould satisfy the demands of neither Hebrew nor Yiddishist circles, whichwere compelled to set up their own institutions for the training of teachersand kindergarten teachers in Hebrew and Yiddish.Each summer the Jewish Directorate organised Hebrew courses forteachers in pedagogic subjects. At first attendance at these Summer coursesgave participants the same rights as were enjoyed by the graduates of the212Political, Social & Cultural Lifebiennial courses. Later on the teachers were required to complete the bi-ennial course, and Summer courses served only for “in-service” training.In the later years an additional training course was set up for kindergartenteachers.ATTENDANCE AT GOVERNMENT COURSES IN PEDAGOGYSchool yearAttendedGraduated1923/2420121924/2572111925/2674581926/2779171927/2856321928/29568b) Artisan schools.In Riga there existed two artisan schools: One maintained by the“Mefitzei Haskala” Society, with classes for carpentry, locksmith work,electricians, and one maintained by “ORT”, training tailors, seamstressesand hat-makers.In Dvinsk there was a School of Crafts, training carpenters and lock-smiths.In Libau there was an Artisans’ School for locksmiths, mechanics andcarpenters.All these schools were well equipped and trained 300 students.c) Agricultural School.During the early years of Cultural Autonomy a plot of land was offeredby the Ministry of Education to the Directorate of Jewish Culture, for usein agricultural education. The schools did not take advantage of this offerat first. Only in 1928, when a special government grant was given for thispurpose, did the “Mefitzei Haskala” Society set up an agricultural schoolfor 50-60 students. It was well-equipped and gave theoretical as well aspractical agricultural training. “Hehalutz” and the Zionist Youth Movementbenefited a great deal from this institution.CHAIR OF HEBREW STUDIES AT THE UNIVERSITY OF LATVIAWhen Mr. Paltis served as Minister of Education it was suggested tohim that a chair of Hebrew Studies be established at the University of213The Jews in LatviaLatvia. The Minister gave his assent, but the realisation of this project waspostponed on the recommendation of the Directorate of Jewish Culture,which claimed that Hebrew studies in the elementary and secondary schoolshad not yet reached a level justifying such a Chair.THE YIDDISHIST SCHOOLSMy review would not be complete without mentioning the Yiddishistschools, not only for the sake of objectivity but also because of the im-portant part they played in the national struggle for the recognition of theright of the Jewish minority to schools teaching the language of the masses.The fighters for the Hebrew language, notwithstanding their bitter struggleagainst Yiddish extremists, always honoured and appreciated the adver-sary’s devotion to their cause, their idealism and their considerable achieve-ments, especially in the realm of pedagogy. Yet in spite of the great effortsmade by the “Tzentrale Iddishe Shulorganisatzie” in raising the level ofeducation, perfecting the methods of teaching and improving relations be-tween teachers and pupils, there was no great increase in the number oftheir schools and pupils over the years.On March 28-31, 1921, the first assembly of Yiddishist teachers inLatvia took place on the initiative of the Democratic Union of Jewishteachers in Riga. At this assembly Radek, one of the ideologues of theYiddishists, gave a comprehensive lecture on the principles of the newschool, and the following resolutions were adopted:a) The only system leading to the full development of children andthe full expansion of their creative powers is the “learning by doing”system. All teachers are called on to use this system in every subject(unanimously adopted).b) The “active learning” school must not be dogmatic and must besecular (unanimously adopted).c) The pupil’s performance should not be evaluated by marks, but bya more comprehensive system of evaluation (unanimous).d) Examinations ars injurious to the normal process of learning atschool and should therefore be abolished (unanimous).e) Punishments are undesirable because they do not achieve their pur-pose (14 for, 6 against, 2 abstentions).f) The development of autonomous activities on the part of the pupilsis a foremost necessity, and the pedagogic conferences are required to intro-duce self-government of pupils (unanimous).g) Representatives of the upper grades should be admitted to pedagogic214Political, Social & Cultural Lifeconferences. (A proposal to admit the lower grade representatives wasrejected.)h) Class teachers cannot be expected to fulfill their duties properly ifthey have to teach more than 12 hours a week.This assembly decided to set up a central Jewish school organisation(Tzentrale Iddishe Shulorganisatzie in Lettland) which in due course be-came responsible for the Yiddish school system of Latvia. It establisheda network of kindergartens, elementary schools, evening schools, coursesin pedagogy and “in-service” training for teachers, etc., and maintainedthem with the help of funds received from the Directorate of Jewish Cul-ture, the Municipalities, and the material and moral support of its members.NUMBER OF PUPILS IN YIDDISHIST SCHOOL IN RIGADURING THE EARLY YEARSSchool yearNumber of classes Number of pupils1919/202810681920/212910951921/222810761922/233211861923/243511871924/253812661925/26391206It can be seen that although the Yiddishist schools in Riga were wellattended in 1919/20, their growth in the following 7 years did not amountto more than 138 pupils and 11 classes in 4 schools. To this should beadded another 110 children in 3 classes at two kindergartens (one affiliatedto School No. 2 in Jesus Church Street, and another to School No. 3 at100 Brivilas Avenue).Permanently connected with the “Tzentrale Iddishe Shulorganisatzie” in1925/26 were the following institutions: The schools in Vorklian andKraslava, 2 schools in Dvinsk, the schools in Tukum and Smilten, theevening courses in Dvinsk, the Kindergarten in Tukum, the “ORT” voca-tional school of sewing, the school for backward children in Riga: A totalof 16 institutions with 3100 pupils, maintained by the municipalities. Tothese should be added the institutions maintained by the “Tzentrale IddisheShulorganisatzie” itself: An evening school in Riga with 62 pupils, andthree kindergartens in Riga and Kraslava with 150 pupils.Worthy of mention are the Yiddish schools which did not join the215The Jews in LatviaCISHO and educated their pupils in a Zionist spirit. The teachers in theseschools belonged either to the CISHO or to Hamoreh, but some of themrefrained from joining either camp and in 1931 attempted to set up aseparate Teachers’ Organisation for a “synthetic” school. Among the initia-tors were Dr. Simon Gorfinkel, Dr. J. Moler and Z. Meirovitz, but theirefforts were unsuccessful. Of the staffs in these schools, mention should bemade of Moshe Bljach (Amir), principal of the School in Dvinsk.AFTER THE COUP D’ETATJewish cultural autonomy came to an end with the coup d'etat ofUlmanis in 1934. Although the Hebrew schools continued to exist until theadvent of the Soviet Regime, they were void of any Zionist or Jewish Na-tional content. Supervision was entrusted to the “Agudat Israel' whoserepresentatives, being faithful adherents of the new regime, set out toabolish the secular Hebrew schools or to amalgamate them with their own.The Soviet Regime put an end to the activities of the Agudat Israel. Afterthe Nazi invasion in 1941 the school structure of Jewish education in Latviaperished with the Jewish population it served.216Abraham GodinJEWISH TRADITIONAL AND RELIGIOUS LIFE IN THELATVIAN COMMUNITIESTHIS account of Jewish traditional religious life in Latvia is divided intotwo sections: First, the period till the establishment of Independent Lat-via; and second, the years of the Independent State, i.e., 1920 to 1940.IThe administrative limitations imposed by the Tsarist regime on theunrestricted movement of Jewish inhabitants had a decisive influence onthe spiritual and religious life of Latvian Jewry, among whom three sepa-rate groups existed by the end of the Nineteenth Century. These were:The Jews of Kurland and Livonia; those of Latgale; and those of Riga.Historical circumstances placed Kurland and Livonia outside the Jew-ish Pale of Settlement, and the influx of new Jewish residents under theTsar was severely restricted. Kurland Jews had been living in that regionfor hundreds of years. They and the Riga Jews who came from Kurlandhad little contact with the Jewish centres lying largely southeast and south-west. The majority of them remained true to the ancient Jewish way ofJife and traditions, but from about the middle of the Eighteenth Centurytheir spiritual character and culture tended to be somewhat Westernizedor more precisely Germanised. Many of them did not understand mostof the prayers they repeated three times a day, and this was more thanoffset by the influence of German culture, as remarked.At the same time the consciously and consistently traditional groupswere influenced by the intense Jewish culture and learning of neighbouringLithuania, with its imposing list of Yeshivot and outstanding rabbinicalauthorities. Indeed, a considerable section of Kurland Jewry had originatedin Lithuania, and many of the Latvian rabbinical families had originatedfrom that country, with its anti-Hassidic ambience.The spiritual transformation which took place in East European Jewrywith the spread of the Hassidic Movement in the second half of the Eigh-teenth Century was scarcely to be noticed here. Hassidic communitiesestablished themselves only in a few towns such as Jacobstadt and Bausk,while a small Hassidic group was to be found in Schoenberg. The majorsplit between Hassidim and their opponents the Mitnagdim in White Rus-sia left Kurland and Livonia almost untouched.217The Jews in LatviaWhat became known as Latgale under Independent Latvia had beenpart of the Vitebsk Government District earlier, and as such lay withinthe Pale of Settlement. There the local Jewish population took an activepart in the seething life of Jewry as a whole thoroughout Tsarist Russia,while the Hassidic Movement spread swiftly in almost all the communities.It began with separate minyanim (prayer quorums) which followed Se-phardi or Lurianic (Kabbalist) prayer usages. Later these communitiesappointed their own rabbis and slaughterers. In communities where therewere two rabbis, one of them was almost invariably a Hassid.The only educational institution to be found in all Jewish communities,whether in Kurland and Livonia or in Latgale, was the Heder, conductedby a private teacher, or the Talmud Torah, usually maintained by thecommunity and providing several classes together. Rich and poor childrenalike were given the same religious education. For adults the Bet Hamidrashor House of Study served incidentally as a club and also had its ties withthe Talmud Torah, where no tuition fees needed to be paid. These Ha-darim and Talmud Torahs were under the direct supervision of theRabbis. Yeshivot, which are Higher Talmudical Academies, were to befound not only in Dvinsk but also in the little Kurland towns of Pilten,Sabilen and Grobin. Boys who showed themselves to be apt and success-ful students were sent to the Lithuanian Yeshivot and also to those estab-lished by and for Hassidim: particularly at Liubavitch, which was the seatof the leading Hassidic “Dynasty”, the Schneurson family.Every Bet Hamidrash provided regular courses in the Five Books ofMoses, the laws governing daily Jewish life, the texts of the Mishna andGemara (which is the Commentary and expansion of the Mishna — to-gether they constitute the Talmud) and also “Ein Yaakov”, which con-tains the non-legal parts of the Talmud only. The Hassidic prayer groupsalso provided courses in Hassidic thought and theory. Shopkeepers, crafts-men, manual labourers, all attended those courses which interested them.Each person belonged to one or more of the Hevrot or Societies forreciting Psalms, studying Talmud as such, or studying Mishna or EinYaakov only. This religious life had no clear-out organisational form. Itwas fluid but vital. In general, scarcely any fixed organisational forms thenexisted in Jewry.Riga also lay outside the Pale of Settlement, but in spite of all admi-nistrative regulations and restrictions it served as a constant attractive forcefor White Russian Jewry. It was far easier to make a living there than inthe poverty-stricken White Russian hamlets.218Political, Social & Cultural LifeBy the middle of the Nineteenth Century Riga had become the centreof the Russian timber export trade to the West. The saw-mills establishedthere and in the vicinity were in Jewish hands. Every Spring thousandsof Jews came into the city on the rafts which floated down the rivers ofNorth-East Russia. The timber specialists and sorters were Jews, andincluded many who were familiar with traditional Hebrew literature andothers who were constant students and scholars. Some of these markers wereamong the first to establish Hassidic minyanim in Riga.The presence of these Jews in the city during the summer monthswas all but officially recognised. Many White Russian Jews exploited thespecial facilities provided for qualified craftsmen. Ways and means werefound to obtain the necessary certificates of craftsmen, which secured theright of residence in Riga.These new arrivals could be distinguished from the older populationboth by the long kapotes they wore, as against the more modern garbof the so-called people from Shlok, consisting of long-term residents fromKurland, or the semi-military clothing of the Nikolai soldiers who had earnedthe right of residence anywhere in Russia following twenty-five years ofmilitary service. Almost without exception the newcomers were Hassidim.It is true that Hassidim had been present in the city even earlier, but theydid not establish any separate minyanim of their own. The new Hassidicresidents, however, could not rest satisfied with the synagogues alreadyin existence because, as remarked above, they employed another prayerusage. In addition, the available lessons and courses of study could notsatisfy them. They studied not only Talmud and Jewish legalities but alsothe work known as the “Sefer Hatanya”, which contains the basic elementsof what is known as the Habad School of Hassidim established by RabbiSchneour Zalman of Liadi; while in addition they spent much time trans-mitting the Hassidic tales, sayings and doctrines of the various Hassidicsaints to one another.Jews lived chiefly in the so-called Moscow suburb, where the syna-gogues were also to be found. Of these the oldest was called the “Alt-Neu Shul” as in Prague, while there was also the Soldiers’ Synagogue.Until the Second World War the Holy Ark of the Soldiers’ Synagoguecontained a number of small Torah Scrolls which the Nikolai Soldiers hadkept with them and used when they were with their regiments on militaryservice. The Alt-Neu Shul was established in 1850, first in a wooden build-ing that was later rebuilt in brick, which is the way it is remembered byJews who once lived in Riga.219The Jews in LatviaThe Great “Choir” Synagogue in Gogol Street was built in 1871 andwas the pride of the community. It also had a Bet Hamidrash of its own,the budding of which housed the Bet Din or Rabbinical Court. Here theRabbis of Riga used to meet twice a week in order to issue divorces orhear Din Torahs, these being cases decided in accordance with Rabbinicallaw and practice.The new arrivals applied to the authorities for permission to buildanother Synagogue, but it took years before their application was granted.In 1935 the “Reissish” or White Russian minyanim (the term used forthe Hassidic Synagogue), celebrated their Fiftieth anniversary. Moshe IsaacHurwitz, an old-time Riga resident, then told the writer of these linesthat he remembered the Meeting of the Riga Communal Administrationin the wooden buildings next to the Choir Synagogue in Gogol Street,to which the Chief of Riga Police came and announced that permissionhad been given to erect a building in the Elian Street, where three min-yanim would be housed under one roof. One of these was known as theLiubavitch minyan, the second as the Kapust minyan and the third as theLiadi minyan — all three centres being connected with the SchneursonHassidic “dynasty.”Little by little the Jews began to leave the Moscow suburb and settledin other quarters. New synagogues and minyanim were established as aresult. Large synagogues were erected in the Peitau Street in the Old Cityin 1906, in the Seilen Street and the Matvei Street. The latter was regardedas the centre of the Kapust Hassidim. Hassidic doctrine and lore weretaught there by Rabbi Simeon Leib Kodesh. New minyanim were opened,the largest being in the Marian Street in the building of the “Bazar Berg,”from which the minyan received its name. After the building of theReissishe minyanim, the Bazar Berg minyan became Riga's Hassidic Centre.Those who prayed there included Reb Zalman Ber Dubin, father of theRiga Community Head and Seim Deputy Mordechai Dubin.This prayer-centre was known all over Latvia. M. Dubin was to befound praying with the early morning quorum there every day, and any-body who needed his help knew that he could find him there.The total number of synagogues and minyanim came to some forty.Here we shall pause at some of the larger ones. These were: The Weiden-damm minyan at No. 9 First Weidendamm Street; the Isaiah Berlin min-yan, whose building was donated by the well-known local philanthropistReb Isaiah Berlin. This building also housed the Moshav Zekenim or OldAge Home, until the latter was transferred to the Pemau Street. At 112220Political, Social & Cultural LifeSuvorow Street could be found Levitan’s minyan, established by SamuelLevitan. At the corner of Seilen and Shprenk Streets was Polotzki’s min-yan, also Hassidic. At 109 Milen Street was the minyan of the Rogat-chover Gaon, of whom more below. There were two more minyanim onthe other bank of the River Dvina.The 1905 Revolution brought about a complete transformation in thesmall Jewish towns. New organisations came into existence which aimedto secure an influence over the synagogues. As a result. Religious Jewryalso began to organise itself. One of the first organisations to establishitself within the synagogue walls was called “Tiferet Bahurim” (Splendourof Youths). This organisation engaged not only in the study of Torah butalso in religious propaganda. It saw to it that the younger generationshould continue studying at Heder, and combatted the new “anti-religious”ideas. Tiferet Bahurim Societies were established in many Latvian towns.In Riga the Society was headed by Rabbi Joel Barantchik, who was tofight later for the Religious School system.IIAs a result of the First World War the Jewish inhabitants of Kurlandhad to take the wanderer’s staff in hand and abandon their homes. TheRussian Commander-in-Chief Grand Duke Nikolai Nikolaievitch orderedthat the Jewish population should be expelled from Kurland. Communitieswith a history going back for centuries were liquidated overnight. A smallproportion of the refugees succeeded in remaining in Riga, but the greaterpart were evacuated to Central Russia. Dvinsk suffered the identical fate.To be sure, the Jews were not driven away from Latgale, but thetowns were subjected to heavy bombardment, so the greater part of theJewish population simply fled. Those who were evacuated included theRabbi of Dvinsk, Rabbi Joseph Rosen, who has already been referredto above as the “Rogatchover Gaon” and who returned to Dvinsk in1924.The World War came to an end and Latvia became independent. Theevacuated Jews were permitted to return to their fomrer homes, but notall of them did so. Some remained in Russia. Those who returned foundthat the towns where they had lived were in ruins, with few exceptions.Entire communities had vanished, and it was necessary to start afresh, re-establishing communal institutions.Vast changes took place in the field of education. The new State pro-vided free schools for Jewish children, where the language of instruction221The Jews in Latviawas Hebrew or Yiddish. The Heder vanished, to be replaced in Riga bythe first religious schools in which Bible, Talmud and Jewish laws weretaught together with general subjects.True, there was still one Heder which went by the name “Yagdil To-rah” (He shall increase Torah), but the number of pupils in it was notparticularly large. In 1921, thanks to the initiative of Rabbi Joel Ba-rantchik, the Young Agudat Israel opened an elementary school at 31Neva Street with parallel classes for boys and girls, which went underthe name “Torah Ve-Derech Eretz” (Torah and Fitting Behaviour). Ayear later Reb Meir Ritov, who became Riga Municipal Councillor be-tween 1931 and 1934, donated a building at 74 Schmieden Street. In 1925this Elementary School was transformed into a Gymnasium, and in 1927Reb Ber Levitas presented a large house at 12 Kormanov Street for schoolpurposes. These schools were headed by Shimon Wittenberg, Riga TownCouncillor from 1928 till 1934 and Deputy in the Seim between 1931 and1934, and Rabbi H. M. Khodakov, Riga Municipal Councillor between1931 and 1934 and spokesman for Jewish cultural affairs between 1934and 1940. (He is now the head of the Liubavitcher Rabbi’s Secretariatin New York.) Torah Ve-Derech Eretz Schools were also opened atLiepaya, Daugavpils (Dvinsk), Rezhitze and elsewhere.During the final years before the World War the buildings of the RigaCommunity in the Romanov (Latchplesha) Street housed the so-called“Hadarim Metukanim” (Reformed or Improved Hadarim). With the aidof Mizrahi leaders these were transformed into a religious elementaryschool and later into a secondary school called “Tushiya” (Dexterity).This school was headed by A. J. Lederman, and afterwards by EngineerM. Rashal.Both the Agudat Israel and Mizrahi Schools were in a less satisfactoryposition than other Jewish educational institutions. The Riga Municipalityhad a Left-wing majority and refrained from including these schools inthe urban school system. (It may be noted, incidentally, that they weresupported in this by Left-wing Jewish Councillors.) Only when the RigaMunicipality had Councillors belonging to the Agudat Israel, namely M.Dubin, S. J. Wittenberg, M. Ritov and M. Khodakov, and Rabbi M. Nu-rock on behalf of the Mizrahi, were these schools included in the Muni-cipal Education System. Until then they were compelled to struggle hardfor their very existence. The Torah Ve-Derech Eretz Schools were aidedconsiderably by Deputy M. Dubin, Head of the Riga community, while222Political, Social & Cultural Lifethe Tushia Gymnasium was supported by the weUknown local philan-thropist Abraham Sobolevitch.The actual participation of the Jewish population in political life hadthe effect that three political parties were established whose programmesstressed the religious element. These were: The Agudat Israel, the YoungAgudat Israel and the Mizrahi. They maintained youth organisations,known respectively as “Tseirei Emunim” (The Faithful Youth) and “Ha-shomer Hadati” (The Religious Guard). The Young Agudat Israel hadbranches in various provincial towns, and held a General Conference in1933. Early in the Thirties the so-called “Folksheim”’ (Folk-Home) Clubsbegan to be popular. A large part in organising them was played by RabbiPinhas Teitz, son of the then Rabbi of Livenhof, who is now Chief Rabbiof Elizabeth in U.S.A.After the change of government in 1934 and the liquidation of allpolitical parties the Agudat Israel expanded to include the Mizrahi, TorahVe-Avoda, Young Agudat Israel and Folksheim in the “Mahane Israel”(Camp of Israel). At this time there was a significant change in the Jewishschool system, where the study of religion became obligatory. An “Edu-cational Fund for Torah Institutions” had already been established in Rigain 1933, and was headed by the long-time Chairman of the Aguda, A.Volshonok. As a measure against the Profanation of the Sabbath a “Shom-rei Shabbat” (Sabbath Observers) Association was established, with a bankof its own.Religious students at the University of Latvia had their “AcademicCentre”, which actively participated in all Jewish student activities. AConference of Religious Students in the Baltic Countries took place inRiga with the active participation of Advocate S. J. Wittenberg and Dr.Holzberg of Kovno, who is now in Jerusalem. In Riga as well as theprovincial towns where Torah Ve-Derech Eretz Schools had been estab-lished, Bet Yaakov (House of Jacob) and Benot Yaakov (Daughters ofJacob) Womens’ Organisation were also set up. Riga had a separate So-ciety of Hassidic women called the “Ahot Temimim” (Sisters of theWhole-hearted). These women’s organisations set out to strengthen thereligious consciousness of Jewish women, while the “Ahot Temimim” So-ciety also studied the basic elements of Hassidism.IllUnder Tsarist Russia there had been no Yeshiva in Riga. Soon afterthe War, when the situation began to return to normal in 1921, Rabbi M.223The Jews in LatviaZack established one which functioned for twenty years at the “BazarBerg” minyan. Students of the Riga Yeshiva became rabbis in due courseat various Latvian towns. They included: Rabbi J. Tscherniak in Viliaki,Rabbi Isaac Gevartin in Kreutzburg, Rabbi Isaac Segal in Sabile, Rabbi A.Katz in Cesis (Wenden) and Rabbi S. Marein in Limbazshi. When theRabbi of Liubavitch came to settle in Riga a Hassidic Yeshiva was estab-lished there under the name “Tomekhei Temimim” (Supporters of theWhole-hearted). Later a second Tomekhei Temimim Yeshiva was establishedat Gostini (Glazmanka), and also existed until 1940.Mention should be made of the energetic young Rabbi of Gostini, RabbiJ. Barkman, and the Yeshiva Supervisor Rabbi J. Himmelstein, who con-ducted the affairs of this institution.“Bet Joseph” (House of Joseph) Yeshiva was established in Dvinsk in1932. Many of the students, as well as the heads of the Institution, hadcrossed the frontier illegally from Poland into Latvia. Thanks to the initia-tive of Deputy Mordechai Du bin, however, the Latvian Government gavethem all righs of residence. Branches of this Yeshiva were to be found inRezhitze, other small towns of Latgale, and even in Libau within Kurland.The Yeshiva was headed by Rabbi David Budnik. The Yeshivot of Latviareceived grants from the State budget, it should be noted.The communities of the country were headed by rabbis and leadingscholars who were familiar with the whole Jewish world. In a brief surveyof this kind it is impossible to give a full report of those figures whothroughout the years headed their communities. However, we shall pauseto consider some of those who occupied rabbinical seats at the end of thelast century and during the present one.Until 1831 the Chief Rabbi of Riga was Rabbi Ezekiel Matz. (TheChief Rabbi, incidentally, should not be confused with the Government-appointed “Crown Rabbi”’.) He was succeeded in 1832 by the Rabbi ofGoldingen, Rabbi Aaron son of Rabbi Elhanan, who had studied underRabbi Hayyim of Volozhin. Then came his son-in-law. Rabbi Jacob ElijahRivlin. From the end of the last century until 1912 the Riga Rabbi wasRabbi Moshe Shapira, a son of the Gaon Rabbi Eizik Harif. Incidentally,the Israel press has recently reported that the works of Rabbi M. Shapiraare now being reprinted.Rabbi Leib Schneurson was the Hassidic Rabbi of the city until1915. He was a member of the Hassidic “dynastic family” and was onvery good terms with the then Rabbi of Liubavitch.Under Independent Latvia the Chief Rabbi of Riga was Rabbi Mena-224TEACHERS OF THE HEBREW FIFTH MUNICIPALITY SCHOOL IN RIGA, 1932Scaled r. to I.: R. Lev (Shattenstein), R. Botwinkin, Plissen, S. Michelson, A. Zvanevitch.Z. Michelson, S. Klein, Pinzow, J. Taitz.Standing r. to I.: Breskovitz, Bramshrag, Z. Itigon. J. MitI, W. Bag, J. Weispapp,M Grinstcin, Pissetzky, A. Bovshover, L. Mayafit, R. Shereshevsky.Mira Lichovitz. —.Standing r. to I.: Kagan, Karlin, —, —. R. Riebusch, Rudak, —. Zupa, Ideikin, —,Vorobei tczik, —. T. Meirson. —, Donskaya. A. Weinberg, Ida Shirman, L. Wolfson,Z. Shneur. G. Chanutin. Donskaya, —. Yochewed Seligman, Ben-E!ul (Reichrudel). —.mmTHE JEWISH DEPARTMENT OF THE MINISTRY OF EDUCATIONFirst row r. to h: —, Zeew Polotzkoi, Jacob Landau, Hochman, —.Second row r. to I.: —, Zwi Gorfinkel, Mrs. Salkind, Boris Giviah, A. Gurevitz,Dov Kulman.THE BALTIC IVRIT CONVENTION, 1927r. to I.: Dr. A. Bavli-Bernstein (Esthonia), Zvi Wasserman (Latvia), Rabbi M. Levin(Latvia), Moshe Cohen (Lithuania), Prof. M. Laserson (Latvia), Z. Michelson(Michaeli) (Latvia), Dr. Z. Feldstein (Lithuania).Eliezer Ettingen, M. Lulow, Dr. H. Wasserman, Adv. J. Tron.Standing r. to L: Prof. B. Sieff, Gottesmann, Ch. Gordon, Dr. J. Heilman, B. Gurevitz,M. Cohen, J. Gorfnikel, Z. Rabinovitz, Adv. M. Rosovsky, Dr. Kron, Dr. B. Herzfeld,F. Berner, Dr. i. Hoffman.PHYSICIANS OF THE BIKKUR-HOLIM HOSPITAL , RIGASeated r. to I.: Dr. M. Berner, Dr. M. Mintz, Prof. W. Mintz, Dr. J. Jaffe,Dr. M. Goldring, Dr. B. Thai, Dr. V. Goldberg.COMMITTEE OF “ O Z E ”Seated r. to I.: Dr. Kottler, Weinberg, Eng. M. Taubin, —, —, Dr. B. Dubinsky,Dr. J. Eliasberg, Mrs. M. Markovitz —.Standing r. to I.: Dr. Magalif, —, —, —, K. Groiss, —, M. Kitai, Adv. Yevelson,Dr. Z. Gordin, Dr. Lazky, Dr. Rachel Kahn.Seated in third row r. to 1.: A. Birnbaum, J. Shlesinger, Mrs. Barshatz, A. Bag,B. Ollcnstein, Arevitz. A. Marcus, Segal, A Kelman, Chazkelevitz, J. Dannenhirsh,Lieberman, Royak, B. Prussak, Goldberg, Friedmann, B Kelman.HEADS OF JEWISH PAPERSPolitical, Social & Cultural Lifehem Mendel Zack, who had been bora in the small Kurland town Nairior Friedrichstadt. He was originally Rabbi in Kandava and was called toRiga in 1913. The second Rabbi from 1912 to 1935 was Rabbi M. M. Avin,a son-in-law of Rabbi Moshe Shapira. In 1935 the Rabbi of Talsen, RabbiMoshe Kilov the son-in-law of Rabbi Zak, was appointed Riga Rabbi,while Reb Raphael Cohen, who had arrived in the city from Soviet Russiain 1934, was appointed Hassidic Rabbi. (In U.S.S.R, he had for manyyears been Rabbi of Nevel and had gained a major reputation by his struggleagainst the Yevsektsia the Jewish Section of the Communist Party.Apart from the three official rabbis, almost all synagogues and minyanimhad spiritual leaders of their own. Mention should be made here of RabbiHayyim Zeev Kharash, who was officially registered as a Maggid orPreacher at the Peitau Synagogue but had received his rabbinical authorisa-tion from both the Rogatchover Gaon and Reb Meir Simha of Dvinsk.Rabbi Elhanan David Brustin taught Midrash in several minyanim. He wasalso known as both a writer and public speaker. Rabbi Ephraim Gabbaigave a daily lesson in Talmud to the minyan at 112, Suvorov Street. Theinstructor at the Mizrahi minyan and for the “Malbish Arumim” (Clothethe Naked) Society was Rabbi Baruch Eliezer Luria. Talmud and Hassidicdoctrine were taught in several Minyanim by Rabbi Simeon Berliner. Theleader in Talmud at the Zeilen Synagogue was Rabbi Joseph NaphtaliKaltun while the study leader of the Young Agudat Israel was his son.Rabbi Abraham Pessah Kaltun.A number of rabbis who had immigrated from U.S.S.R. lived in Rigaduring the final years before the annihilation of Latvian Jewry. Amongthese, mention should be made of Rabbi Isaac Hurwitz, known as “Itchethe Matmid” (Day-and-Night Student of Torah) who was a great scholarwith an intelligent sense of what was significant in Hassidic teaching. In1933 he visited U.S.A. where he made a lasting impression, as was shownby the entire Yiddish press of the country.Among the Riga Shohtim (ritual slaughterers) there were a numberwho were qualified rabbis. These were Rabbi Zalman Vevier, Rabbi Mor-dechai Zelbovitch, author of works on Jewish law, and Rabbi AbrahamEliahu Osherov.Dvinsk was privileged because both its rabbis were outstanding Ge-onim, who were famed throughout the whole Jewish world. These were theGaon Reb Meir Simha Cohen and the Gaon Reb Joseph Rosen, generallyknown as the Gaon of Rogatchov (the White Russian hamlet in which hewas bora). Reb Meir Simha was held to be the Rabbi of the Mitnagdim225The Jews in Latviaor anti-Hassidic groups. When the Hassidim of Dvinsk required a Rabbi,the well-to-do Hassidim headed by the major building contractor Mo sheWittenberg, father of Reuben Wittenberg (a deputy in the First and SecondLatvian Seim), chose the then youthful Rabbi Joseph Rosen. Reb MeirSimha served as Rabbi in Dvinsk for almost fifty years, and so did theGaon of Rogatchov. Everybody who has lived in Dvinsk has countless talesto teD of these two great rabbis; and it is scarcely necessary to add thattheir works are vital sources in Torah literature. The “Or Sameah” (JoyousLight) and “Mashak Hokhma” (Words of Wisdom) of Rabbi Meir Simha,and the “Tsofnat Paaneah” (Decipherer of Hidden Things) and otherworks by the Gaon of Rogatchov will always be the pride of religiousJewry. Even in his earliest youth the Gaon of Rogatchov was outstanding,thanks to his keen mind and comprehensive knowledge of Talmudic andRabbinical literature.The last Riga rabbi after the Second World War died in 1957 when hewas over a hundred years old. This was Rabbi Moshe David Maslianskywho had been Rabbi in Valk, Esthonia, until the Second World War. Hehad attended the Volozhin Yeshiva, and at one time studied together withthe Gaon of Rogatchov. He told the present writer that even before hisBar Mitzva (the Gaon studied at the Yeshiva between the ages of elevenand fifteen) he had been the most outstanding of all the students. Inciden-tally, the Head of the Yeshiva never gave him any rabbinical authorisation,saying that he would be acceptable anyway.In an application to the Ministry of the Interior the Gaon of Rogatchovsigned himself “Rabbi”, but told the present writer that he did so thoughhe had never received any rabbinical authorisation or qualification. Muchhas been written about the rare and outstanding quality of his scholarshipand knowledge.As is generally known, the Gaon knew by heart everything that hadever been written in the entire literature of the Torah, from the Bible andTalmud until his own times. His work “Tsofnat Paaneah” consists almostentirely of references, “see such-and-such a work”. Once it happened thata question arose in Warsaw regarding the ritual correctness of an eruv(token fence within which Jews might carry objects on the Sabbath day).One of the local rabbis remembered that the matter was referred to in the“Tsofnat Paameah’”. He set out to obtain the works to which the Gaonreferred on this matter, but his large judicial table was too small to holdthem all.Reb Meir Simha characterised his colleague the Rogatchover Gaon in226Political, Social &. Cultural Lifethe following way : On one occasion a difficult problem was brought beforehim for decision. He told the questioner that he would have to toil all nightlong to give him the answer. “But step in to the Rogatchover and he willanswer you on the spot.”His gaze left a deep impression. Anybody who saw him once remem-bered him for the rest of his life, with his lofty forehead, his deep eyes andhis long curling locks. Incidentally, he made a deep impression on the lastRussian Tsar, who visited Dvinsk in 1915 and received delegations of thelocal population. The Jewish delegation was headed by the Gaon. Nobodycan ever suspect that Nikolai II had any affection for Jews. So all thosepresent were astonished to find that the Tsar devoted far more time to theJewish delegation than to any other. It is reported that when he returnedto Petrograd the Tsar said that it was worth while taking a look at theRabbi of Dvinsk. When the Gaon was evacuated to Petrograd in 1916,members of the royal family came to see him.Reb Meir Simha used to pray at the community’s Bet Hamidrash, whilethe Gaon of Rogatchov prayed at the Planov Bet Hamidrash. It deservesto be mentioned that both of the Gaonim were registered at the ReligiousDepartment of the Ministry of the Interior as assistants to the Rabbi ofDvinsk. The official Rabbi of Dvinsk was Rabbi Ratner, who had beenthe Crown Rabbi of the city until the establishment of Independent Latvia.The last two Rabbis of Dvinsk until the Second World War were RabbiCohen and Rabbi Fuchs. The latter had been ordained by the Gaon ofRogatchov, and dedicated himself to the Gaon’s spiritual heritage.In the smaller provincial towns the officiating rabbis were known farbeyond the frontiers of Latvia. During the second half of the last century,for example, the Rabbi of Bausk was Reb Mordechai Eliasberg, who wrotetwenty-four works. From 1897 till 1903 his successor as Rabbi of Bauskwas Reb Abraham Isaac Hacohen Kook, who afterwards became ChiefRabbi of the Land of Israel. The last Rabbi of Bausk was Reb Moshe Sha-lom Stoll, author of several works on Rabbinical law and homiletics.During a century and a quarter the Tukum Community was headedby four generations of rabbis belonging to the Lichtenstein family. Thesewere: Rabbi Mordechai, his son Rabbi Eliezer, his son Rabbi Zvi and hisson Rabbi Levi. Rabbi Mordechai Nurock, the long-standing deputy in theLatvian Seim, was a son of the Rabbi of Mitau, Reb Zvi Nurock, and agrandson of Rabbi Eliezer Lichtenstein. His brother. Rabbi Dr. Aaron BerNurock, was the Chief Rabbi of Libau.The Rabiner family produced outstanding scholars. Rabbi Mordechai227The Jews in LatviaRabiner was the first Rabbi of Bausk at the commencement of the lastcentury. His sons and grandsons were scholars who actively participated inreligious lite. In the religious circles of Riga during the two decades of In-dependent Latvia the great-grand-children of the first Rabbi of Bausk werewellknown. These were the Brothers Rabiner: Rabbi Mordechai, a followerof the Mussar School who campaigned for the observance of the Sabbath,and his brother Reb Zeev Arie, an active member of the Mizrahi and areligious writer, who now resides in Tel Aviv.The Rabbi, first of Windau and later of Mitau, was Reb MordechaiUri Samunov. For almost thirty years from 1897 onwards his grandsonReb Ephraim Sumanov occupied the rabbinical chair and actively parti-cipated in the work of the Agudat Israel. He was a Delegate to the SecondKnesia Gedola of that party when it met in 1929.Rabbis of the Zioni family occupied the rabbinical chair in the townof Liutzin for close on 150 years. The first of the family, Reb David Zioni,was invited to this office in 1806. The last Rabbi of Liutzin, who waskilled in 1941, was the son-in-law of the first rabbi’s grandson. This wasRabbi Eliezer Don-Yahia, known as an outstanding scholar.For many years the Rabbi of Schoenberg was Reb Naphtali HertzKliatzkin. Six of his seven sons also occupied rabbinical posts. The oldest,Reb Israel Isser Kliatzkin, was Rabbi of Lievenhof.Rabbi Levi Orchinsky, Rabbi of Mitau, published several volumes onthe history of Jews in Kurland.Rabbi Leib Saul Ginzburg, rabbi of Jacobstadt, was a descendant ofRabbi Jacob Ginzburg, who was the teacher of Rabbi Yomtov LipmanHeller, known by his major commentary on the Mishna as the 4bTossafotYom-Tov”, at the end of the Sixteenth Century.Mention should also be made of Rabbi Jacob Grodsky, Rabbi of Vork-liani, several of whose works have been published.For twenty-two years the Rabbi of Neiri (Friedrichstadt) was Reb Hay-yim Aaron Bezalel Paul, who conducted the educational and charitableinstitutions of the town.Rabbi Moshe Shkarota, the son-in-law of the outstanding Gaon RebMoshe Mordechai Epstein, held the rabbinical seat in Rezhitze.In Vishky Reb Solomon Platzinsky was rabbi for forty years. Shortlybefore the Second World War he retired in favour of his son. Rabbi JacobMeir Platzinsky.The Gaon Reb Elhanan Wassennann, Vice-President of the AgudatIsrael’s Council of Great Scholars (Moetzet Gedolei Hatorah) and Head228Political, Social & Cultured Lifeof the Yeshiva in Baronovitch, came from Bausk and was known in thescholarly rabbinical world as “Reb Elhanan Boisker”.In 1932 an all-Latvian Conference of Sabbath Observers was held inRiga and was attended by almost all the rabbis of the country. It turnedinto a Rabbinical Conference, in fact. Much attention was devoted at thetime to the speech of Reb Joseph Isaac Schneurson, the Hassidic Rabbiof Liubavitch, who then resided in Riga. An Executive Committee wasappointed with the Riga Rabbi M. Zack as Chairman, and M. Khodakovas General Secretary.The events of June 1940 brought an end to Jewish communal life inLatvia. All religious organisations, including the Community as such, wereliquidated. The Archives of Deputy Mordechai Dubin, Chairman of theRiga Community, which were in the Community Offices, were confiscated.However, the synagogues and minyanim were allowed to function.The terrible years 1941-1944, in which Latvian Jewry was destroyed,saw the end of the synagogues and minyanim as well. The Choir Synagoguein Gogol Street, the Seilen Synagogue, the Alt-Neu Synagogue, the Min-yanim of Reissen and the Soldiers’ Shool were all burnt.When a handful of surviving Jews returned from the Ghettoes, theLabour Camps and the Evacuations, two synagogues were opened in Riga:These were the Peitau Shul and the Bazar-Berg Minyan. Minyanim werealso established in Dvinsk, Tukum, Rezhitze and Liutzin. At present onlythe Peitau Shul exists in Riga, and there is one synagogue each in Dvinsk,Rezhitze and Liutzin.A few years ago the Tukum Synagogue was closed and the holy bookswere transferred to Riga. The Tukum Synagogue Library was one of whichany large Jewish community might be proud. There one could find every-thing that has been printed in the entire range of traditional Torah lite-rature. Books from the first presses of Venice and Amsterdam, going backto the Sixteenth century, could be found there together with works printedin Vilna and Riga in 1940. Similar collections were to be found in almostall the synagogues and minyanim.The People of the Book were always true to the Book, even in theirmost harrowing Ghetto years and in the death camps.Author’s Note: This account has been written in Israel in Tishri 5731 (Oc-tober 1970). In preparing it I have made ample use of the Hebrew “YahadutLatvia”, the Memorial Volume published by the Society of Latvian and Es-tonian Jews in Israel, Tel Aviv, 5713 (1953). I have also relied very con-siderably on my own memories.229Professor Dr. Benjamin SieffJEWS IN THE ECONOMIC LIFE OF LATVIATHE Jewish community of Latvia played an important part in the economiclife of the country. Their share in the establishment of the new state follow-ing the havoc resulting from the First World War was particularly outstand-ing during the first few years of Latvian independence.Stabilising the CurrencyJews had occupied leading positions in industry, commerce and bankingbefore the War, and were the representatives of Russian companies in Riga,Liepaja (Libau) and other cities. Among them were branch managers ofimportant St. Petersburg banks, such as “The Azovsko-Donskoi Bank”,“The Russian Foreign Trade Bank”, etc. They headed outstanding in-dustrial undertakings, e.g., “Phoenix” (railway wagons), “Provodnik”(goloshes) etc. In 1918 the Jews began to return from Inner Russia toLatvia, bringing with them precious metals, foreign currency and drafts onforeign banks. They actually laid the foundation of Latvian currency which,however, was stabilised only during the second half of 1921, after heavyupheavals.The country was then passing through a grave crisis. The political re-gime was not firmly established and the economy was in a state of com-plete chaos. There was an extreme shortage in the means of production,transport and foreign exchange. The “financial” denominations in circula-tion were exceedingly varied. They included all kinds of Russian Roubles,the German Ost-Rouble, the German Mark, the Latvian Rouble, the papercurrency of the Liepaja Municipality, etc. K. Ulmanis, head of the LatvianProvisional Government, adopted the financial policy of least resistance.He set the printing press in motion and currency in circulation rose from36 million roubles in September 1919 to 2240 million by August 1921.Failure was inevitable. Paper money could not rebuild the ruins. Goodswere scarce and there was a shortage even in the food supply. It was neces-sary to import foodstuffs, raw materials and means of production. Theprime condition for this, however, was: Export.During this period the Jews played a decisive role. They had ampleexperience of the export of Latvia’s main raw materials, i.e., timber andflax, that went back to the prewar period. Upon their return from Russiathey renewed the export of these commodities with their own money and230Political, Social <& Cultural Lifeon their own initiative. A steady stream of stable currency began to reachthe country, especially from England. This roused the envy of Ulmanisand his entourage. The slogan of “Jews are taking over Latvia” served forthe establishment of a Government monopoly on flax. This, however, provedvery expensive for Latvia. In 1921 the monopoly was liquidated thanks tothe Minister of Finance, Ringold Kalnin. The free export of flax and tim-ber, organised and developed by Jews, helped Latvia to overcome her crisis.A considerable share of Latvia’s import trade, e.g., mineral oil (kero-sene), textiles, etc., was also in Jewish hands, Scandinavian and Britishfirms established goods stores in Latvia, headed mostly by Jewish managers.Jewish BanksJews laid the foundations of the big private banks of Latvia, and suc-ceeded in attracting foreign capital, which had adopted a very negativeattitude towards Latvian investment to begin with. During the years 1922-1924 six banking-houses were founded by Jews as share companies with acapital fund of 7.6 million Latt, or about 60% of the total capital of allprivate banks in Latvia. Actually the percentage was even greater, for se-veral Latvian banks were purely speculative, their capital fund existing onpaper only. Among these should be mentioned two banks of the “FarmersUnion” — “The Farmers Bank” and “The Union Bank”, the chief aim ofwhich was to combat Jewish banking capital and accumulate financial re-sources for political ends. Within a few years they went bankrupt. The lastmanager of these two banks was A. Karklinsh, who was prosecuted forembezzlement and sentenced to five years’ imprisonment.The names of the “Jewish” banks were: 1) The Bank of Libau (found-ed 1922); 2) The Northern Bank (founded 1924); 3) The International Bankof Riga (founded 1922); 4) The Private Bank of Latvia (founded 1924);5) The Merchants Bank of Libau (founded 1924); 6) The Commercial Bankof Riga (founded 1924).Each of these had a character of its own, and marks an spoch in theeconomic development of Latvia in general and of Latvian Jewry in parti-cular.The Bank of Libau (Liepaja) had been the bank of the Stock Exchangebefore the First World War, but was totally ruined. Jews succeeded in re-viving it with the aid of Jewish-German capital. Instrumental in this con-nection was Dr. N. Soloveitschik of Kaunas, an outstanding economist withclose ties in all European capitals, who also conducted the negotiationsbetween this concern and the Jewish-German “Darmstaedter Bank”. TheBank of Libau soon played an important part in financing electric corn-231The Jews in Latviapanics, in which large German concerns of the type of A.E.C. took aninterest. The Bank Council was rather diversified, its Jewish members beingRaskin, Schlossberg and Minsker. Additional members included several Ger-mans, and the President of the Council was a Lett, A. Berzin, an uncul-tured person who, however, had good practical sense and personal con-nections with the heads of state including, most significantly, K. Ulmanis.Berzin continued to be Ulmannis’ economic adviser after the Fascist Re-volution, and assisted him in the extrusion of Jews from their economicpositions “without bloodshed”.The Northern Bank was the stronghold of the Jewish National Demo-cratic party, and the Management consisted almost entirely of its members:A. Rabbinovitz (chairman), formerly an important timber merchant; I. Lan-dau, School-owner and Director of the Jewish Section at the Ministry ofEducation; Dr. Mayer and Dr. N. Mintz, a brother of Prof. P. Mintz. Thelong-term manager was the Jewish banker Zachs, one of the leading expertson theoretical and practical economics in Latvia. He was greatly esteemedby the Latvians, who treated his views very seriously.The International Bank of Riga was founded by the Hoff brothers.These were the “Rockefellers” of Latvia and displayed matchless economicinitiative. Jewish-German capital also participated in this bank and, indi-rectly, Jewish-American capital as well. Actually management was in thehands of the Brothers Lewstein, two Jewish bankers of the old school, whohad been bankers in Riga before the war. The council included severalLatvians: A. Krievinsh, Consul-General of Latvia in Berlin; A. Anderson,ex-mayor of Riga; and N. Dombrowsky, who was a ’’liaison officer” betweenthe Hoff family enterprises and the Government. It should be remarkedthat he was devoted to the Hoff family although he belonged to the decid-edly Antisemitic “Democratic Centre” Party. In later years G. Zemgal,former President of the State of Latvia, also joined the Council of the Bank.The Private Bank of Latvia was a combination of Jewish initiative andCzechoslovak capital. The founder and first manager was Dr. A. Kogan,formerly a Moscow bank manager. He was a man of wide culture and agreat expert in the theoretical and practical problems of his profession. Thecapital required for this enterprise was supplied by the Bank of the CzechLegionaries of Prague. (The capital of the latter derived from the gold ofthe State Bank of the Tzar. This gold was transferred by order of GeneralKolchak to Siberia under guard of the Czech Legion, which in due coursetransferred it to Czechoslovakia.) Dr. Kogan also succeeded in attracting232Political, Social & Cultural LifeSwedish capital, and extensive credits were at his disposal abroad. Thislargely engaged in financing the export trade. Several Latvians were Direc-tors of the institution. They had previously been high government officials,and it was impossible to deal with Government institutions without theirmediation.The Merchants Bank of Libau also largely financed commerce andtrade. Its founder was H. Epstein, who actually held most of the initialShare Capital.The sixth Jewish bank was The Commercial Bank of Riga, most ofwhose clients were small tradesmen.Although the Jewish banks were firmly established and properly or-ganised, they were unable to survive a crisis. The Latvian rulers did notview them with favour in spite of the “Sabbath Goyim” (the Latvian mem-bers on the Councils) and sought an opportunity to deal them a decisiveblow. Such an opportunity occurred in 1929, when “The DarmstaedterBank” suspended payments, and distrust in banks reached the Baltic coun-tries as well. A state of panic ensued, and there was a run on the banks,particularly those backed by Jewish-German capital. The first victims wereThe Bank of Libau and The International Bank of Riga, which wereforced to suspend payment. In actual fact no commercial bank in the world,no matter how solidly financed, can ever repay all deposits at the sametime. In such cases the national or central bank usually lends its supportto the banks in difficulty, in order to ward off a general crisis. This, forexample, was done by The Central Bank of Lithuania when it at a crucialmoment extended ample credit to The Commercial Bank of Kaunas, whichwas also affected by the Darmstaedter Bank crash. The Government Bankof Latvia, however, refused to assist in any way the local banks that foundthemselves in difficulties. It considered that the time had come to eliminatethe Jewish banks. This, however, proved to be a miscalculation. The crisisspread to other banks and the Government was forced to declare a mora-torium, which caused violent convulsions throughout the economy andresulted in countrywide distress that lasted for more than a year. Thisstate of affairs weakened the Jewish banks very considerably.Jews also participated in the organisation of the big “Latviesu AkeijuBanka”, which was originally a cooperative credit society for Latvians.With the assistance of British capital it was converted into a companylimited by shares. The organization was participated in by the LewsteinBrothers after they retired from The International Bank of Riga.233The Jews in LatviaCredit Cooperative SocietiesThe assistance of the American Joint Distribution Committee (the“Joint”) made it possible for the Jews to develop a network of cooperativecredit societies for artisans and small tradesmen. The central institution.The Union of Cooperative Credit Societies, was headed by Dr. I. Yaffe,a gifted organiser. Both the Jewish banks and cooperative societies werelooked upon as step-children in respect of public credit and the Govern-ment Bank was closed before them. Nevertheless they were more firmlybased and more soundly managed than the Latvian societies. Their investedcapital was larger than the total capital of the cooperative societies of allother nationalities in Latvia combined. The same was true of deposits, asshown in the following table of 31st December 1931 :PERCENTAGE OF GENERAL TURNOVERLatvianSocietiesGermanRussianJewishCapital invested14.816.217.122.9Deposits22.955.39.865.0Loans57.317.067.33.8Sundries5.011.55.88.3This table shows that the total loans granted by the Latvian societiesamounted to 57.3% of turnover, while the corresponding figure in the Jewishsocieties was 3.8% only. The main source of such loans was The Bank ofLatvia. All complaints lodged by the Jewish societies in connection with thisdiscrimination were of no avail. The Jews were compelled to manage withtheir own resources.The following list shows the composition of membership in the Jewishsocieties in 1931 :Artisans3442Minor industrialists1673Merchants6419House-owners406Free Professions978Clerks654Others1515Total15,087234Political, Social & Cultural LifeMore than 15 thousand members were registered in the Jewish Coopera-tive societies, under the supervision of the Jewish Cooperative Credit Com-pany. Business was conducted on a sound business basis, in accordance withthe express stipulations of the “Joint”. In this field of cooperative credit,the sole support of the working people, something was literally created outof nothing. In 1920 the writer of this essay was appointed head of the Co-operative Society of Artisans and Small Tradesmen in Riga. This publicinstitution, which had existed before the war, had been totally ruined. Mostof its members were scattered all over Russia. I succeeded in persuadingMr. I. Hyman, the representative of the “Joint”, to grant the institution aloan of 250 Latvian Roubles. This petty sum was regarded at the time asa fortune. The institution went from strength to strength, and in later yearsachieved an important position in Latvian Credit Cooperation.The Cooperative Credit Society of the “Kleinhandelschutz” (Protectionof Retail Trade), was also regarded as a well-founded public undertaking.Less successful were the activities of the “Mutual Credit Societies”.Some of them went bankrupt, and others were converted into Share Com-panies.Industrial UndertakingsThe Jewish share in the reconstruction of the Latvian industry after thewar has already been alluded to above. It should be mentioned here thatduring the war the Tsarist Government evacuated all industrial equipmentcapable of transportation. The rest was ruined or looted by the Germanarmy. During the early years of independent Latvia only Jews dared tostart new industrial enterprises. Among the Jewish industrialists particularmention should be made of Berlin-Shalit, The Brothers Hoff, M. Mizrach,U. Millman, Maikapar (a Karaite), R. Feldhoun, H. Feitelberg and A. So-bolevitch. The latter was not only a businessman of imagination, but alsoan exemplary public worker.The Jews made their particular mark in the following industries:Timber, matches, beer, tobacco, leather, textiles, canned food and flour.The importance of the Jewish industrial enterprises for the Latvian nationaleconomy was twofold : They developed exports and reduced the import offinished articles.A place of honour in the Latvian Balance of Trade was reserved forthe export of timber. In 1930 the total export of Latvian raw materials andsemi-finished products reached the sum of 103.93 million Latt. This alsoincluded timber exports to a value of 77.63 million Latt, i.e. 74.46%. The235The Jews in Latvialion’s share of timber exports were in Jewish hands. Among the Jewishtimber industrialists mention should be made of: Belinki, Brill, Berlin-Shalit, The Brothers Hillman, Lulov, Shmulyan, Michelson, etc.The Jews also played an important part in the export of finished pro-ducts such as timber, matches, textiles and rubber shoes (goloshes). In thetextile industry several Jewish firms gained distinction: Hahn, Mercur,Feldhun, Hoff, Wulff, Rita (Feitelberg), Yegel, Kurshansky and Himmel-hoch, and others. The brothers Hoff headed two large industrial undertak-ings : “Hoff” Flax industries in Mitau, and “Buffalo” in Riga. The formeremployed about one thousand hands, the second about six hundred. Some70% of their production went abroad. R. Feldhoun reestablished the ruined“Cotton Spinneries of Sassenhof”, where about one thousand men foundwork, and which produced three million metres per annum.An important part of the match industry, before it was taken overby the “Swedish Trust”, was also in Jewish possession. Most of the enter-prises were concentrated in the hands of the “Emolip” Company.Riga was famous before the First World War on account of its rubber-shoe industry. The “Provodnik” was famous throughout the whole world.The manager was Jewish, the invested capital was French, Swiss, Belgianand Italian. About fifteen thousand hands were employed, and the annualproduction amounted to 57 million Gold Roubles. During the war the plantwas destroyed, and the first pioneer to renew this industry in Latvia wasagain A. Sobolevitch. He set up the “Continent” Rubber Shoe Factorywhich employed 800 hands, and whose products soon earned a good namefor themselves in many countries. Similar undertakings were erected bySobolevitch in Lithuania and Poland. Sobolevitch, incidentally, was one ofthe first business men to recommence the transit trade of Soviet Russianraw materials through Latvian ports to the outer world; and it goes withoutsaying that the youthful state benefitted greatly from these transactions.Sobolevitch reerected the “Tannhaeuser” brewery. B. Levitas, A. Lu-botsky, Mizroch, I. Schiff and others built large new flour-mills. Mizrochalso reconstructed the famous Liqueur factory “Wolffschmidt”, which hadbeen in German hands before the war. The tobacco industry was largelyin the hands of the Maikapar Company (of Karaite descent), and a con-siderable portion of its shares was owned by U. Millman. This firm alsoheld most of the shares of the large “Goegginger” canned goods factory.In this branch mention should also be made of the “Soerensen” company,whose owner was Birman. In the chocolate industry a prominent place wasoccupied by Mr. A. Frumtchenko.236Political, Social & Cultural LifeSpace does not permit a more detailed survey of the Jewish part in theestablishment and development of the Latvian industry; it should be stressed,however, that all of these Jewish undertakings incessantly met with envyand hatred, and artificial obstacles were placed in their way by the Latvianauthorities.ImportsI have already mentioned that Jews also played an important part inthe import of vital raw materials. Particular mention must be made ofmineral oil (kerosene). The worldwide concerns of “Shell” and “StandardOil”, and the Russian Trust were all represented by branches in Latvia,and supplied their fuels on fairly reasonable credit terms. The first comerwas the “Shell” Company, which commenced operations in Latvia as earlyas 1921. The driving spirit in the Baltic countries including all the branchesof this company was E. Ettingen, who possessed an extraordinarily expertknowledge of this very extensive field. His chief competitor A. Nisse, theprincipal agent of the Russian Trust, was also a Jew.In the import of coal the activities of A. Mushkat call for particularmention.The Economic Structure of Latvian JewryWe have mainly dealt so far with the contribution made by individualJews to the Latvian economy. We shall now briefly consider the economicstructure of the Jewish community as a whole in the state of Latvia. Forthis purpose we shall use the population census of 1930. It is worth whileremembering that the head of the Department of Statistics in Latvia thatyear was the Jew-baiter Skujenek. Although he did not falsify figures heedited the tables so as to give them a decidedly anti-Jewish bias.The following table (top of p. 238) shows that Jewish income wasderived mainly from commerce.In absolute figures the Jews held second place in income from com-merce, according to the above table; in relation to the size of the Jewishpopulation, however, they held first place. In other words, 48.81% of theJewish population were merchants. All the remaining income sources, suchas agriculture, transport, civil service, etc., etc., were not accessible to Jews,and only a small proportion enjoyed incomes from industrial and wholesaleenterprises. The Jewish masses were excluded from the fundamental in-come-source of the country, agriculture. Their income from the land was237The Jews in LatviaNo. of InhabitantsIncome from Commerce % of total incomeLatts for each nationalityLatvians1,394,95750,409,0003.61Jews94,38846,070,00048.81Great Russians201,7785,653,0002.80Germans69,85513,373,00019.94Poles59,3742,557,0004.31White Russians36,029496,0001.30Esthonians7,708538,0006.78Lithuanians25,885914,0003.53Miscellaneous8,5661,729,00020.18Unknown1,50553,0003.52Total1,900,045121,765,0000.93% only. Latvia's total income from agriculture amounted to 57.4%of the total National Income of the country. The following table gives theJewish share in various branches of the National Income:1925—% 1930—%Agriculture0.910.93Industry26.7527.66Commerce48.0848.81Transport2.722.85Civil Service——Jurisprudence, Police0.800.80Free Professions7.385.89Health—3.35Domestic Servants0.971.31Miscellaneous occupations12.398.40Actually the Jewish share in commercial occupations was even greaterthan shown in the official statistical figures, as the latter did not includepeddlars, dealers in old clothes and various barter experts in the marketsof the Riga suburbs or in the provinces.Conditions in the provinces were extremely difficult for Jewish mer-chants, especially in Latgale, where economic conditions in general dete-riorated severely as a result of the province’s severance from Russia. The238Political, Social & Cultural Lifecity of Dvinsk, for instance, had been a centre of Jewish industry andcommerce before the war, but went completely bankrupt. The Jewish masseswere cut off from their sources of income and means of subsistence. Mostof them were driven to “commercial” occupations. New shops sprang upnext to one another, their owners competing for every single client.In the town of Rezhitze (Rezekne) the Jews fell victims to the exor-bitant interest rates claimed by the local branch of “The Latvian Bankfor Industry and Commerce.” This rate reached 48% per annum. Thematter was brought before the Seim, and a motion was introduced to in-dict the managers of the bank. In the end, however, nothing came of thisand a considerable share of Jewish property passed into its possession.Under the impression of his visit to Rezhitze the writer commenced a cam-paign in the press and with the Economic Committee of the Ministry ofFinance, in order to promote legislation limiting the rate of interest to amaximum of 7%. This was not at all easy, for fierce opposition was raisedagainst the new law from Jewish circles as well, on the grounds that itmight entail Government intervention in private business. The represen-tatives of the Cooperative Credit Societies also opposed the proposed legis-lation as endangering their position, in view of the fact that these societiesdid not benefit from credits with the Government Bank. In the end, how-ever, the campaign was crowned with success and the law passed. Earlieropponents eventually admitted that it was justified.In the towns of Kurland the economic conditions of the Jews werequite bad. The two harbour cities of Vientspils and Liepaja underwent amajor decline on account of the stoppage of Russian exports, and theJewish merchants in the provincial towns could not hold their groundfor three reasons: a) The grain monopoly introduced by the Ulmanisadministration hit them hard; b) Latvian cooperatives were founded andenjoyed considerable Government support; c) Difficulties in obtainingcredit. In addition the Jewish population in the provinces collapsed underthe burden of heavy taxation.Commercial, Industrial and Artisan UnionsThe Jews were also pioneers in organising commercial and industrialassociations. The German Chamber of Commerce, before the war the chiefbulwark of commerce, did not dare to show any activity in the early yearsof Latvian independence, and the committees of the Exchange in Riga,Liepaja and Vientspils also ceased to function. The Latvians themselves,on the other hand, were not used to this kind of institution. In 1920, a239The Jews in LatviaJewish body was organised under the name of “Kleinhandelschutz” (“Pro-tection of Retail Trade”) founded by the writer. The new union came atthe right time, for the Jewish merchants were suffering greatly from theprevailing chaos in currencies, taxes, foreign trade, etc. They were an easyscapegoat in any case, and a public body was clearly necessary to protectthe interests of Jewish commerce in all dealings with the authorities. Withinthree months about one thousand members enrolled. Most of them wereminor traders and craftsmen, but in time they were joined by represent-atives of wholesale trade and industry, such as Shmulyan, the brothersHoff, Sobolevitch and others. After a while the name of the organizationwas changed to “The Union of Industry and Commerce.”One of the main achievements of the Union, from the very beginningof its existence, was that it secured the inclusion of Jewish members inthe Assessment Committees for Taxation. (They functioned on a voluntarybasis, thus inspiring the respect of Latvian members.) This was made pos-sible largely thanks to the personal relations between the writer and Winter,the first Director of the Department of Taxes, who was honest and in-corruptible. In the course of time the Union became a political centre,and the Jewish members of the Seim often came for information andconsultation on matters of economic interest.The Jews were also members of non-Jewish organizations such as“The Union of Industrialists of Riga”, the “German Chamber of Com-merce”, and “The Exchange Committee”. “The Latvian Union of TimberIndustrialists and Merchants” also had a largely Jewish membership.The “Kleinhandelschutz” had a branch office in Liepaja which in duecourse became independent and played an important part in local com-merce. In Latgale two Jewish commercial unions existed : One in Daugav-pils, and one in Rezhitsa. There was also an Artisans’ Union which alsolooked after the spiritual needs of its members. Regular lectures were heldin their club on matters of current interest. Finally mention must be madeof “The Latvian Economic Society”, founded by the writer and participatedin by representatives of industry and commerce belonging to all commu-nities. This was a sort of political-cum-economic “Salon”, and was fre-quented by ministers of state, members of the Seim, etc., who used tocome to listen to lectures. Ulmanis, the Prime Minister and later Dictator,was also one of the regular visitors. This society was responsible for alarge number of memoranda and various projects submitted to the Govern-ment and the Seim. Jewish influence here was also considerable, and ceasedonly with the Fascist Revolution.240TOWNS AND PEOPLEMendel BobeRIGAIN an earlier section we described the rapid growth of the Jewish populationof Riga from about 400 souls in 1842 to a total of 33,000 in 1913. Theseseventy years were accompanied by an exceptional development in the eco-nomic significance of Riga Jews for the trade of the entire region; leadingto open and concealed toleration on the part of the Tsarist authorities to-wards this Jewish concentration, though it was outside the Pale of Settle-ment.Here we shall try to show who these Jews were who took so active apart in stabilizing the position of their community; and this not only withregard to their economic significance but also on account of their uniquequalities as a Jewish community first and foremost.A study of the ways in which the Jews of Riga struck root shows thatthey mostly belonged to two groups: Those who arrived from the neigh-bouring Kurland and Lithuania, and those who were known by the generalname of “Reissishe Idden”, who originated from the territory referred toin old Hebrew and Yiddish sources as Reissen, i.e.. White Russia. Thisincluded the Government Districts of Minsk, Vitebsk, Mohilev and theneighbouring regions.Here we shall give an account of these two “prototypes” of Riga Jewry.Jews from Kurland in RigaThe first Jews to settle in Riga came from Kurland and were also theoriginal nucleus of the “Schutzjuden” or Protected Jews from whom thecommunity developed.An absence of civic rights in Kurland, a very bad material situation anda shortage of Jewish and general schools all contributed to bring about alow cultural level among them. At the same time the surroundings, parti-cularly the German environment, had a considerable effect and helped todetermine their language, culture and sources of education. Nor should it beforgotten that the Jews of Kurland hoped that a knowledge of Germanmight lead to a change in the legal position, which was one of tolerancealone until 1795, when the territory was ceded to Russia.Influence of German Culture in RigaIt should be remembered that the Germans founded the city and were243The Jews in Latviaits only rulers for several hundred years. The upper and ruling classes, evenunder Polish and Swedish rule, remained German and retained their posi-tions even after the city was conquered in 1710 by Peter the Great.In his time and during several of the reigns that followed it was Ger-man culture which was imitated and studied; and German nobles continuedto play a leading part in high Russian administrative offices for manygenerations. So it was natural that this attitude towards the German lan-guage continued unchanged in everything that affected the municipal ad-ministration of Riga, where all the affairs of the Municipality and its insti-tutions, including the Minutes of Town Council Meetings, Ordinances, Re-gulations, etc. were recorded and published in German until the end of 'theNineteenth Century.With this German hegemony the struggle for Jewish rights naturallyinvolved a spiritual adaptation to the ruling climate, and primarily to theGerman language. For Jews from Kurland no particular difficulty was in-volved. The German influence on the earliest Jewish residents in Riga canbe judged by their family names, e.g., Scheinessohn, Hirschfeld, Loewen-stein, Jacobsohn, Blumberg, Friedmann, Blankenstein, Michelsohn, Springen-feld, Lewinsohn, Bamberg, etc.An Exclusively German SchoolIn 1838 the “Community of Jews from Shlok dwelling in Riga”, whichwas the official name of the local Jewish community until their presencewas officially recognised in 1842, applied to the District Governor to permitthe establishment of a Jewish School in the city. They undertook to pay50 kopeks per head of cattle slaughtered in order to cover the upkeep,in addition to the ordinary slaughter tax (korobka).Permission was received in 1840. Regulations required the school to beheaded by a Westernized Jew from abroad. The heads of the Jewish com-munity applied to the learned Dr. Ludwig Philipsohn, founder and editorof the Leipzig “Allgemeine Zeitung des Judentums” (General Journal ofJudaism), requesting him to recommend a suitable candidate. His choicefell on Dr. Max Lilienthal, who served as the first Principal and beforelong became known in Russian Jewry as the “Disseminator of Enlighten-ment” on behalf of the Russian authorities. When the Minister of Educationvisited the Jewish School in Riga, he found that Lilienthal “was fit to serveas an example for the other schools” which the Tsarist Government wasplanning in order to bring about a basic reform of Russian Jewry; and hewas invited to St. Petersburg to organise Enlightenment among the Jews.244Towns & PeopleAfter Lilienthal left Riga to take up his new post. Dr. Philipsohn oncemore made a recommendation, this time of Dr. Abraham Neumann ofBavaria. In 1854 Dr. Neumann was appointed Crown Rabbi of the RigaCommunity, and only in 1877 was Dr. Adolf Ehrlich of Berlin appointedSchool Principal. During all these years, in the absence of any official Prin-cipal, the school was headed by Wolf Kaplan for three decades. In thecommunity at large the school, indeed, was known as Kaplan’s; but sincehe was a local Jew he was not appointed Principal.The language of instruction at the school was German, apart fromreligious instruction for which Mendelssohn’s German translation of theBible was used. The pupils were also taught Arithmetic, Geography andNatural History. A department for girls was added in 1877. Only in 1888was the school required to use Russian as the language of instruction. In1893 there were close on 500 pupils.It should be noted that the teachers included several persons wholeft their mark on the history of Latvian Jewry. In 1881 the teaching staffwas joined by Leib Fischmann, who in due course became a member of theLatvian Seim following Independence. The music teacher was the famousCantor Baruch Leib Rosowsky.Apart from the usefulness of the school as the first modern educationalinstitution in Riga, it also served during its early years in spreading Ger-man culture among the Jews of Riga, particularly the middle class andworkers.Reissen Jews in RigaUnlike the Kurland Jews, who had been virtually cut off from the ori-ginal sources of Jewish life for several generations, the Jews of Reissenarrived from the Pale of Settlement and were impregnated with a deeply-rooted popular tradition. As already remarked, they first came to Rigafrom the Government Districts of Minsk, Vitebsk, Mohilev and the neigh-bouring north-eastern vicinities of White Russia.The Reissen Jews, mostly Habad Hassidim, came for the greater partas timber dealers who engaged in the large-scale export of wood fromInner Russia. They floated rafts made of lopped trees down the River Dvinato the port of Riga.During the second half of the Nineteenth Century changes came aboutwithin Russia which benefitted commerce and export. At this time Jewishrights of domicile were somewhat eased. Merchants of the First Guild,University graduates and certain kinds of craftsmen were granted a general245The Jews in Latviaright of residence all over the country. This economic development, togetherwith the ameliorations for large-scale merchants and others, led to con-siderable progress in commerce and export, more particularly in the timbertrade which was largely in Jewish hands in the Baltic region.Merchants from various small and large towns of the Pale moved toRiga. Saw-mills began to concentrate near the city. Export firms and otherbusinesses fostered trade and industry and considerably increased the numberof Jews from the Pale who settled in Riga on account of their businessaffairs. Between the years 1867 and 1880 the Jewish population increasedfrom 5254 to 20,013. The greater part of this increase resulted from thetimber trade and associated manufactures.The main sources of timber were the forests in the Government Districtsof Pskov, Vitebsk and Smolensk, which lay on the River Dvina or its tribu-taries. Sections of these forests were prepared for export purposes by localinhabitants under the supervision of travelling Jewish “supervisors,” whospent the greater part of the year journeying through the forests and re-turned home only for festivals and the High Holidays. These supervisors,who were mostly observant Jews, were not only in charge of the preparationand shipment of the wood but were also experts who recognised the beststands of trees, and could advise on the sections to be prepared and theplaces where it was worthwhile making purchases from Russian estate-owners.These merchants were not only in charge of the purchase of timberbut also brought a special kind of life of their own with them, togetherwith their deep Jewish tradition. They established the “Reissisher Minyan”(The prayer-quorum of Jews from Reissen) in Iliya Street in Riga, a“quorum” which in due course had three synagogues bearing the namesof Kapust, Liadi and Lubavitch; these being the names of Jewish townsin which lived and held court various members of the Schneurson Dynastyof Hassidic Rabbis, who were descendants of Reb Schneur Zalman, thefounder of what is known as the Habad School of Hassidism. They alsoestablished other prayer quorums, such as the one which bore the name ofAlexander Zisskind Berlin in Weiden Damb Street. These Hassidim andother Jews brought Rabbis and slaughters of their own, together with Jewswhose Hassidic spirit served as a counter-weight to the chilly and formalist“anti-Hassidic” Jews of Kurland and Lithuania. It is not impossible thatthe Habad approach which is based on “keen intellect and scholarship...whereas other Hassidic groups went by the heart and feelings” (to quoteDr. S. M. Horodetzky in his standard work on “Hassidism and Hassidim”,246Towns & PeopleVol. IV, P. 98) also helped them to reach an understanding with the localJews, who were marked by preferring intellect to emotion. In any case themerging of these two elements through mutual contact and, even more,family ties to which we shall refer below, helped to bring about the specificcharacter of Riga’s Jewry.Political and Cultural Conditions at the End of the NineteenthCenturyJews from Kurland and Reissen in Riga were to be found on all rungsof the economic and cultural ladder. They included leading merchants,persons of limited means, university graduates and those who came fromYeshivot and old-fashioned Hebrew classes. Each group had its own styleof life, habits and customs and manner of speech.Among the leading groups of well-to-do merchants, physicians, lawyers,etc., the Kurland influence predominated. German was considered anaristocratic language which, as it were, could secure an entry to the salonsof good society. This was sometimes a natural process. Many of those whoenjoyed a higher education, particularly graduates of the neighbouringDorpat University, could barely speak Russian.In these circles there was a certain tendency towards assimilation, whichfound expression in external habits and attempts to resemble the non-Jewish environment, a certain weakening of the ties with tradition. Therewere a few cases of mixed marriages. No cases of conversion to Christianityare known, such as those that were so frequent in Germany during theEnlightenment period.In the Nineties, however, the Russification of the region commenced.The schools began to give instruction in Russian at the same time as thelively participation of the Jewish Community in economic life which alsoexpanded thanks to the development of trade, industry, banking, etc. Theinfluence of Russian culture, the literature of which was reaching its mostbrilliant epoch at this time, as well as the revolutionary ferment with itsown singular literature, all helped the Russian language to spread amongthe Jews of Riga, and produced a bilingual situation in which both Ger-man and Russian were spoken.There was a brief period of improvement from 1859 to 1865. Rightsof residence were granted to various groups such as Merchants of the FirstGuild, persons with University education, etc. This however, was followedby a reaction which continued until the end of the Tsarist epoch.247The Jews in LatviaDiscriminatory laws were introduced and Jewish intellectuals felt themas a source of burning shame. They included complete exclusion from thehigher and lower civil service, overwhelming difficulties in obtaining fulladmission to the legal profession, and rejection of candidates for professor-ships in High Schools, no matter how outstanding the knowledge and capa-cities of suitable Jews might be. There was one inflexible rule: Changereligion. A brilliant career lay before those who did so. The majority re-fused. There were some, including famous figures, who did not resisttemptation.So it is not surprising that in this situation of complete lack of pros-pects for a Jewish future in Russia those who were politically consciousdid their best, as far as possible, to prepare the younger generation forlife outside Russia; all the more so as the academic numerus clausus madeit necessary for all who wished for University education to go abroad. Theclosest country was Germany, so German culture once again exerted anoverriding influence.The First World War was followed by the establishment of the Inde-pendent State of Latvia, including not only Riga and Kurland but alsoLatgale, which had been part of the former Pale of Settlement. The newstate of affairs brought about vast changes in Jewish national, cultural andother aspects of life, as has been told elsewhere. To begin with however,the structure of Riga Jewry changed very little. There was the same divisioninto “upper” circles and the ordinary people. Little by little, however, theinfluence of the middle classes and workers began to be felt in all aspectsof life, thanks to political Parties and parliamentary liberty.Leading Personalities and Families in Riga Jewry *Among the Jews of Riga there were individuals and families who wererepresentative of the surroundings from which they came, together withtheir cultural backgrounds.Some of them conducted large-scale businesses, were outstanding pro-fessional figures and scholars who dedicated themselves not only to theirvocations but also to communal requirements. They organised and establish-* Details of some of the biographies given below were received from : Mrs. EdithCohen-Mintz; Mrs. Deborah Kamenetzky (the L. Shalit and Mintz families);Mrs. Lili Mizrah-Brill (S. Shalit); and Mr. Michael Piratinsky (the Hindin family).Mr. Piratinsky also engaged in the import and export of timber through Riga.248Towns & Peopleed public institutions without which it would be hard to imagine the devel-opment of the local Jewish Community.Here we shall describe a few of them, concentrating on persons whocommenced their public careers before the First World War when therewas as yet no framework for communal leaders and workers who wereprofessionally engaged in this field. Some of these continued their activitiesin Independent Latvia as well.Leib ShalitHe was one of the first timber merchants who came to Riga. He en-gaged in large-scale activities within his field and was regarded as one ofthe wealthiest men in the city, with large estates in several North RussianProvinces.He headed the Riga Community and was particularly concerned withZionist activities. As one of the first Hovevei Zion in Riga he went to theHovevei Zion Conference at Kattowitz in 1884. When the Hibbat ZionMovement received official Tsarist recognition in the form of the “OdessaCommittee” in 1890, he was put in charge of the Livonia and KurlandDistricts.When the land on which Hadera was established in 1890 was purchasedwith the aid of the three Hovevei Zion groups of Vilna, Kovno and Rigait was necessary to complete the transaction swiftly, but the settlers did nothave the necessary resources. Leib Shalit, together with Jacob Hindin ofwhom more will be told below, provided the money needed for purchasingthe remaining 2,000 dunams.In 1897 L. Shalit was a Delegate to the First Zionist Congress in Basel,and was appointed a Director of the Jewish Colonial Trust. Throughoutthese years he continued to be active, travelling to Conventions of RussianZionists, etc.In local Riga activities he collaborated with Paul Mintz, of whom morewill be told below. The two of them established a branch of the “Societyfor the Dissemination of Culture”, for which an official permit was receivedin 1898. The Riga branch had the second largest budget in the whole ofRussia.L. Shalit passed away in 1906.Zeev (Wulf) LuntzOne of the first Hovevei Zion in Riga, he was one of the leading mer-chants of the city. He attended the Kattowitz Conference in 1884 and249The Jews in Latviaproposed that support should be given to the Bilu Group, pointing outhow important educated young people would be for the development ofthe Jewish community in Eretz Israel. He also spoke at the end of theConference.He participated in the Second Hovevei Zion Conference held in Drus-kenik in 1887 and at the Third Conference held in Vilna in 1889, on behalfof the Riga Hovevei Zion. He supported the Maskilim (enlightened andsemi-secularist) in the dispute which took place there between the OrthodoxRabbis and the moderately unorthodox.In his Riga activities he belonged to the group that organised the So-ciety for the Dissemination of Enlightenment. In 1915 he was a Memberof the Committee for the Relief of Jews expelled from Kurland, and wasone of the ten “hostages” who guaranteed the faithfulness of Riga Jews tothe Government with their persons, property and homes.Jacob Hind inHe came from the town of Velizh in the Vitebsk Government District,owned forests in the Pskov District and an alcohol factory until the intro-duction of the Russian government monopoly. One of his sons, namedZalman, was a share-holder in ships that sailed on the river Dvina, togetherwith Lipmann Rachmilevitch. A second marriage made him the brother-in-law of Rabbi Samuel Mohilever, who persuaded him to take an interestin the resettlement of Eretz Israel. He purchased the Hedera lands referredto above for his son-in-law Shneur Zvi Shneurson of Dvinsk, who wasone of the first settlers in Hedera and whose descendants still live there.An indication of the pride and independence of this group, who livedin magnificent dwellings, judging by then current standards, in the townswhere they dwelt before moving to Riga, and who often had the localauthorities at their service, can be judged by the following story, told byJacob Hindin’s grandson, J. L. Shneurson of Hedera in his reminiscences,“Mipi Rishonim” (Tel Aviv, 1964):“Some years before the War my grandfather Jacob Hindin came toEretz Israel to visit us. While he was in Hedera Baron Edmond de Roth-schild also visited the country. The Hedera settlers decided to send a dele-gation to him and selected two men for the purpose: Shaktzer and mygrandfather Hindin...“The Baron spoke to them in an Alsatian German. He was accustomedto having people come to him for help, and naturally asked them at oncewhat they needed. But they answered him that they did not need any help250Towns & Peopleat all and had merely come to pay him a courtesy visit on behalf of thesettlement. Baron Edmond then said that he was a Baron and could helpthem. To which Hindin answered : ‘We ourselves are little Barons anddo not need any help.’“ ‘Heraus!’ (Get out!) cried Baron Edmond and sent them away.“The Baron was very angry indeed and nobody dared to mention thename of Hedera in his presence for a long time... Only after years hadpassed, and thanks to the efforts of Dr. Hillel Yaffe and Rabbi Zadoc-Kahnof Paris, did he finally agree to help in draining the Hedera swamps..J. L. Shneurson goes on to tell how Jacob Hindin transferred 267 du-nams of swamp from his own private estate in the name of the Baron.In due course a forest was planted there. He also gave 50 dunams of hisproperty for planting a citron grove in the name of his brother-in-lawRabbi Samuel Mohilever. This was the site of the present-day kibbutz GanShmuel. In his will Jacob Hinden left 120,000 roubles for charity andother purposes, to be expended at the discretion of Baron Edmond deRothschild.The Brothers Isaiah and Shlomo Zalman BerlinThey also came from Velizh and were among the best-known timbermerchants and manufacturers in Riga. The forest they owned, the sawmillsthey established, the numbers of their employees and the scale of theirexports made them leading figures.Isaiah Berlin was married to the daughter of Menahem NahumSchneurson of Niezin, a great-granddaughter of Rabbi Schneur Zalman thefounder of Habad Hassidism. The leading officials employed by the BerlinBrothers were wellknown house-holders in Riga. They were all Hassidimand in close touch with the Hassidic Rabbi of the Schneurson stock. Suchwere Alexander Zisskind Berlin, who has already been mentioned in con-nection with the Minyan bearing his name; Zalman Isaac Volshonok, hisbrother Avigdor Volshonok who was Chairman of the Riga Agudat Israelin Independent Latvia, and others.A Fund of 300,000 roubles in the name of Isaiah Berlin was created— a very great amount at the time — in order to build a Hospital in Riga.However, most of the money was expended to support war refugees duringthe First World War.Isaiah Berlin had no children, so he adopted the Zuckerman familywho were also of the Rabbi’s kin. Mendel Berlin, the son of the adopted251The Jews in Latviason, Dov, was a partner in the Berlin and Luria Factory, one of the largesttimber export enterprises in the city.The son of Mendel Berlin is Professor Sir Isaiah Berlin, the famousEnglish historian and scholar. The two sons of Shlomo Zalman Berlin,Beinush and Leib, were also among the ten Riga “hostages” during theFirst World War.Shlomo ShalitHe came from the small town of Ula in the Province of Vitebsk andhad six sons and four daughters. Three sons established the Emolip Firm,the name being derived from the initials of their own names Elijah, Mor-dechai and Lipmann. This was one of the largest enterprises engaged inbringing timber from the heart of Russia and exporting it abroad. At theirsaw-mills in Riga and the vicinity they employed Jews from the Pale ofSettlement, who had no right of residence in the city. The police knew ofthis and turned it into a regular source of income by arresting the “illegals”every Sabbath. The sons of Shlomo Shalit used to spend much time bribingall ranks of police in all kinds of ways.Another son, Zalman Shalit, set up the Berlin-Shalit partnership to-gether with Meir Berlin, son of Alexander Zisskind, for wood-sawing andexport. They were both Zionists and generous, and established a specialFund to support householders who had lost their money, rabbis who neededmedical attention, etc.Meir Berlin participated in the all-Russian Zionist Conference at Hel-singfors, Finland, in 1906.Zalman Shalit, his brother-in-law Dr. M. Pines who wrote a history ofYiddish literature in French, and his partner Meir Berlin, helped to establishthe paper “Die Iddishe Stimme” (The Jewish Voice) in Riga. This paperwas organised on the initiative of the Hebrew writer Yehuda Leib Kantor,who was serving as Crown Rabbi of Riga in the year 1910. The Shalitfamily also contributed the ground for the erection of “The Jewish Club”at the corner of Dzimava and Skoliaya Streets.The son, Tuvia Shalit, was the one of the “hostages” taken by theRussian authorities during the First World War.Elijah Shalit took part in the Kovno Conference of 1909, and was aMember of the Relief Committee established in 1915 in aid of the Kurlandrefugees who were expelled to Inner Russia by the Russian army.Eliezer EttingenEliezer Ettingen was born in Velizh in 1870, in a family where com-252Tdvms & Peoplemunal activities were a tradition. His father had been accustomed to proceedto St. Petersburg about the affairs of his town. He himself studied in Berneand together with the Yiddish Publicist Hayyim Zhitlovsky established aNational Jewish Students’ Organisation. From the time he moved to Rigahe headed a large firm for the distribution of mineral oil, known as theMazut Company under the Tsar, and subsequently as the Shell Company.After the First Zionist Congress he was one of the founders of thefirst Zionist Society in Riga, and in 1898 was delegate at the RussianZionist Conference held in Warsaw. Fifty years later he published his re-miniscences together with the Minutes of the Conference in the officialZionist weekly “Haolam” (30,9.48). This is one of the few documentsavailable for students of the Conference in question.He participated in all Congresses from the Second onwards, was electeda Member of the General Zionist Council at the Eighteenth Congress heldin Prague, and was Chairman of the General Zionists in Riga until heproceeded to Eretz Israel in 1935. His years of active membership andleadership of the Zionist Movement earned him the status of a “Virilist”,i.e., he was coopted as a Member of the Zionist General Council in viewof his ample activities and experience.Zionist activities did not prevent him from taking an active part inthe variegated local Jewish public life. He was among the founders of thefirst Yiddish Paper in Riga, the “Iddishe Stimme”, was Chairman of theHakoah Sports Society, and a committee member of the Society for theDissemination of Enlightenment for 35 years. At the time of the expulsionof Kurland Jews in 1915 he was one of the heads of the Committee in Aidof Refugees. After the Second World War he headed the “Association ofLatvian and Esthonian Jews in Israel.” To his last day he actively parti-cipated in helping Jewish refugees from Soviet Latvia, as well as newcomersfrom Latvia in Israel.It is nothing less than proper to give a brief account of Eliezer Ettin-gen’s personality. In his external appearance he was every inch the grandseigneur. He seemed like an ancient oak, firm and deeply rooted, venerableand honourable. He enjoyed life and knew when to take the lead with aspacious gesture, when to support and aid. He dealt dedicatedly and respon-sibly with issues great and small. He would welcome refugees at the quay-side during the Expulsion of 1915, and waited on the stairs at the homeof the District Governor in order to persuade him to send the consignmentsof refugees to Jewish regions in order to facilitate their absorption. He would253The Jews in Latviado what had to be done to provide a tombstone for a veteran Zionist orfind work for an immigrant from Latvia who was left without a liveli-hood ...He passed away in Tel Aviv in 1956, replete with years and good deeds.The Mintz FamilyThe Mintz family was an old and aristocratic one with a pedigree goingback at least seventeen generations to the learned rabbinical Mintz familyof Padua in the early Sixteenth Century, and included a long series of out-standing rabbinical authorities and famous scholars. (For further informa-tion see the Hebrew genealogical work “Daat Kedoshim” by I. T. Eisen-stadt with supplements by Samuel Wiener, St. Petersburg 1897/8.)The family headed by Yehiel Michel Mintz left Dvinsk in 1880 forRiga. They included five sons, several of whom established outstandingprofessional reputations and were dedicated to communal activities. Thesewere: Professor Paul (Samuel Feivel) Mintz, Professor Vladimir (ZeevWolf) Mintz; and Engineer Dr. Nahum Mintz.The Mintz family actually lived in Riga as a first-generation group thatleft the Pale of Settlement (Dvinsk having been part of the Vitebsk Govern-ment District in 1880). It could serve as an example of the influence ofGerman on the Jews of the region even before they came to the primarilyGerman city. Their behaviour, their external appearance, the language usedat home, the education of the children were all dominated by German cul-ture. Old Riga residents were certain that they must have been residing inRiga or Kurland for many generations.Professor Paul MintzThe best-known of the brothers, on account of his communal activities,was Paul Mintz, born in 1868, who in 1890 graduated with distinction fromthe Legal Faculty of the St. Petersburg University. In 1892 he received thedegree of Master of Law at the Dorpat University. In 1904 he was ad-mitted as an Advocate, which in those days involved considerable difficul-ties, together with the lawyers Schlossberg and Vinaver, who subsequentlybecame famous in Russian Jewry. He engaged in communal activities to-gether with his professional work as an advocate, scholar, and subsequentlyas a Lecturer at Riga University.As a young man he aimed to set up a nucleus of communal workerswho would organise the communal institutions which were missing in Riga,while at the same time helping to lead the community as far as necessary254Towns & Peopleand possible towards expanding and defending their civic rights. The grouphe established attended the “Herren Abende” or Gentlemen’s Evenings,which in due course became a kind of unofficial club of leading communalfigures, and were attended by persons from Kurland and Reissen alike.Members included : Leib Shalit, Zeev Luntz, Paul Mintz, Nahum Mintz,Dr. Max Scheinfeld, Eliezer Ettingen, Dr. Abraham Salkind, AdvocateJoshua (Zhano) Tron and others. It is indeed a pity that all the namesconnected with this institution have not been preserved. It functioned notonly under Russian rule but also in the early days of Independent Latvia.These Gentlemen’s Evenings led to the establishment of the Riga branchof the Society for the Dissemination of Enlightenment, which in 1906 setup the Riga Craft School. It also guided the Jewish voters in the Electionsto the Russian parliamentary institution known as the Duma, which metfrom 1906 to 1917. Here it should be mentioned that the Jews supportedthe Latvian candidate rather than the German. In due course the Latviansrepaid this Jewish support fittingly by joining the Germans and exterminat-ing Riga Jewry during the years 1941-1944.At the time of the expulsion of the Jews from Kurland in 1915, PaulMintz headed the Public Committee to aid the Expelled; and he was oneof the ten hostages demanded by the Russian authorities in order to refrainfrom expelling the Jews of Riga.During the German Occupation in the First World War he lived inMoscow where he continued his scholarly work. In 1919 he returned toRiga, and went to Germany when the city was occupied by the Red Army.Following the Latvian Declaration of Independence Karl Ulmanis, whoheaded the Government during the greater part of the existence of Inde-pendent Latvia, invited him to return to Riga. He was elected to the Con-stituent Assembly and joined the Government as State Comptroller, beingthe only Jew to serve as a Minister.From the foundation of the University of Latvia he lectured there asProfessor of Criminology, writing works on this subject which were trans-lated into Latvian. He headed the Committee that prepared the LatvianCriminal Code, and represented the Latvian Government at InternationalLegal Conferences.In the beginnings of Latvian independence, when hopes of nationalautonomy had not yet faded, the Central Committee of Jewish Communitiesset up a Committee which he headed, in order to prepare the Statute ofAutonomy to be presented to the Seim. He was a Member of the JewishAgency for Baltic countries, was Chairman of the National Democrat Party,255The Jews in Latviawrote for the party paper, “Narodnoya Misl”, was Chairman of the JewishLawyers’ Association, etc., etc.When Latvia was annexed to Soviet Russia in 1940 he was exiled toSiberia together with his wife and son. A few months later he was arrestedand kept in the Thaishet Concentration Camp. All efforts made by publicfigures in U.S.A. to obtain his liberation were in vain. In 1941 he died inSiberia.Professor Vladimir (Wolf) MintzThe brother of Paul Mintz, he had a well-earned reputation as one ofthe best surgeons in Moscow and Riga. He was born in Dvinsk in 1872.After the family moved to Riga in 1880 he completed school there andentered Dorpat University, from which he graduated in medicine in 1893and was appointed Surgical Assistant. In Berlin he studied with the famousSurgeon Israel. In 1897 he went to Moscow, where he became knownthrough his scientific and surgical studies. At an all-Russian Medical Con-ference held in Moscow in 1916 he demonstrated the removal of foreignbodies from the lungs, which was a medical novelty at the time. He wasSecretary of the Surgical Association of Russia and was also a Member ofthe International Surgical Organisation, besides being an Editor of the Rus-sian “Surgical Journal”, together with Prof. N. A. Sokolow. In 1917 he wasappointed Professor at the University of Moscow.In 1918, after Lenin had been attacked and shot by the Social Revo-lutionary Kaplan, he was called to attend to him, operated and saved hislife. The Lenin Museum in Moscow exhibits the Bulletins reporting Lenin’scondition and improvement in health, which were signed among others byV. Mintz.With the aid of Lenin he was allowed to return to Riga, where he wasin charge of the Surgical Department of the Jewish Bikkur Holim Hospital,which he finally headed. He lectured at the Riga University, where he oc-cupied the Chair in Surgery from 1940.After Riga was taken by the Nazis, he passed through the entire Naziinferno, beginning with the Riga Ghetto where he organised a kind ofhospital and dedicated himself entirely to relief work. The Riga Ghettowas followed by the Kaiserwald Concentration Camp. Finally, after allkinds of vicissitudes, he was sent to Buchenwald where he found his deathin a mass grave.Mintz was a Zionist and dreamt of working at the Hebrew Universityin Jerusalem. Physicians and students who worked with him or studied256Towns & Peopleunder him still speak of his dedicated kindness to patients and students.His reputation has not diminished, and he is still referred to in Latvianand Russian literature as the surgeon who saved the life of Lenin. In 1970a biography was published in Riga, in Russian, entitled : “Professor Mintz”,by Drs. B. Altschuler and D. Cherfass.Nahum MintzThe brother of Paul and Vladimir Mintz. Bora 1867 in Dvinsk, heproceeded to Riga with his family in 1880. After leaving the SecondarySchool he entered the Riga Polytechnicum in the Faculty of Chemistry.Following his graduation he became the Assistant of Professor Bischoff.In 1890 he received his doctorate at Leipzig University, returned to Rigaand once again entered the Polytechnicum as an Assistant. He was offereda high scientific post provided he changed his religion, but declined theoffer. That ended his scientific career.Apart from his professional qualifications as a chemist he knew manylanguages and was widely cultured in many fields. He worked in variousprivate enterprise and was married to the daughter of Leib Shalit.In his communal activities he took a considerable part in the Societyfor the Dissemination of Enlightenment, particularly in organising the CraftSchool which was established in 1906 and which he helped to reestablishafter the First World War. He was a Committee member of the JewishClub, a member of the Board of Directors of the Northern Bank, etc.Dr. Max ScheinfeldUnlike many Latvian public figures, most of whose activities were localin character, the work of Dr. Max Scheinfeld was conducted in institutionsand organisations which aimed to improve the condition of Russian Jewryas a whole.Dr. M. Scheinfeld was a psychiatrist, bom in Mitau in 1861, who gra-duated from Dorpat University. In 1897 he opened a Hospital for MentalDiseases in Riga, and became known as one of the outstanding specialistsof Russia. He also published studies in his profession, and gained a widereputation as a person not concerned with making money who attendedpoor patients free of charge.In spite of his professional activities he also dedicated himself to com-munal work. In Riga he helped to establish the Bikkur Holim Hospital.He played an even more important part in Jewish institutions that wereestablished from 1905 onwards.257The Jews in LatviaIn 1905 Jewish communal workers from all parts of Russia met inVilna and established the “Society for achieving Equal Rights for the JewishPeople in Russia.” Dr. Scheinfeld was present and was elected a memberof the Central Committee, dedicating himself to the new task. Those werefateful years for Russian Jewry. They included pogroms, elections to theFirst and Second Dumas, steps to prevent the exclusion of the Jews fromthe voters’ lists and to direct elections along the desired channels, etc., etc.Several Conferences of the Society were held during 1905 and 1906. How-ever, it split over various differences of opinion in 1907 and was dissolved.In 1909, after the disappointment resulting from the election of onlytwo Jewish Members to the Duma (one from the Kovno District and theother from Kurland), the increasing reaction and a steady worsening of theJewish position, an attempt was made to revive communal life through aConference held in Kovno. Doctor Max Scheinfeld was the representativeof Riga Jewry. The Conference adopted a number of resolutions regardingorganisation of the communities, social work, steps to improve the situationof craftsmen, etc., but these resolution had no real effect on account of thegeneral political situation.In 1912 Dr. Scheinfeld was murdered by one of his patients.Apart from the individuals and families mentioned above there were alarge number of others. Mention may be made here of: Abraham Rabino-witz, Hayyim Leib Risker, Zelig Brusowansky, Jacob Hurwitz, ZalmanMeir Lipschitz, Koppel Lewinson, Kahaner, Mendel Lulov, JonahEttinger, Feitel Cohen, L. Zalmansohn, S. M. Yaffe, A. Leibovitz and Sonsand Hermann Cohen and Brothers. Some of these headed large firms forthe import and export of timber; they owned sawmills, exported skins andfells, engaged in banking business, etc., etc.The following owned some of the largest business houses in Riga:Moritz Feitelberg; G. Scheinfeld; Aaronstamm; Louis Tall and others. Thesedealt in clothing, metal products, paper and writing utensils, draperies, etc.,on a very large scale, and were known far beyond the city limits.Mention has been made here only of those about whom it has beenpossible to obtain details. Many others of equal importance must undoub-tedly be missing.The Average Riga JewIt is the way of history to record and write at length about persons whooccupied leading positions and directed the development of the community258Towns & Peoplethanks to their own special qualities. In order to avoid giving a wrong im-pression it should be noted that apart from the “Upper Classes” to whomreference has been made, Riga contained extensive Jewish groups fromKurland, Lithuania and Reissen. They lived largely in the suburbs and in-cluded all kinds of toiling craftsmen: Tailors, hand-sewers, shoemakers andsmall shop-keepers. They all spoke Yiddish, and most of them were obser-vant Jews who filled the many synagogues of the city. Then there was ayounger generation of “free” Jews who listened to new winds of thought,were swayed by ideological currents calling for changes in the establishedorder and a transformation in the civic and national life of the JewishPeople.Although Riga was not part of the Pale of Setdement, it was sensitiveto all the currents which originated in the Jewish centres of Russia. TheZionist Movement and the Bund, the synthesis of national life with theadvancement of the working class in all their varied and separate groupsand parties, found their echo and enthusiastic supporters who were preparedto take action and sacrifice themselves.National and Political Currents: Zionism, the Bund, the JewishSelf-DefenceIn 1884 there was a Hovevei Zion nucleus in Riga. Its members in-cluded Leib Shalit and Wolf Luntz to whom reference has already beenmade, David Schwarzbard, and Aaron Pumpiansky, a Hebrew writer andjournalist who was Crown Rabbi of Riga for twenty years. The Secretarywas Wolf Kaplan who has been mentioned elsewhere as the principal of thefirst modem Jewish School in Riga. He also used to contribute to theHebrew press and wrote poetry under the pen-name “Zaken”.In 1890 the Jews of Riga began to take active steps in connection withEretz Israel. A Society of twelve members, together with similar Societiesin Vilna and Kovno, acquired part of the Hedera lands. In 1891 peoplewent to settle there, drained swamps, caught malaria, and no small numberlost their lives in regaining the land for settlement.After the 1897 Zionist Congress, which Leib Shalit attended as a dele-gate from Riga, the “Zion” Society was established headed by EliezerEttingen, Advocate Z. Tron, Dr. A. Salkind and others. In 1898 E. Ettingenwas a delegate at the Russian Zionist Conference in Warsaw, while in 1902M. Nurock was a delegate at the Minsk Conference. There were delegatesfrom Riga at all Congresses, from the first onwards.In 1904 a group of young men organised the “Shoharei Zion” Society,259The Jews in Latviawhich took an active part in the Helsingfors Conference. In 1906 thetemporarily illegal Zionist activity was conducted in the guise of the“Ivriya” ClubThe Zeirei Zion Party was established in Riga in 1912, and sent ZeevLevenberg as its Delegate to the Eleventh Congress in 1919.Revolutionary propaganda was already being conducted in 1899-1900among Jewish and Christian workers including tinsmiths, tailors, hat-makersand female dress-makers. When the “General Association of Jewish Work-ers in Russia, Poland and Lithuania”, known in brief as the Bund, wasorganised in 1897, those worker groups joined it.Throughout the years of ferment 1900-1906 there were constant demon-strations, strikes, attacks on editorial offices of reactionary papers, etc., inRiga, where an active propaganda circle functioned in the Polytechnicum.This led to the expulsion of students, including future leaders such as Abra-ham Braun (Sergei), Z. Latzki-Bertholdy, one of the founders of the ZionistSocialists (S.S.), and others.Arrests and on occasion cruel and degrading punishment led to theorganisation of a terrorist group of “Organised Vengeance”, headed byAbraham Braun and Lazar Aronstamm. Riga distinguished itself beforeand during the 1905 Revolution, when a number of the most importantpolitical strikes of Tsarist Russia took place in the city.The first Conference at which it was decided that the Bund and theSocial Democrat Movement should cooperate was held there. The demon-strations and strikes organised by a Joint Committee of the Bund and theLatvian Social Democrats were conducted on a particularly large scale.In Latvia the 1905 Revolution acquired a unique character through theparticipation of the Latvian peasants, who saw this as an opportunity torevenge themselves on the German Barons whose ancestors had robbedthem of their land long generations before. During the period of the reac-tion punitive expeditions were sent out and wrought havoc among thosewho had revolted.The reaction of 1908 and subsequent years brought about a decline inthe work of the Bund, whose strength was also considerably reduced byemigration. A new policy found expression through legal work in the com-munities, the establishment of economic organisations, developing the Co-operative Movement, etc.A nucleus of the Bund remained in Riga and conducted lively activitiesin Independent Latvia after the First World War.260Towns & PeopleThe movements which developed as a synthesis of Zionism and SocialDemocracy, namely, the Poalei Zion Movement and its offshoots, theZionist Socialist (S.S.) Movement and the “Seimovtsi Movement”, alsofound a place in Riga.All these Movements, from the Bund to the Zionist Socialists, etc., tookan active part in the Jewish Self-Defence which came into being after theKishinev Pogrom. This Self-Defence body showed its value in 1905, whenJews were attacked in the outskirts of Riga. Thanks to its existence andpresence much loss were prevented and many lives were saved.The First World War brought all these party activities to a standstill.Many of them reawakened to an even more intensive life in IndependentLatvia.In all the above descriptions our aim has been to indicate the variouscomponents which taken together helped to shape that outstanding com-munity known throughout the Jewish world as “Riga Jewry”.261Moshe Amir (Bliach)D V I N S KTHE Dvinsk to which memory returns is the famed City and Mother inIsrael, teeming with Jews, hospitable beyond belief, bubbling with com-munal activities. The realisation that it has been silenced makes one quiverand shake; remembering what the murderers did to this creative centreand source of culture which no longer exists.The purpose of the present essay is to offer a memorial in order thatfuture generations, offspring and descendants of those who once dweltin Dvinsk, may know their forefathers and bear them in mind. For theashes of our martyrs were turned into fertilizer for the fields. Their boneswere ground into phosphates, the very hair of their heads was taken tobe stuffed into mattresses. Let these things be remembered throughoutthe ages.The Foundation and Development of DvinskDvinsk was originally known as Dunaburg, a name that bears witnessto the founders of the city which was established in 1278 C.E. by theOrder of Livonian Knights. The name means the Burg or citadel on theDvina (the Western Dvina besides which the city lies.) The German namewas retained for more than six hundred years; until the year 1893, infact. Not only does Dvinsk lie beside the River Dvina but it is also ajunction on the Riga—Orel—Leningrad—Vilna Railway. Throughout thecenturies its strategic advantages have attracted many conquerors. TheLivonian Knights used it as a fortress from which to expand and strengthentheir authority as conquerors of the medieval inhabitants of the BalticCoast. Both Lithuanians and Russians repeatedly tried to take the city byassault, but did not succeed.With the liquidation of the Livonian Order in 1561, the City of Duna-burg was taken over by the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania, togetherwith the territory known as Latgale. The city afterwards passed repeatedlyfrom hand to hand; and only with the First Parition of Poland in 1772did it finally become part of Russia together with all its environs. However,it was attacked in 1795 by the Poles, who set it on fire and almost burntit down. In 1812 it was briefly occupied by the French during Napoleon’sCampaign, finally passing to Russia after his defeat and remaining in262Towns & PeopleRussian hands until the First World War in 1914, when it was occupiedby the German Army. In 1919 it was held by the Bolshevik forces, butbecame part of Independent Latvia early in 1920, after the conclusion ofpeace with U.S.S.R.Following the occupation of Latvia by the Germans in 1941 Dvinskbegan to experience the horrors of the Holocaust, and the entire JewishCommunity was exterminated. The city is now within the Latvian Republicof U.S.S.R.As remarked, Dvinsk is an important maritime and land entrepot, andowed its rapid growth as an important industrial centre to the timber tradein particular thanks to the Western (Baltic) Dvina whose source lies inCentral Russia. This river takes a south-west course amid afforested marsh-lands and passes through the northern sections of White Russia, where ittakes a north-west turn and then crosses Latvia. The Dvina is the chiefriver of that entire territory, emptying into the Baltic Sea at the Gulf ofRiga. It is more than 1,000 kilometres (over 600 miles) long and is a veryconvenient route for wooden rafts, making the development of the timbertrade and related industries possible.The various rulers who held Dvinsk all set their stamp upon it, andit had a manifold population consisting of White Russians, Ukrainians,Lithuanians, Poles and Germans. The Jews constituted the largest minorityin the city prior to their liquidation. Until 1914 they were 14%, and at thetime of their extermination they were 5%. It is interesting that even duringthe two decades of Independent Latvia the city almost completedly disre-garded the national language, and continued to use Russian even for con-ducting its municipal affairs. The Latvian inhabitants of Latgale constituteda backward group among their own Latvian compatriots. They spoke aslightly different dialect from the standard vernacular of Livonia andKurland, whose inhabitants were regarded as “purer” stock. They lookeddown on the Latgalians, referring to them as the “Tchangali” to indicatethat they were inferior in some way. The “pure” Latvians regarded them-selves as closer to the “noble” German race, assimilated with them, andalmost all spoke German while the Latgalians spoke either their own dialector Russian. The latter were backward in all respects, and were an impo-verished group. For example, while illiteracy in Kurland and Livonia reach-ed five percent, it was more than 40 percent in Latgale. To begin with,they had great difficulties with their own dialect which lacked all traditionand history.In 1860 Dvinsk had a total population of 26,000. By 1892 the number263The Jews in Latviahad risen to 73,000, while in 1913 it had reached 130,000. The most de-veloped economic branches in the city were the timber industry and trade,skins and leather, flax, tobacco, and sweets.The Jews of DvinskThe Jewish Community of Dvinsk began to strike roots there by thesecond half of the Eighteenth Century. Since the city was a fortress, Jewswere forbidden in 1812 to erect any building whatever, or to take up per-manent residence there. In spite of this, about 800 Jews were to be foundthere in 1805. The community grew steadily, and since it was afterwardsincluded in the Pale of Settlement Jews settled there in large numbers.By 1897, when a census was held, 32,400 Jews lived there. The Jewishpopulation continued to increase and in 1914, at the outbreak of the FirstWorld War, consisted of more than 60,000 in a total population of 130,000;namely, almost half of the population.At this time 49% of the Jews were merchants, 7% consisted of mem-bers of the free professions, while the rest were artisans or craftsmen ofvarious kinds. All of them were literate, reading and writing Yiddish with-out exception. There were any number of “Hadarim” (Hebrew Classes)and the sound of the study of Torah, beginning with little children of threeand four and going up to students of the Talmud, could be heard on everyside. As early as 1887 there was a Trade School with 72 pupils, while aTrade School for Girls was established in 1902 and then had 208 pupils.In that year 2 libraries were founded and there were 3 loan funds. Ac-cording to the 1897 Census the Jews were 46% of the total populationwhile almost all the trade of the city was in their hands. Of the 1370 mer-chants, 1134 were Jews, while there were only 168 agriculturists amid atotal of 22,320. The Jews played a large part in the clothing industry,4769 persons making their living from it. A total of 838 souls engaged ineducation, and 805 in wood processing. There were 692 Jews in the army.The three factories in the city employed 575 male and female workers.In 1901 there were 3 municipal elementary schools for Jewish children,at which tuition was given in Russian. These were attended by 300 children.A school giving instruction in Hebrew was established in the same year,anl had 81 pupils.The First World War broke out in 1914 and deprived the city of itsJewish inhabitants. An order of the Russian Commander, the Grand DukeNikolai Nikolayevitch, uncle of the Tsar Nikolai II, brought about theexpulsion of the Jews from every place along the Russo-German Front as264Towns & Peoplebeing under suspicion of espionage, and an untrustworthy element. Tensof thousands of Jews were compelled to abandon all their property andbelongings, and were carried off to places in the heart of Russia and as faraway as Siberia.It was then that Jewish Dvinsk revealed itself in all its magnificenthumanity. As one man they engaged in fraternal aid, on a scale neverknown before. Public kitchens were established, while hundreds of volun-teers engaged day and night in the sacred task of tending the children ofthe refugees who passed absolutely destitute through the city from all thesmall neighbouring towns and from Lithuania. The warm and sensitiveJewish heart responded far beyond its capacity. For the War affected theJewish population in particular, destroying all their normal sources oflivelihood.Famine and disease wrought havoc, and the population emptied outof the city. All those who could do so fled afar. Even the great rabbi andpride of the community, the rabbi and Gaon of Rogachov, left the city,depressing the feelings of those who remained. Their eyes then turned tothe other great luminary of Torah, the Gaon Reb Meir Simha. He resolute-ly rejected every entreaty to leave the dangerous place, for the time beingat least, saying, “as long as nine Jews remain in the city I shall be thetenth for a minyan (prayer quorum).” Together with his flock he underwentall the suffering they experienced, but stayed where he was throughout theWar as Rabbi of the Community and spiritual guide and Father of hisCongregation.The Rabbis of the CityDvinsk was privileged to have some of the most outstanding rabbinicalauthorities of the past century and a half occupying its rabbinical seats.Among those who made the name of Dvinsk famous in the Jewish worldwere, more particularly, three. The first of these was Reb Reuvele Dina-burger, one of the greatest scholars and Jewish legal authorities of moderntimes, whose pupil was the late Rabbi Abraham Isaac Kook of blessedand saintly memory. (Rabbi Kook himself came from Grivo, which lieson the other bank of the River Dvina.) The other two outstanding author-ities were Rabbi Meir Simha Hacohen and Rabbi Joseph Rosen, the Gaonof Rogachov, who were the pride of the city and of learned Jewry every-where. They helped to spread the name of Dvinsk far and wide throughoutObservant Jewry.Rabbi Meir Simha served as rabbi for 39 consecutive years, while the265The Jews in LatviaGaon of Rogatchov also occupied a rabbinical seat there for half a century.There was never any dispute in Dvinsk between Hassidim and Mitnagdim;the only difference lying in a few synagogue usages and details of prayersrecited by the respective groups. They lived together without any barriersbetween them. The Gaon Rabbi Meir Simha was the rabbi of the Mitnag-dim, while Rabbi Joseph Rosen the Gaon of Rogatchov was the rabbi ofthe Hassidim. They were vastly different in their temperaments, way ofliving and spiritual worlds, but they were very close in their great scholar-ship and spiritual authority.Rabbi Meir Simha was regally tall and erect, honoured and respectedby all who saw him. He was friendly, easy-going, spoke carefully and waswelcomed and venerated by all, including every non-Jewish community inthe city without exception. The latter believed that the Rabbi had somemagical powers, I remember a flood when the Dvina overflowed its banksand threatened to flood the city. Gentiles and Jews alike swore by all thatwas holy to them that they saw Reb Meir Simha mount the embankment,gaze at the swirling waters for a moment, murmur something very quietlyand — the waters withdrew and the danger passed.He had been a merchant in his youth, and so he knew how to smoothedifferences over since he was familiar with the problems of daily life.On the other hand the spiritual leader of the Hassidim, the Gaon ofRogachov, was short and nimble with a fine ascetic face and a head coveredwith white curls down to his shoulders, who left an unforgettable impressionon all who saw him. He remained secluded and all his activities had some-thing in common with his works, as represented by the best known one,“Tsafenat Paaneah” (Decipherer of Hidden Things). The great Hebrewpoet Hayyim Nahman Bialik spent some time with him and said later:“From the brain of the Rogachover it would be possible to make twoEinsteins. There is an incomparable uniqueness about him and he mustbe regarded as a great spiritual asset of the Jewish People. If his eruditionand knowledge could be systematically and scientifically exploited our cul-ture would enriched by dozens of valuable creative works. If it were pos-sible to draw upon the Talmudical resources in his brain it would be pos-sible to create a comprehensive culture.”That was what Bialik said after one hour’s conversation. Indeed, Dvinskwas privileged to have great scholars of the age dwelling in its midst.The Synagogues of the CityThe Jews of Dvinsk were not extremists in their faith and religiouspractice like certain sections of Polish Jewry, and were most assuredly266Towns & Peopleworlds apart from such groups as those of Mea Shearim in Jerusalem. Atthe same time most of them were traditionalists and observantly fulfilledcommandments without wearing unusual clothing. They did not wear eitherShtreimel (fur head-pieces) or Kapote (long robes), although synagoguesand prayer-groups were plentiful and were always full of persons recitingtheir prayers. The “Chor-Shul” in Petrograd Street in the centre of thecity was a magnificent lofty building with a splendid internal structure. Itattracted many people who wished to hear the Cantor and the fine choir.This was the centre for the more “secularist” believers.If a famous cantor came to Dvinsk he would be heard in the Chor-Shul, where he would have to pass the exacting standards of the localexperts. On the other hand the “Planover Minyan” (Planov Quorum) wherethe Rogatchover Gaon prayed, attracted scores and hundreds of persons,who repeated their prayers in rotation every day from before dawn untilnoon. The building was always full of those who prayed, one prayer quorumending and another beginning.Similarly the “Koholisher Bet-Hamidrash” (The Congregational Houseof Study) was the spot where Reb Meir Simha chose to pray. Here every-thing was quiet and reserved. There were fewer people and prayers weremore restrained. Rabbi Meir Simha prayed lengthily, and the congregationwould wait with awe and respect until he completed the “Eighteen Bless-ings” and took the traditional three steps backward; entirely unlike theRogachover Gaon who would be the first to complete his prayers, andwould then hasten back to the Torah on which he meditated by day andnight.Those were the most aristocratic centres of prayer in the city. In additionthere were dozens of prayer groups, such as that of the Butchers, theTailors’ Synagogue, the Dyers’ Minyan, the Green Synagogue, etc., etc.,all of them crowded day by day. At the High Holidays the voices wouldburst forth, so that in the words of the Bible the people could see them;and the whole city was transformed into one vast prayer bursting forthfrom the heart and sweeping everything away in tears. Such was Dvinsk,the City and Mother in Israel, on weekdays and on festivals.Dvinsk also had a Yeshiva (Talmudical Academy) where about ahundred lads and young men studied by day and night. They had manykeen minds among them. The Yeshiva was headed by “Der Kovner” (TheMan from Kovno), a fine-featured scholar who won the hearts of his stu-dents. The Yeshiva bore the name of the wealthy philanthropist Reb SotseHorvitch, who maintained it at his own expense.267The Jews in LatviaThe Jewish Community of Dvinsk preserved Jewish traditions in a mosthonourable fashion. The “apikorsim” (unbelievers) and the observant treatedone another with mutual respect. For Dvinsk was also a cradle of revolu-tionaries, of the Bund and the Left-wing Zionist Movements. They all livedtogether with mutual tolerance, never going beyond the proper bounds orengaging in personal attacks even during elections. On this the city prideditself.The Parties in DvinskMost of the population were poor people, making their living by the toilof their hands and earning little. Economically speaking, lower standardsof living were to be found only in Vilna. Yet despite their poverty, theordinary Jews of Dvinsk were concerned with everything affecting the fateof Jewry and its struggle for a better future and a more just society. Theytherefore took an active part in any struggle against the Tsarist regimewhich oppressed and discriminated against the Jews. For 35% of the Jewsof the city were hired workers, clerks or craftsmen, while the others wereartisans whose living depended on the grace of Heaven. Well-to-do persons,even by local standards, were few and far between. The majority lived onscanty bread and water.So it was not surprising that the population tended to support everymanifestation that might help to break the yoke of servitude, and all eyeswere turned towards any slight improvement. Thus we find that as early asthe year 1880, when Pogroms began in Tsarist Russia with the approvalof the authorities, Jewish national groups organised for active resistance.At about the same time the Hovevei Zion organised in town, and Societieswere established bearing the name of Moses Montefiore, Zionist Unity,Young Israel, Liberty, Zionist Socialists, Revival, “Vozrozhdenie”, all ofthem with the same ultimate purpose : War against the oppressors andliberation from the obscurantist regime.In 1900 the first Poalei Zion Group was established in the City, andunder the influence of Ber Borochow and Shimoni (Dabin) they officiallyorganised themselves as a party about a year later. At the Poalei ZionConvention held in Vilna during 1903, the Dvinsk Group headed by AlterYaffe and Zalman Abramson presented a programme clearly defining thenecessity for the Class war and Socialism as foundations of the Movement.When Pogroms broke out in 1905, after the collapse of the revoltagainst the regime, an alliance was established in October and a Self-DefenceMovement was established for active defence measures. The parties that268Towns & Peopleparticipated included the Bund, the Zionist Socialists, the Seimovtsi, andthe Poalei Zion. In that year the Poalei Zion made its way into the TradeUnion Movement which had previously been monopolised by the Bund,and played an active part in the struggle for improved working conditionsas well as the political demands from the authorities.The repression that followed the Disturbances of 1905 severely affectedthe organisers, and the Movement was considerably weakened until theoutbreak of the First World War. Only in 1914 did it recover, and revivedfor a little while in the days of Kerensky after the Russian Revolution ofFebruary 1917.The first Commissar of the City was Haver Rosenbaum, Chairmanof the Zeirei Zion, thanks to whom young men walked about freely oncurfew nights with the cards of the Watch Committee, a Militia which wasorganised at short notice.The Dvinsk Zionists also made their mark in the General Zionist Move-ment. Moshe Berlin represented the Hovevei Zion of Dvinsk at the First(1890) Conference of the Odessa Committee, which the Russian Govern-ment had officially recognised as representing the Hovevei Zion Movement.Dvinsk was represented at the First Zionist Congress by S. J. Sachs. Whenthe Zionist Youth Movement first began to flourish, Dvinsk was the firstcity in which young people organised.In 1903 the first group of members of the Labour Zionist Movementproceeded to Eretz Israel. Among them was Sarah Malkin who becameproverbial as a Halutza, and was esteemed and revered by all. Otherswere Rachel Gutman, Antin, Tehia Lieberson, Eliezer Zadikoff and Ba-ruch Kastral. These were the first of all the Dvinsk halutzim who are nowto be found in kibbutzim, moshavim and settlements wherever there havebeen upbuilding or defence activities, and some of whom are now to befound in the High Command of the Israel Defence Forces. They preparedthe way, serving as a light-house to all who followed in their footsteps.Dvinsk was one of the strongholds of the Bund, being largely “pro-letarian” with a bitterly poor population. By the standards of those days,it also had no small number of industrial workers in the few factories ofthe city; and also in the clothing industry, the bristle manufacture, matchmanufacture and general unskilled “Lumpenproletariat”. All these werenaturally suitable human material for the Bund, which based its entireexistence and ideology on the demand that the Jews should stay wherethey were in the Diaspora, and called only for cultural autonomy whileremaining an integral part of the Social Democrat Movement except in-269The Jews in Latviasofar as certain specific Jewish interests were concerned. As early as 1872there was already a Revolutionary Group in the city, headed by the JewElijah Snapp and — an exceedingly unexpected participant — the RussianReliaiev, who was a student at the Seminary for Priests. In 1876 almostall the group were arrested and their Movement was liquidated. Theywere known as the “Social Revolutionary” Society. A Jewish Section of theillegal Social Revolutionary Party was established in the same year.During the years 1893-97 strikes for better working conditions and alsofor political improvement broke out from time to time. In the year 1896the workers of Dvinsk openly celebrated the 1st of May in the streets. Theindependent efforts made under the leadership of Mania Wilbuschevitch-Shohat, who left the Bund and was bedazzled by Zubatov, the Head ofthe Secret Police, to establish a group of their own in Dvinsk proved fruit-less. This attempt at an independent Movement was misled by Zubatovand caused considerable trouble to the organised workers until it was provedbeyond any doubt that Zubatov was exploiting Mania Wilbuschevitch’s in-nocence in a shameful fashion. When the trick was discovered, the Move-ment vanished from the ken of Jewish workers.The Dvinsk workers were represented at the Bund Convention inBialystok by their representative Kaplinsky. In 1899 about 300 Jewishworkers of the city celebrated the 1st of May, while in 1903 about 700demonstrated. During the February 1905 Demonstration there was a con-flict with the police, in the course of which 30 people were wounded andkilled. A memorial was erected to them in 1925, and Bund members usedto gather there in large numbers on certain occasions during the year.The local Jews were very much affected by the trial of Mendel Beilissin 1913; and the name of Gruzenberg, the Jewish lawyer who defended him,never left their lips. Prayers were said in the synagogues for the disproofof the Blood Libel, and Dvinsk Jews of the city held a Protest Meetingagainst the course of the trial. In 1915 the Bund organised another protestagainst the War. All who attended were arrested and imprisoned.When the First World War broke out in August 1914 it swept theinhabitants away, and scattered them like chaff before the wind. The citywas almost evacuated. Only when the War was over did the former inha-bitants slowly begin to return; and Dvinsk revived fully with the establish-ment of the Independent State of Latvia, though two years passed beforeit became part of that State. Only in January 1920 was it included withinLatvia as the chief city of the Latgale District.Yet although Dvinsk renewed her youth, she could not compare with270Towns & Peoplebygone days. Of the 60,000 who had formerly lived there only 12,000Jews were left. They returned as broken refuges to a ruined city, but thenswiftly began to re-establish their communal life on the old foundations.They were aided by the extensive autonomy granted to the minorities bythe State of Latvia and confirmed by the Geneva Convention. But at lastthe whole of their life was destroyed by the Nazis, and Jewish Dvinskvanished from the Jewish map.The Jews of Dvinsk regarded themselves as “Litvaks” (Lithuanians)in all respects, and were imbued with the dedication to study and Jewishscholarship which marked the Jewish community of the neighbouringcountry. They spoke to one another in the literary Yiddish of Vilna. Theyprided themselves on their rich and idiomatic language which they masteredfully and wrote well, besides using it for educating their children in every-day life. With good reason P. Latzky, a Member of the National Assemblyof Latvia, based himself on Jewish Dvinsk when he insisted that Yiddishmust be recognised as an official language together with • Latvian. “Who-ever wishes to rule over Dvinsk”, said he, “must master the language ofthe Jews, which is Yiddish.” And indeed, among the non-Jews of the citythere were a large number who spoke a pure Lithuanian Yiddish as wellas any of the local Jews. The latter had the lion’s share in the developmentof the city, and all who came there could sense the singular and predomi-nant Jewish atmosphere.Although the Jews had been 14% of the population in their prime,and were only 5% when their numbers fell, their influence on every branchof economic and public life was most decisive. As already remarked, thiswas due to the mixed population of Poles, Lithuanians, Russians, Ukrai-nians etc., among whom they constituted the largest single minority.Three of the most important posts at the Municipality were held byJews. These were: Finance held by Glinternik the representative of theGeneral Zionists; Administration, held by Ravdin, formerly an active mem-ber of the Russian Social Revolutionary Party and subsequently the repre-sentative of the Jewish Craftsmen; and Economics, in charge of Meksinof the Bund. The Municipality had its representatives of the Bund, theGeneral Zionists, Zeirei Zion, Z.S., Jewish Householders and Craftsmen.(The Mizrahi was not properly organised and appeared only for electionsto the Seim.)With the establishment of the Latvian Republic after the First WorldWar, the following became the major spokesmen for the various politicalcurrents : Dr. Noah Maisel and Isaac Levin-Shatzkes for the Bund; Glin-271The Jews in Latviaternik and Storch for the General Zionists; Dr. Gordin and Juris for theZeirei Zion; Moshe Bliach (Amir) and Dr. Sand for the Z.S. Representativeof the Merchants were the Brothers Kopolovsky and Bolivka. Spokesmenfor the Householders were the Brothers Gurevitch and Eidelstein, whilethe spokesman of the Craftsmen was Ravdin. These were the outstandingfigures of the Jewish community during the period of Latvian Indepen-dence, until the Right-wing coup d'etat under Ulmanis in 1934.These parties all came to life under the liberal Constitution of Inde-pendent Latvia, and displayed considerable activity in every field, so thatDvinsk once again became a centre of lively social activity, although on afar smaller scale than before the First World War. The establishment ofparties led to the foundation of their respective Youth Movements. TheBund set up its own Scout Movement within the Sports Organisation ofthe Social Democratic Party. At the same time the various Halutz YouthMovements also developed rapidly. Gordonia came into being alongsidethe Zeirei Zion. The Z.S. maintained its Borochow Youth, the first branchof which was established here. The Shomer Hatzair Netsah also came intobeing. The Borochow Youth established a Sports Section which won overthe Nationalist Youth and, after an ideological struggle, was recognisedas part of the country’s Labour Sports Movement by the Social Democrats.The Z.S. also penetrated the Bund strongholds, finding its way into themanagement of the General Sick Fund, Labour Exchange and Trade UnionOrganisation. The Borochow Youth and Z.S. were recognised as a Move-ment in good standing by the Social Democrats, in spite of Bund opposition.As a result the Z.S. was represented at the management of the Sick Fundby Moshe Amir, and by Zahodin and Hayat in the Trade Unions. TheZ.S. and Borochow Youth participated in the First of May celebrations,when the Zionist flag headed the processions together with the Red Flag.Speakers on behalf of the Social Democrats and Bund were joined by aspeaker on behalf of the Labour Zionist Movement, namely Haver MosheAmir. The Labour Zionist camp was officially recognised, and its influencewas felt everywhere.Cultural LifeFollowing the establishment of the State of Latvia, there was a tremen-dous upsurge of Jewish cultural life. Six elementary schools were establishedin Dvinsk, two in Yiddish, two in Hebrew, one in Russian and one byJewish religious circles. There was a pre-Gymnasium conducted in Russian,a Municipal Secondary School where tuition gradually shifted from Rus-272Towns & Peoplesian to Hebrew, an Evening Gymnasium in Yiddish, and a VocationalTraining School established by the ORT. Dozens of courses commencedfor Hebrew and Literature, and there were countless lectures and sym-posiums. Jewish Dvinsk strode ahead with raised head, using its own lan-guages and developing its own culture.The Jewish CommunityBefore the First World War the Jewish community had maintained itsown traditional charitable institutions such as: The Linat Hatsedek Ma-ternity Society; The Bikkur Holim Health Service for visiting and nursingthe sick; the Passover Flour Fund for providing secret aid to those whoneeded it at the time of the Festival. The community also had its ownfinancial institutions in the form of Gemilut Hassadim Free Loan Funds.Dvinsk Jewry fulfilled all commandments calling for the support of brethrenin distress; but all this was primarily philanthropic and was based on goodwill and voluntary contributions.When it became part of Latvia the Jewish Community developed aremarkably well-organised life. It held democratic elections in which allpublic groups participated. An administration was elected and elected bodieswere established to manage and supervise it. A well-stocked library wasset up, a Pharmacy and an Old Age Home. Thousands of needy personsreceived support for Passover and other help without publicity. Communalproperty included the Municipal Jewish Hospital. The Community Buildingwas a spacious edifice in the Miasnitska Street. The Community also hadland outside the city, and leased land and buildings at a nominal rent tothe Hehalutz for the establishment of a Hachshara Centre, where youngpeople received their training for the Land of Israel. Its first head was Ad-vocate Minkovitch, who afterwards proceeded to Eretz Israel and endedhis days in Jerusalem. He was followed by Advocate Zvi. Debates wereheld, resolutions were passed, and the Dvinsk Community served as amodel displaying the effective unity of all the various groups and sections,based on mutual respect and democratic processes in the fullest senseof the word.Trade and IndustryThere were very few really wealthy people. The most outstanding in-dustrialists were: Friedland, Luria, the Horvitch Family, the Sachs Family,Griliches and the Wittenbergs. These dominated the leather trades, beermanufacture, saw-mills, match manufacture and soap making. The out-273The Jews in Latviastanding merchants were: Griliches, Bolivka, Kopolovsky Brothers, Grein,etc. The overwhelming majority of the merchants were small shop-keepers.In the workshops the owners were also usually the whole working staff,with the possible exception of one or two young assistants. These filledevery comer as carpenters, tailors, shoemakers, hat-makers and all theother kinds of craftsmen who made up the great majority of the populationin Jewish towns: according to the Talmudic principle: “Go and make aliving from one another...”Naturally the largest number of all were the small shop-keepers, whobought and sold whatever came their way. A few of them succeeded andwere regarded as having climbed the economic ladder. Yet with all theliberality of Latvian democracy, and even in the palmy days when theSocial Democrats held office and the Latvians had only just been liberatedfrom their conquerors and for the first time enjoyed independence, theGovernment and State made use of a tacit taboo as far as Jewish partici-pation was concerned.In the whole of Latvia there were only 21 Jewish civil servants in 1925out of a total af 5291 Government officials, i.e., 0.4%. This when Jewswere 5% of the population. There was one single Jewish policeman in Riga,and people ran to look at him when he passed through the city; whereasthere were 4316 policemen in the country. There was not a single Jew inthe Courts, which employed 1682 officials. In the Posts there were 2 Jewsin all, and 33 in the Railway Service. All in all. Democratic Latvia employed200 Jews out of the 100,000 Jewish citizens. This doctrine of “excludingthe Jews” who played no small part in establishing, shaping and developingthe laws of the country and gaining it international recognition, was allthe recompense obtained by Latvian Jewry at the best of times.So it is not surprising that in Dvinsk there were not even a dozenJews in the Government service through which the Jews received serviceas citizens. There were subsidies to institutions, and the Education Systemhad a special Jewish Department. But Jews could only serve one anotherand not the general population.Now that Dvinsk is part of Soviet Russia it has a handful of Jews, themajority of whom did not originate there but proceded to the city fromother parts of Russia. The surviving members of the original communitywere almost all exterminated. In the letters of the isolated survivors to theirkinsfolk they still write: “Dvinsk is without Jews. It is indescribable! Onthe pavements under our feet we keep on treading on gravestones with in274Towns & Peoplepart obliterated Hebrew inscriptions that bear witness to the place wherethe Jews of Dvinsk were to be found.”On either side of the city, where local Jews used to spend their sum-mers in their "Dachas” (summer homes) with fresh green trees all round,now live Latvians who murdered them and also inherited; in Pogoliankaand Strop where they buried the Jews of Dvinsk who were massacred intheir mases. The Red Flag rises over the city that grew red with Jewishblood and there is no memory or tombstone for them on earth. We whoremain are the living memorial, we the children and grandchildren of thosewho were slain. It is our task to engrave their likeness on our hearts, totell our children and children’s children of the magnificent community, ofthe Dvinsk that was, yet is no longer; to establish living institutions, toerect memorials in stone, to publish books that leave a memorial for cominggenerations. That is our sacred duty, and this account is one of the waysof expressing the need to immortalize Jewish Dvinsk.275Dr. Shaul LipschltzJEWISH COMMUNITIES IN KURLANDIn memory of my native town WindauJEWS settled in Kurland earlier than in other parts of Latvia.According to the historian Reuven Wunderbar, Jewish settlement therebegan in the 16th century. The first-comers originated from East Prussia.They came by sea as merchants, and eventually established their home inHasenpot and Pilten. The Bishop of Pilten encouraged Jews to stay, realizingthe usefulness of their trading between Prussia and his district. The greaterpart of Jewish immigration into Kurland, however, came across the southernborder, namely from Lithuania.Kurland was incorporated into the Russian Empire in 1795. Its Jewishpopulation at that time amounted to less than 5000 souls. It is interestingto note that only 20% lived in towns, while 80% found a livelihood in thecountryside, on the large estates of the German Barons, as petty artisans,innkeepers, land tenants and peddlars. In 1850, fifty-five years later, theJewish population in Kurland had grown to 22,000; and by the end of thecentury, in 1897, it reached the impressive number of 51,000.Economic Developments at the End of the 19th CenturyDuring the second half of the 19th century important developments tookplace in Russia’s foreign trade, its export being channelled to a great extentthrough the Baltic sea ports of Riga, Libau and Windau. Two importantrailway lines were laid for the export of Russian grain through the twolatter ports: The Romni-Libau Line and the Rybinsk-Windau Line. Thesetwo ports had the advantage over Riga of being open for shipping all theyear round, whereas the big port of Riga was closed during the wintermonths because of massive ice. To store the grain at the exit ports, hugesilos were built with modern facilities for speedy loading into vessels. Libauhad a further economic asset, namely a naval port where part of the RussianBaltic fleet was stationed.These economic changes had a great impact on the port cities, whichprospered and grew fast. However, inland towns like Goldingen, Talsen,Sasmaken, Zabeln, and others had only a small share in the economic ex-pansion and remained almost untouched in their idyllic quaintness. Zabeln,Kandau, Talsen and their surroundings were called the “Swizerland ofKurland” for their romantic beauty. (The name Talsen is supposed to be276Towns & Peoplea combination of the German words “Tal” and “See”, meaning “valley”and “lake”.) Goldingen on the shore of the Venta river, with its waterfall,its wonderful big park in the heart of the town, its classic German gym-nasium and entirely German atmosphere, had a particularly provincialcharacter, with practically no change for generations in spite of its in-dustries : A match factory (Hirschmann), a needle factory, and a flour-mill, all belonging to Jews.Mitau was the seat of the central government administration, where theGovernor of Kurland resided. Tukkum had the advantage of two railwaylines meeting there; while Hasenpot, for example, enjoyed its position onthe crossroads from Goldingen to Libau, with which there was a narrow -guage railroad from Hasenpot.Cultured Influences from East and WestKurland was not part of the Pale of Settlement (the part of Russiawhere Jews were permitted to live), and only those who were born therehad the right of residence. In spite of restrictions, however, the influx ofJews from other parts of Russia, and in the first place from Lithuania, wasvery considerable throughout the 19th century. There had always beenneighbourly ties of all kinds between Kurland and the adjacent sections ofLithuania. There were no Yeshivot (Talmudical academies) in Kurland. Forthis reason well-to-do Jews in Kurland sent their sons to study at the famousYeshivot of Volozhin, Slobodka, Telsh, Mir, and others. They also choselearned young Yeshiva students as husbands for their daughters. Eventuallythese students became rabbis or teachers, who were badly needed in Kur-land. Most of the rabbis in Kurland who established a succession of re-nowned rabbinical families originated in Lithuania. To mention only a few:The Rabbis Eliasberg (Bausk), Samunoff (Windau, Mitau), Lichtenstein(Tukkum) and Nurock (Mitau, Libau). Rabbi Abraham Yitzhak HacohenKook resided in Bausk, and later became Chief Rabbi of Israel. Thus Li-thuania had a considerable share in Jewish religious education and spiritualleadership in Kurland.However, winds of knowledge and education also blew from the West.Famous educators came to Kurland from Germany. Thus David Fried-lander, a pupil of Moses Mendelssohn, and Professor Marcus Hertz ofBerlin, both resided in Mitau for several years. The Emancipation and theensuing urge for contemporary education in neighbouring Germany did notpass without influencing the Jews in Kurland who, in fact, were quite per-ceptive to Western culture, their language being German (Kurisches Deutsch),277The Jews in Latviaeven if they also spoke Yiddish. Indeed, long before Friedlander and Hertzcame to Kurland, the German cultural influence on the Jewish populationthere was paramount. The historian Wunderbar remarks in his book, whichappeared in 1853 : “As to their (the Jews of Kurland’s) education, it ismost satisfactory. Even the poor do their utmost to give their children afair education, and among the adults there are practically none who do notcommand the German language.”As it happened, there was no competition between East and West inguiding the Jews of Kurland. On the contrary, both complemented eachother. Where the East took the lead in Jewish religious education, the Westcared for the secular aspects.All these developments and currents created the unique type of theKurland Jew, often named “Kurischer” by his brethren from other partsof Latvia. It meant the Jew from the province, straightforward, not toosmart, observant but not very learned, a person with a distinctly Germanbackground who at the same time was responsive to cultural and spiritualinfluences from the Russian provinces.EmigrationThe favourable economic developments during the second half of the19th and the beginning of the 20th century were a blessing to the Jewishpopulation in Kurland. However, not all parts of the country enjoyed theeconomic upsurge to the same degree. As already mentioned, the sea-portcities of Libau and Windau were prospering. They attracted Jews fromneighbouring communities. Libau gained new residents from Grobin, Ha-senpoth and Goldingen; Windau from Pilten (virtually the entire Jewishpopulation gradually moved to Windau), Zabeln, Talsen, Sasmaken andKandau. However, Libau and Windau, and even the big city of Riga, wereunable to absorb all those who struggled for a livelihood.With the approach of the 20th century, emigration to the United Statesof America set in, expanding considerably with the terror and persecutionfollowing the abortive revolution of 1905, and reaching South Africa andEngland. In this context it may be of interest to mention a historical episodewhich took place 60-65 years earlier, namely in the year 1840, when 341Jewish families, consisting of 2530 souls, emigrated to the south of Russia(Kherson Gubemiya) to work on the land there. The emigrants were mainlyfrom Mitau, Bausk, Hasenpoth and Goldingen, the communities whichsuffered most from lack of gainful occupation. This enterprise was spon-sored by the Russian Government, but also by some Jewish leaders and278Towns & Peopleeducators from Germany like Dr. Max Lilienthal, who called for the pro-ductivisation of the Jewish masses.The Revolution of 1905In spite of the fact that Kurland scarcely had an organized labour forceamong its Jewish population, Jewish youth took an active part in the risingagainst the Russian Government in 1905. They paid a high price for theirparticipation, when the reaction set in and the Revolution was smashedwith an iron fist. To liquidate the revolting Latvian peasants who rebelledagainst their landlords the German barons, chasing them out of their estatesand setting their mansions on fire, the Russian Government sent a punitivetask force consisting of Cossack and dragoon detachments to Kurland,Latvian peasants in hundreds were executed on the spot, while Jewish re-volutionaries — real or suspect — were not spared either. In Windau twoJews, Meir Wulfson and young Behrman, were shot by the Russians. Fear-ing pogroms, Jews and Latvians organized a common self-defence whichdid not abstain from attacking the government forces wherever possible.High government officials representative of the Tsarist regime wereassassinated. On a Saturday morning the District Commissioner, ColonelBrown, was* shot dead in Windau on the way to his office. The assailantwas never identified. In Tukkum, the town commandant and 17 dragoonswere killed by revolutionaries; which, of course, led to condign punishmenton the part of the authorities. An entire section of Tukkum was wiped out,including several Jewish families. Shaul Berman and Jacob Blumenthal fromTukkum were sentenced to death for taking part in the rising, but managedto escape before it was too late. Israel Friedman of Bausk, a locksmith,was accused of making arms for the self-defence and was executed.The authorities did not abstain from taking hostages either. In Tukkumtwo Jewish notables, Gerschon Paul Berner and Leonard Gerson, were heldas hostages and released only after payment of a heavy fine. (These detailshave been told by Dr. Meir Berner, a native of Tukkum now residing inIsrael.)Talsen suffered more than any other town in Kurland. The Russiandragoons surrounded the town and fired indiscriminately, setting it on fire.Half of the place went up in flames. There were several Jewish casualties,among them a young man by the name of Ludwig Thalberg.World War 1 and the Expulsion of April 1915World War I broke out in August 1914, and had an immediate effecton life in Kurland. The German border was not far away, and in spite of279The Jews in Latviainitial victories of the Russian army in East Prussia, the dangers of hostilitiesspreading to Kurland and of a possible German occupation were imminent.The Autumn and Winter passed without spectacular changes, exceptfor a standstill in many fields of the economy. The snow of the first winterhad hardly melted away, however, when a strong German offensive began,endangering the right wing of the Russian front. The Russian Army leaders,seeking excuses for their defeats, had the answer ready: The Jewish popu-lation was in sympathy with Germany, and was spying for the Germans,They therefore demanded that Jews be removed at least 50 kms. fromthe front.The Commander-in-Chief of the Russian Army, Nikolai Nikolaevitch,an uncle of the Czar, Nikolai II, decreed on April 28, 1915 that the entireJewish population of Kurland should be expelled within twenty-four hours.The confusion, anxiety and panic of the Jews on that memorable day ofApril 28, 1915 can hardly be described. Jewish leaders appealed to theauthorities, but all they could achieve was a postponement of several days.Five provinces (Guberni) in the heart of Russia were designated for theresettlement of the expelled Jews; namely Mogiliov, Chernigov, Poltava,Voronezh and Yekaterinoslav. The greater part of the Jewish communityof Windau chose the town of Orsha in the Mogiliov district.Why Orsha of all places? The writer recollects exactly how the choicewas made. To a certain extent, he was responsible for the selection. Whenthe five Guberni were announced, my sister and I, the best-educated mem-bers of the family, opened an Atlas to see where those five Guberni weresituated. We found that the least distant was the Mogiliov Guberni, and thefirst town to be reached on the way would be Orsha. Father was enlightenedon the geographical situation, and accepted our suggestion. When neigh-bours, relatives and friends came in to ask the fateful question: “Wheredo we go” ?, we replied “Orsha”, stressing its geagraphical advantage, andeverybody found our choice reasonable enough. There was actually noreason whatsoever to choose Orsha, other than its being the least distantpoint from Kurland. Apparently the choice was dictated by the secret hopeof the expelled that they would be able to return to their homes before long.The brutal decree struck the Jews of Kurland as an overwhelmingblow. It meant leaving everything behind, their homes, businesses, and pro-perties, and setting out on an adventurous journey to an unknown Russianland without even knowing the Russian language. At that time families wereblessed with plenty of children. The writer belonged to a family of sevenchildren, aged from 4 to 18. The concern and worry grew even greater280Towns & Peoplewhen it was announced that there would be no accommodation in passengertrains, but special freight cars (cattle trucks) would be provided and onlythe most necessary personal belongings could be taken along.The day when several hundred families gathered at the railway stationof Windau, to entrain in the long row of cattle-trucks prepared for thefantastic journey into the unknown, will not be forgotten by those whoparticipated in the nightmarish adventure. The platform was crowded withmen, women and children of all ages, old, young, fit and sick, all sittingon their bundles, the miserable remains of their households, now the onlyproperty left to them; the women weeping, some of the men uttering prayers.When the doors of the cattle-trucks were opened the people started crawlingin, stowing their bundles, suitcases, and prams at the sides of the trucks.It took several hours until everybody was settled somehow, — relatives,neighbours and friends together as far as possible. By the time the doorswere shut and the long, sad freight train left the station in the direction ofRiga darkness had fallen. Most of the people fell asleep on the floor atonce, resting their tired and heavy heads on their bundles, their childrennext to them. There were probably many heads of families who could notfind sleep at all, their minds turning over the fateful question: What werethey to expect over there ? How would they make a living, where wouldthey house their families ?Next morning the train arrived in Riga, after several stops during thenight. In Riga, at the freight yard where freight trains normally stop, a sur-prise was in store. A delegation of Riga Jews came to make us welcomeand put heart into us, greeting us with fresh rolls, cheese, sausage, tea,sweets for the children, and a good supply of food for the rest of our jour-ney. The delegation also brought the gratifying message that a public com-mittee consisting of prominent Jewish leaders (Lazar Ettingen, MordechaiNurock, Professor Paul Mintz, Mendel Luloff and others) had been formedto provide help for the suffering Jews of Kurland. Similar committees hadimmediately been organized in other towns with a Jewish population. Onour long journey we were met in Dvinsk, Polotsk, and Vitebsk in the samefriendly and hospitable manner as in Riga.We arrived in Orsha on a Saturday morning before dawn, after a jour-ney of almost a whole week. Here in Orsha, a town of 50,000 Jews (only5000 non-Jews) a further surprise awaited us. We were literally carriedout of the cars on the hands of those who came to greet us. Jewish menand women, mostly students, accompanied us into the station hall wherelong tables had been set with tea and fresh food. We were not allowed to281The Jews in Latviacarry our bundles. That was done by the students themselves. We weretheir guests, and under their protection and care. This remarkable devotionand brotherly love on the part of Russian Jews was manifested not onlyin Orsha but in all places where the expelled Jews chose to settle. RussianJewry proved to be a solid and dependable protector of the poor Jewsfrom Kurland, who had suddenly become homeless through no fault oftheir own.Outside the station hall a new day was coming to life, a lovely sunnyearly summer day. The newcomers were now carried to town in all sortsof carriages and settled temporarily in schools, synagogues, and privatehomes. Our family was split. The five younger children remained with ourparents in a schoolhouse, the two older ones were accommodated in thehouse of a wealthy farmer outside Orsha, who came to the railway stationto share in the reception of the newcomers and give a hand. The Jewsof Orsha spared no effort to give every possible assistance to the “refugees”,as we were misleadingly described. We were not refugees. We did not runaway from our homes, but were expelled by order of the military authorities.Help was extended in a public organized way, and very frequently ina private manner. It soon became plain that we were not the only Jewswho needed help. Many more “refugees” landed in Orsha and became theresponsibility of the local Jewish community.Two years later, when the German armies were approaching the DnieperLine, the good Jews of Orsha became refugees themselves. Some of themfound shelter in Riga, which was still in Russian hands. This was unfor-tunately the fate of our benefactor farmer, his wife and his two children.An irony of fate indeed, but it gave my parents, who in the meantime hadmanaged to return to Riga, a welcome though sad opportunity to recipro-cate and repay the kindness and hospitality they themselves had enjoyeda few years earlier.The expulsion of Jews from Kurland had far-reaching consequences.Many perished in Russia. Others remained there for good. Few returnedto their homes. It is estimated that of the 40,000 people expelled in 1915,only 16,000—17,000 re-settled in the old places. It can be said withoutexaggeration that the expulsion of 1915 was a major tragedy in the historyof the Jewish community of Kurland.Jewish Duma Members from KurlandThe abortive Russian revolution of 1905 was not entirely in vain. Itproduced the so-called constitutional regime and its parliamentary ex-282Towns <& Peoplepression, the Duma. There were four Dumas in all. The first was elected in1906 and included 12 Jewish members from the whole of Russia. Kurlandelected Dr. Nissan Katzenelson of Libau, an outstanding Zionist leader.This Duma had a very short life of about three months only. Its com-position was not to the taste of the Russian Government, which did nothesitate to dissolve it. The progressive members, among them the Jewishrepresentatives, protested against this action of the Government and signedthe famous “Vyborg Declaration”. All the protesters, among them Dr.Katzenelson, were imprisoned for three months and disqualified from servingas members of the next Duma.The Second Duma began its sessions in February 1907, but as it appear-ed to be even more leftist than the first it was dismissed in June 1907.To the Second Duma only three Jewish members were elected, among thema representative from Kurland; namely Jacob Shapiro of Windau, a timberexporter and a well-educated man of liberal views, who was highly esteemedby the community. The Third Duma (1907-1912) saw only 2 Jewish re-presentatives from the whole of Russian, one of them again a representativefrom Kurland — Dr. Lazar Nisselovitch, a lawyer, a native of Bausk. Heengaged in very keen parliamentary activity, particularly on Jewish issues.This was not an easy task, since the third Duma was particularly reactionaryand anti-Semitic.Also in the Fourth Duma (1912-1917) Kurland had a Jewish repre-sentative, Dr. Yehezkiel Gurvitz, a physician from Jacobstadt. Althoughthe number of Jewish members was cut to a minimum of 2-3, we find arepresentative from Kurland in all four Dumas. This interesting featureis undoubtedly a great achievement on the part of the Jews of Kurland.However, it should be pointed out that this was only possible thanks topre-election agreements concluded between Jews and Latvians or Jewsand Germans. As a result of such agreements the Jews managed to get oneof the two representatives accorded to Kurland. The Duma representativesdid their share to obtain more rights for Jews in the days of Tsarist Russia.The Zionist MovementThe Jews of Kurland were in many respects a homogeneous group.For instance, with very few exceptions they were strictly traditional. Sa-turdays and holidays were observed throughout, with all shops and businessclosed, and full attendance at synagogues, kosher households, traditionalFriday evenings, and so on. There were very few fanatical members of thecommunity, and even fewer non-conformists.283The Jews in LatviaIt can be said in the same way that all Kurland Jews, with very fewexceptions, were Zionists. In the early stages of the Zionist Movementthe participation of Jews from Kurland was particularly evident. In 1885a “Hovevei Zion” Organization was founded in Libau by Nissan Smolit-zinsky, with some 300 registered members. Kurland dispatched three dele-gates to the Hovevei Zion Convention in Druskeniki in 1887. They were:Dr. Hillel Klein and Joseph Zakheim of Libau, and Rabbi Zvi Rabinovitchof Mitau. At the close of the Convention the Hovevei Zion Organizationin Libau published a declaration which was signed by well-known Rabbislike Mordechai Elias berg, Shmuel Mohilever, Naphtali Zvi Yehuda Berlinand Jacob Reines, and was distributed in the cities of Russia.In 1902 the famous all-Russian Zionist Convention in Minsk tookplace. The delegate from Kurland (Mitau) was Rabbi Mordechai Nurockwho eventually published a report on this Convention in the form of abook. According to his report there were 22 Zionist organizations in Kur-land in 1902. Dr. Nissan Katzenelson of Libau took part in the ThirdZionist Congress at Basle. He was elected to the Directorate of the JewishColonial Trust. He was a close friend of Dr. Theodore Herzl, who invitedhim to accompany him to St. Petersburg in 1903.The Zionist idea struck deep roots among the Jews of Kurland. It wasthe only Jewish national or political movement in Kurland to speak ofbefore, and in great part after, the independence of Latvia. Thanks toZionist activities many hundred Jewish youths emigrated to Palestine aspioneers, and excaped the fate of their brethren who remained in Kurland.Today one can meet Kurlanders in kibbutzim and moshavim, also in citiesas manufacturers, businessmen. Government officials, high-ranking armyofficers, doctors, lawyers, engineers, artisans, and workers.This essay consists largely of personal reminiscences. Thus it conveysincomplete and sometimes fragmentary information on memorable events,important trends and developments. It does not pretend to be more thana modest contribution to a true portrayal of the distinguished Kurland Jewrywhich was so cruelly and inhumanly destroyed by the Nazis, and which hasperished almost completely. It is dedicated to their blessed memory, withdeep and genuine affection. Very few who can tell the story of KurlandJews are left, and it is doubtful whether more publications on their lifewill see the light. Therefore this essay is, I trust, its own justification. Itsshortcomings will, I hope, be tolerated and forgiven.284Menahem BethMEN AND DEEDSVARIOUS personalities who were active in one field or another in Latvia, orwho achieved fame beyond her borders, have been referred to in the essaysof this volume. There were certain sections, such as the account of Riga,in which the persons described constituted an inseparable part of Jewishlife. Indeed, it would have been impossible to give an account of RigaJewry without them.In other cases the city or region merely served as their place of origin;and their activities often took them far from their birthplace.We feel it necessary to include them in this volume too, in order thatLatvian Jewry should bear her outstanding sons in mind. Since there is notenough space to supply comprehensive details, the list of sources providedwill enable those interested to learn more about them.IIn a basically historical work like the present volume it is natural tobegin with the historians who dedicated themselves to the bygone days ofLatvian Jewry. The person who is rightly considered to be the first to devotehimself to this was Reuben Joseph Wunderbar (1817-1868), who was bornin Mitau.In the home of his parents, who were of restricted means, he receiveda traditional education, acquiring his secular education by himself. In 1835he passed examinations, received his Master’s Degree, began teaching inschools at Riga and worked as a translator on behalf of the Government,and served for some time as Crown Rabbi of Mitau.His publications covered a wide range of subjects: Text-books, anabbreviated version of the “Shulhan Arukh”, essays on Jewish customs, etc.Two of his works are still of value for scholars. These are: "Biblisch-Talmudische Medizin”, Riga and Leipzig, 1850-1860. As Wunderbar wasnot a physician, there is considerable significance in the estimate of Pro-fessor Joshua Leibowitz, the authority on the history of Jewish medicine,who has written: “... The book of R.J. Wunderbar is a foundation andcornerstone for all research into the history of Jewish medicine...285The Jews in LatviaThe second volume is his History of the Jews of Livonia and Kurland,“Geschichte der Juden in die Provinzen Liv- und Kurland”, Mitau, 1853.This was the first work written on Latvian Jewry and was based on originaldocuments, manuscripts and rare volumes; and it was published “in thehope that the Jews, particularly the local residents, will learn the eventsthat took place in the lives of their forefathers from this work, togetherwith their sufferings and rejoicings...”The purpose of the volume was to stress the need for closer ties betweenthe Jews and their environment and neighbours by breaking down barriers,primarily through the use of the German language, productivisation, andstressing the “benefit” that the Jews brought to the country. This of coursereflected the approach of the earlier Haskala (Enlightenment) period, ofwhich Wunderbar was an outstanding representative.The great Synagogue of Mitau contained a special tablet in his memory.Fifty-five years after the publication of Wunderbar’s work, the historianRabbi Levi Ovchinsky published his Hebrew study: “Toldot Yeshivat Ha-yehudim be-Kurland” (History of Jewish Residence in Kurland), Piotrokow1908. A second edition was published in the same place in 1911, while in1928 a third, Yiddish edition appeared in Riga with supplementary passages,under the title: “Die Geschichte fun die Idden Lettlands.”Rabbi L. Ovchinsky came from a small town in the Vilna District. Hehad literary talents, and in particular a great affection for historical studies.After moving from one place to another he was elected Rabbi of Alt-Autzin 1897. From there he went to serve as Rabbi in Mitau. He and his familymet their deaths during the Second World War, in the Holocaust.Apart from the above work he published other biographical booksentitled “Nahalat Avot” and “Hadrat Zvi”. His historical work on Kurlandis of importance not on account of the historical events recorded by theauthor which, incidentally, are not always given in consecutive fashion.Sometimes, indeed, there is no link between one section and the next sothat a blurred picture is obtained.... Yet the author won his special place among the historians of LatvianJewry thanks to the second part of the book: The history of the Rabbisand Communities of Kurland. Here he reveals his considerable talents andremarkable memory. He gives full details of each separate Community onthe basis of Pinkassim (Communal Registers and Minute Books), lists ofthe Hevrot Kadisha (Burial Societies) and other documents. He records286Towns & Peoplethe foundation and institutions of each Congregation and, above all, its per-sonalities, rabbis and wardens...However, these two historians, Wunderbar and Ovchinsky, did notpossess the full documentary basis for preparing a complete History ofLatvian Jewry. This was left to the historian Dr, Isaac Jaffe.Dr. Jaffe combined the qualities of the active communal worker andthe historical student. In 1896, after receiving his medical degree at DorpatUniversity, he began playing his part in communal life in Riga. He wasa member of the “Gentlemen’s Evenings” organised by Professor PaulMintz, a member of the Zionist Movement, a member of the ExtendedJewish Agency for the Baltic countries, and for several years headed theHealth Department of the Riga Municipality.After the rise of Independent Latvia most of the Jewish communitiesof the country organised a Convention which elected a Council with by aCentral Committee, known as the “Tse Vaad”. This was headed by Dr.Jaffe as long as it existed, and he dedicated himself to its daily activitiestogether with the Joint Distribution Committee of America, which suppliedthe resources for the rehabilitation of Latvian Jewry after the First WorldWar. Dr. Jaffe displayed his energy and initiative, particularly in organisinga network of Cooperative Banks.From 1925 onwards he headed the large Jewish “Bikkur Holim” Hos-pital in Riga. Following the Russian occupation in 1940 he was dismissed,and his subsequent fate is unknown. Dr. Jaffe was not only a physicianand a communal worker. His special position in Latvian Jewry is due evenmore to his historical work, consisting of a collection of original documentson the History of his Community which he published under the title : Re-gesten und Urkunden zur Geschichte der Juden in Riga und Kurland”,Riga, 1910, 1911, 1912 (Register-entries and Documents towards the Historyof the Jews in Riga and Kurland).His sources came from the Archives of the Riga Town Council and itsinstitutions, the Proceedings of the Society for the History and Antiquitiesof the Baltic Lands (an institution established by the Baltic Germans,which functioned successfully for many years), books published prior tohis own, evidence in Court cases, etc. All these sources are presented intheir original languages, in chronological order and with references, togetherwith summary translations where the originals are in Latin. Each documentis arranged in chronological order with its serial number, from 1536 to1740. The whole work follows the style of the “Regesta and Inscriptions”published in St. Peterburg by the Jewish Ethnographical Society.287The Jews in LatviaFollowing this work Dr. Jaffe continued to publish documents in histo-rical journals such as “Perezitoya”, “Evreiskaya Starina” and also in thedaily press. Dr. Isaac Jaffe laid the foundation for the modern historicalwriting of Latvian Jewry.In this section it is not fitting to ignore and overlook the historianAnton Buchholz, a Baltic German Antisemite who did not conceal his ani-mosity towards the entry and presence of Jews in Riga. His work, “Ge-schichte der Juden in Riga, bis zur Begruendung der Rigischen HebraeerGemeinde im J. 1842” (History of the Jews in Riga until the Establishmentof the Riga Hebrew Community in 1842), was published by the GermanSociety for the study of the Antiquities of the Baltic lands, in 1899.With characteristic German thoroughness and precision he based hiswork on original documents, most of which are quoted in the originals;On the reports of the Riga City Council, the Archives of the District Gover-nor, etc. Were it not for this work nothing would be known of a series ofdocuments connected with the early years of the Riga community as farback as the Sixteenth Century. The book is justly regarded as the best oneever written on the Jews of Riga; and this, as already stressed, in spite ofthe Antisemitic spirit which finds expression at various points of thevolume.(Most of the details about the above-mentioned historians have beentaken from the Hebrew “Perakim Be-toldot Yahadut Latvia” or “Chaptersin the History of Latvian Jewry,” M. Bobe, Tel Aviv, 1965.)IIThe last decade or so of absolutist Tsarist rule in Russia saw theestablishment of a Parliamentary-style institution known as the “Duma”.In spite of its restricted powers it provided a platform from which deputiesand public representatives enjoying parliamentary immunity could proposelaws, raise political questions, and defend their positions. In the prevailingcondition of lack of equal rights the Jewish deputies had an incomparablyimportant function to play. Now that more than half a century has goneby it may be admitted that the practical value of their achievements hasproved to be virtually nil. Yet at the time the Jewish deputies were elected,the Jewish community of Russia had great hopes that they could succeedin bringing about a change in their miserable political status.As a result of the election system employed Kurland, like the adjacentKovno District, was one of the regions that sent Jewish deputies to all288Towns & Peoplefour Dumas which met between the years 1906 and 1917. The situationof these delegates, isolated amid hostile political groupings, was by no meanseasy. Now that some fifty to sixty years have passed only a handful ofpeople can remember them; but they deserve to be placed on record.The First Duma which opened in 1906 had 12 Jewish Deputies, in-cluding Dr. Nissan Katzenelson of Libau, an outstanding personality inthe early days of the Zionist Movement and in the communal affairs ofRussian Jewry.Nissan Katzenelson was born in Bobruisk in 1862 and studied at theBerlin University. After completing his studies he settled in Libau wherehe became a banker. At the Third Zionist Congress (1899) he was appoint-ed a Director of the Jewish Colonial Trust, and in 1905 became Chairmanof the Bank’s Board of Directors. He was a close friend of Dr. TheodoreHerzL When the latter went to St. Petersburg to meet the Russian MinisterPlehve he chose Dr. Katzenelson to accompany him. Plehve subsequentlyreceived Dr. Katzenelson a second time.In the political life of Russian Jewry he played an active part in the“Society for obtaining Equal Rights for the Jewish People”, which wasestablished at a Convention of Jewish Leaders held at Vilna in 1905; andhe also attended a meeting of a similar body in 1909 at Kovno, wherehe was elected one of the Presidents of the Conference. In 1906, as re-marked, Katzenelson was elected to the First Duma, which held its sessionsfor less than three months before being dispersed by order of the Tsar.The reason was that its composition was too left-wing. “It strayed into afield which did not belong to it”, according to the Order.As a protest against this measure by the Government, a large sectionof the Deputies met at Vyborg in Finland and issued a Proclamationagainst the closing of the Duma, calling for passive resistance against theGovernment. Katzenelson and the other Jewish Deputies signed this pro-clamation. All the signatories were arrested, including himself, and afterhis release he was deprived of the right to be elected again. Following the(Kerensky) Revolution in Spring 1917 he was a Member of the Councilfor the preparation of an all-Russian Jewish Conference. He spent his finalyears in Libau, where he helped in the restoration of the Jewish communityafter the War, and died there in 1923.Only three Jews were elected to the Second Duma. Among them wasJacob Shapira, a timber merchant and exporter of Windau. He was a personof wide culture, wealthy and philanthropic, who held Zionist views. The289The Jews in LatviaSecond Duma lasted from 20th February to 3rd June 1907, and was dis-persed because it was even more radical than the First Duma.J. Shapira settled in England where he was killed during the bombingof London in the Second World War.Two Jews were elected to the Third Duma, Advocate Naphtali Fried-man of Kovno and Lazar Nisselovitch of Kurland.Nisselovitz was born in Bausk. After completing his studies at the LegalFaculty of the St. Petersburg University in 1880 he worked in the Ministryof Finance, and at the same time wrote a series of studies dealing withfinancial problems connected with Russian industry.In 1882 he left Government service and set up in private practice as alawyer. At the Duma he joined the Constitutional Democrats or “Kadets”,first stating in advance that he would be completely independent in allmatters connected with Jewish questions; although the said party did notview this condition with favour. Nisselovitz was elected as an expert toseveral committees, including the Finance Committee. He also lectured tothe Duma on legal matters.The two Jewish Deputies, isolated amid a largely hostile group wherethe Jewish people and its representatives were subjected to plentiful abuse,had a very difficult and exhausting function to exercise. Although theywere not among the outstanding leaders of Russian Jewry, they acquittedthemselves honourably of their duties.Advocate N. Friedman, a wise and pleasant person who was suitedto parliamentary activities by his profession, was a gentle and unwarlikeman by temperament. As a result the name of Nisselovitz appeared asthe Jewish spokesman in the Duma during most of the debates. While theThird Duma was in session matters of Jewish interest were particularlyplentiful. This period, from 1907 to 1912, was a gloomy one for RussianJewry. The reactionaries held boundless sway and their arrows were directedprimarily against the Jews.It is enough to mention several of the events which set Russia in acommotion during this period. Stolypin, the Prime Minister, was assassinatedby the Jew Dimitri Bogrov. A Ritual Murder charge was brought againstMendel Beiliss. As a result questions and interpellations were presented inthe Duma, and charges and libels that were the fruit of a venomous Anti-semitism beyond all previous experience were regularly heard. There werealso systematic administrative persecutions aiming to restrict rights of re-sidence. In the Duma an attempt was made to abolish Jewish military ser-290Towns & Peoplevice on the excuse that the Jews in any case tried to evade this, etc. Inbrief, the atmosphere was thick with Jew-hatred which Deputies Friedmanand Nisselovitch had to face and withstand.One of the most important measures taken by Nisselovitch in the ThirdDuma was the proposal he submitted at a Plenary Session of February 1911calling for the abolition of the Pale of Settlement. Together with Friedman,he had previously succeeded in obtaining the signatures of 166 Deputiesin support of this motion. Although the proposal was referred to Com-mittee without any time limit being set for deliberations, the motion assuch was regarded as a limited triumph, of which Nisselovitch was proud.However, the constant tension and excitement ruined his health. He refusedto stand for election to the Fourth Duma, and passed away in 1913.The Latvians were a progressive minority who at the time had commoninterests with the Jews. They agreed to establish common Latvian-Jewishblocs, and all three of the first Dumas had both a Latvian and a JewishDeputy from Kurland.At the elections to the Fourth Duma, however, the Latvians demandedthe right to return both Deputies. In spite of the fact that in other Pro-vinces the Jews voted for progressive candidates without gaining any De-puty of their own, the Jews of Kurland insisted on being represented by aJewish Deputy. In the absence of any other choice they made an agree-ment with the German electors, who preferred to support a moderate Jewishcandidate rather than a second progressive Latvian.As a result Dr. Ezekiel Gurevitch was elected to the Fourth Duma.He was a physician resident in Jakobstadt, who had been born in 1861 andhad studied medicine at Dorpat University.Dr. E. Gurevitch was not an experienced man of affairs, but he heldhis own in worthy fashion. Special mention should be made of his appear-ances in the Duma plenum during 1913 in connection with the restrictionsimposed on the higher education of young Jews by Kasso, Minister ofEducation and a Jew-hater; as well as in connection with the budget of theMinistry of Education. In his speeches Gurevitch firmly and politely op-posed all the persecution and complained about the unsatisfactory economiccondition of Russian Jewry.The events that took place after the outbreak of the First World Warin 1914 proved that there was no change in the attitude towards the Jews.They were now doubly persecuted by the High Command in the vicinityof the Front, where they were charged with treason and were subjectedto mass expulsion. In the heart of Russia itself the authorities distributed291The Jews in Latviaofficial circulars charging the Jews with raising prices and trying to destroythe crops.The Jewish deputies protested at the measures taken by the MilitaryAuthorities against the Jews in the battle zone, but without achieving anyresults whatsoever.Deputy Gurevitch presented a Jewish Delegation, headed by RabbiMordechai Nurock, to the Prime Minister in connection with the expulsionof the Jews from the vicinity of the Front in the year 1915.Nothing is known about the fate of Dr. Gurevitch after the 1917 Re-volution.IllTo turn now to another field of political and communal activity: Itshould be borne in mind that this period of the end of the Nineteenth andfirst half of the Twentieth Centuries was an epoch in which National andSocialist Movements came to life. It saw the First World War, the RussianRevolution and its various side effects, the emergence of new states basedon national self-determination and accompanied by high hopes and greatdisappointments. It saw the rise of Nazism, the Second World War, theHolocaust and the establishment of the State of Israel. All of these develop-ments were reflected in the public activities of the period.The yearnings of the Love of Zion Movement found an echo in manyhearts, but only a few people sought the ways and means of shaping andimplementing this ideal. One of the first to advance toward this end wasZeev (Vassily) Berman.He was born in Mitau in 1862. His father was a Maskil (modernistJew who supported the development of Hebrew as the unifying Jewishsecular language) who opened a school in Mitau. Together with his familyhe afterwards moved to St. Petersburg, where he also headed a school andpublished the weekly “Russki Yevrei”’ (Russian Jew) between 1884 and1897. His son Vassily published his first poem in its pages. He proceededto the Faculty of Laws at the St. Petersburg University, and after com-pleting his studies began to practise law.The Pogroms of the early Eighties caused him to turn to the HibbatZion Movement, which his father opposed. Zeev Berman attended theFirst Hovevei Zion Conference at Kattowitz in 1884, and played a con-siderable part in obtaining official Government recognition for the so-called“Odessa Committee” in the early Nineties.292Towns & PeopleHe was among the first to base the return to Zion on scientific founda-tions. As the Secretary of the ICA (Jewish Colonisation Association) hevisited several European countries in 1893 in order to study the MigrationProblem, and reached the conclusion that migration was an inevitable pro-cess in the life of the Jewish nation.Together with others who held similar views he published two Russianvolumes entitled “Palestine” and “Zion”, which made a great impressionand exerted considerable influence in their own time. He published numer-ous essays and engaged in written and spoken propaganda, proving to be anenthusiastic orator. He also edited a Bibliography of Eretz Israel literature,visiting that country in 1889. The institutions of the Hibbat Zion Move-ment hoped to put his range of knowledge and personal qualities to pro-ductive use, but he developed Tuberculosis and died in Cairo in 1894.(Yevreiskaya Encyclopedia IV.)Rabbi Mordechai Nurock enjoyed length of days and participated inall the ups and downs of the period. He was a member of the rabbinicalfamily Lichtenstein of Tokum, moved with his father, a rabbi, to Mitau,and acted on his behalf during his life-time, taking his place after hepassed away.His communal activities began under Tsarist rule in Kurland, whichwas outside the Jewish Pale of Settlement. The rabbi not infrequently hadto defend and protect Jews who established themselves there without rightof residence. When the Jews of Kurland were expelled in 1915 he spokefor the refugees before the highest Government authorities. As represent-ative of the Mizrahi Movement he played a lively part in the outstandingJewish Community of Moscow until he returned to Latvia in 1921. Fromthat time he engaged in parliamentary activity as a Deputy in the LatvianSeim, serving from the First to the Fourth without interruption until theFascist coup d'etat in 1934.Apart from his Seim activities he attended all Zionist Congresses onbehalf of the Mizrahi. He was also a member of Inter-Parliamentary Con-gresses and Conventions of the Organisation of Minorities. He took partin the establishment of the World Jewish Congress, etc., etc., and was akey figure in all these institutions.Following the Russian Occupation of Latvia in 1941 he was arrestedand imprisoned for 14 months on a charge of Zionist activities. After hisrelease he was sent to Tashkent and in 1945 left Russia, proceeding toSweden and Norway where he was received by the King. From there he293The Jews in Latviawent to New York where he played an active part in mobilising supportfor the United Nations Resolution of 29th November, 1947, calling forthe establishment of a Jewish State in Palestine.In 1948 he came to Israel and was elected to the Knesset, of which heremained a member until his death. As a veteran Parliamentarian, oneof the very few in the Knesset, he was of considerable assistance in estab-lishing parliamentary procedures. For some time he was Minister of Posts,and was proposed as President of Israel. Throughout this period he visitedall countries of the world on behalf of Jewish National Institutions, andexerted an outstanding influence wherever he came thanks to his aristo-cratic presence and effective and straightforward speeches. He was Chair-man of a number of Israeli institutions and contributed regularly to thepress, both in Israel and abroad.He engaged in the full range of communal and political activities andenjoyed fame and renown, but had no personal happiness. While in prisonin Soviet Russia his wife and two sons were killed in the Riga Ghetto.He never established a home again.The following passage is taken from an essay in a volume dedicatedto his memory entitled “Zecher Mordechai”, published by the Rabbi KookFoundation, Jerusalem 5727 :“For the survivors of Latvian Jewry in Israel and elsewhere theperson of Rabbi Nurock was a link with the period when the com-munities of Kurland and Livonia began to blossom, and led by wayof the road of suffering and the Holocaust to a new life in the Stateof Israel. His departure marks the end of a generation. No leader hascome to replace him.”In Kurland there were no Yeshivot to which orthodox parents couldsend their sons to study Torah, and so they were sent to neighbouringLithuania. In this way Jacob Heilman (Talsen 1880 — Buenos Aires 1950)was sent from home at the age of 14 to study at the Yeshivot of Slobodka,Mir, etc. He found his way to Zionism and secularism, and proceeded toGermany in 1897. There he matriculated in spite of great poverty, studiedPhilosophy at Marburg University and received his Ph.D. at Berne in 1910.He was a supporter of the Uganda proposal and left the Zionist Move-ment as a result. In the years 1904-1906 he took an active part in theillegal Russian Social Revolutionary Party. He settled in Riga in 1912 andmoved to Moscow during the First World War. In 1919 he returned to294Towns & PeopleRiga, where he joined the Zeirei Zion Party by which he was elected tothe Latvian Constituent Assembly.His journalistic career had commenced at the end of the NineteenthCentury with contributions to the Hebrew journal “Hamelitz”. In Rigahe was one of the founders, in 1919, of “Die Iddishe Folkstimme” whichwas closed on account of the difficulties that marked the end of the FirstWorld War. He was appointed Editor of “Dos Folk” but resigned at onceon matters of principle. He was one of the editors of the Zeirei Zionjournals “Der Weg” and “Unser Weg”, returning in due course to “DosFolk”. In 1927 he became one of the editors of “Frimorgen”, with whichhe worked until the daily was closed after the Fascist coup d'etat of 1934.During the Twenties he was one of the leaders of Zeirei Zion — Hi-tahdut in Berlin, and was sent on missions to several countries. After the" Frimorgen” was closed he moved to Warsaw, where he participated in“Dos Neie Vort”. Following a brief visit to Eretz Israel in 1939 he pro-ceeded to the Argentine as representative of the World Jewish Congress.In Buenos Aires he contributed to the “Yiddishe Zeitung” and “DieNeie Zeitung”. His essays were collected in the Volume “Jerusalem” pub-lished by the Buenos Aires Community, in which he won affection andhigh esteem. The book was published in Hebrew in 1957, with a biographywritten by Baruch Zuckerman. He died in Buenos Aires in 1950, andin 1952 his remains were transferred to Israel and interred in Jerusalem.Dr. Jacob Heilman, an outstanding public figure in Latvian Jewry, isfrequently mentioned in the Hebrew volume on Latvian Jewry (YahadutLatvia), Tel Aviv, 1953. A detailed account of his work as a journalist,who participated in the Jewish press of several countries, will be foundin the Yiddish “Lexicon of the New Yiddish Literature.”Dr. Heilman was an original thinker who did not always accept theusual line of thought. A devoted friend and comrade, he was aggressivetowards his opponents. Enthusiastic and tempestuous, keen and sharp, swift-thinking, he was equipped with a thorough Jewish cultural foundation andan extensive European education. He had considerable communal exper-ience, and was honoured by admirers and opponents.Professor Max Matatiahu Laserson was one of the most important Kur-land Jews to participate in general political and Jewish communal activitiesin Latvia.Temperamentally he was a scholar who was concerned primarily withhis favourite field: Theory of Law, International Law, Philosophy of Law,295The Jews in Latviaetc. In other circumstances he would certainly have achieved an outstandinginternational reputation in his own range of studies.However, the times in which he lived and the situation of the Jewstransformed him into a leading protagonist of his people, using his far-reaching knowledge and intellect not only in the directions he himself wouldhave preferred, but far more frequently in the struggle to improve theJewish situation in Latvia, or at least to prevent that situation from becom-ing worse.Max Laserson was bom in Mitau in 1887 and studied law at St. Pe-tersburg University from which he graduated in 1910. He received thedegree of Magister for his first work after graduation. This was promptlyfollowed by a series of studies on legal aspects in the literary works ofTolstoi and others. Thanks to these monographs he was granted the statusof “Privatdozent” (Lecturer) at the St. Petersburg University.Following the February Revolution of 1917 he worked in the MinoritiesDepartment of the Kerensky Government, returning to Latvia after the Bol-shevik Revolution of October, 1917. He joined the Zeirei Zion Party bywhich he was returned to the First, Second and Third Seims. It is unne-cessary here to deal with his parliamentary activities, which are adequatelyillustrated in his essay, included in this volume, on “The Jews and theLatvian Parliament.”During his activities in Latvia he published inter alia: “The Develop-ment of the Latvian Constitution,” “State Law in Latvia”; and a majorstudy on “The General Theory of Law.’”His works on Jewish themes included “The Theory of Natural Lawaccording to Jewish Literary and Legal Sources”; “Jewish Law”; “Spinozaas a Philosopher of Law and State”, etc.His active participation in Minority Congresses was accompanied bystudies such as “State, Sovereignty and Minority”; “The Law of Minoritiesin the Baltic States”, etc.Several of his studies were connected with the idea of establishing theState of Israel long before it came into being. These included: “The Man-date, the Constitution and the Legislative Council”; “How a new State isestablished”; and “Thoughts on a Jewish Constitution.”After the seizure of power by Ulmanis, Laserson was sent to the Con-centration Camp at Libau. After his release he left Latvia and came towhat was then Palestine. However, he did not strike root here, althoughhe was one of the founders of the Tel-Aviv High School for Law andEconomics. There was no adequate field for his talents and learning, nor296Towns 6c Peopledid he gain the attention of those who might have been able to help himto find a suitable place in the limited academic spheres of the time.He proceeded to the United States, lecturing en route at the Paris andLondon Universities and elsewhere. In U.S.A. he found a suitable academicposition. He lectured at Columbia University, New York, first as a GuestProfessor and afterwards as a permanent member of the academic staff.His final works were connected with Russian foreign policy. He published“Russia and the Western World”, “Russia and the World”, “The Influenceof America on Russia,” etc.“M. Laserson displayed his erudition in more than one field. To besure, the subjects that were closest to him, those in which he engagedand which he taught, were the Philosophy of Law and the Theoryof the State; but he had an ample range of knowledge in variousother fields of science and art. He was a connoisseur of painting andarchitecture, and had a fine artistic taste. He was closely acquaintedwith the general history of Europe and America in particular. He wasfamiliar with world literature, much of which he knew in the originalsince he had an absolute mastery of many languages. His scholarlyand publicistic work was marked by fresh and original thinking,testifying to his wide knowledge and exceptional memory. His peda-gogical talent was outstanding. He knew how to express his ideas ina lively and literate fashion, but at the same time he would lecture sosimply that the reader or listener absorbed the ideas and thoughtswithout any difficulty, and the ideas seemed to be his own. Lasersonwas an experienced orator and publicist.’”The above quotation is taken from an essay published in the Hebrewvolume on “Latvian Jewry”, Tel Aviv 1953 and was signed E. S-n. Itwas written by the Tel-Aviv Chief Magistrate Dr. Eleazar Selikson, who hadbeen Professor Laserson’s assistant in Latvia. The essay in question givesa detailed survey of most of Laserson’s work, and a selective list of essays,etc. Those cited above have been taken from it.Profesor Laserson passed away in New York in 1950, at the age of 63.We were associated in party activities for many years. I also met himin Eretz Israel before he left for U.S.A. and during his brief visit to his sonin Tel Aviv; and we corresponded regularly. “I am happy as a scholar” —but there was a tinge of melancholy in the happiness.At all times and under all circumstances, rising or falling, succeeding orfailing, he was always a good companion, of fine spirit and rare culture.297The Jews in LatviaDr. Jacob Hoffman was identical with the Revisionist Movement andBetar in the eyes of Latvian Jewry. He was bora at Yelizavetgrad, Russia,in 1891 and studied in Berlin and Dorpat where he graduated as physician.He served as a doctor in the First World War, was wounded and receiveda medal. In Russia he dedicated himself to communal work among victimsof the War. He settled in Riga in 1920.While still a student he joined the Zionist Movement and was amongthe founders of “Hehaver”, and a Congress Delegate from the EleventhCongress onward. After V. Jabotinsky visited Riga in 1923 the first branchof the Revisionist Movement was established there under the chairmanshipof Dr. Hoffman. Thenceforward be was dedicated to that Movement untilthe end of his life, and he left the World Zionist Organisation together withJabotinsky.The Revisionist Movement gathered some of the most enthusiastic youngpeople in the Latvian Zionist Movement, who established the “Hashmonia”Student Society, and the “Brit Trumpeldor” or Betar Youth Movement. Thelatter dedicated itself to Halutz training at a special farm, and to maritimetraining on a ship called “Theodore Herzl” which was given to them by theIndustrialist Rudolf Kaplan. For some time the Revisionist Movement alsohad its own afternoon paper, “Oventpost”’, which was closed in 1934 afterthe Fascist seizure of power.Dr. Hoffman headed all these activities and movements in addition tohis professional activities. For some time he was Chairman of the MedicalSociety and also headed the Jewish National Fund in Latvia.The World Headquarters of Betar was in Latvia until the end of 1930,when Hoffman moved to Paris at Jabotinsky’s suggestion and undertook theorganisation of the Revisionist Movement. In 1934 he came to Eretz Israelbut did not find a proper field for his energies in spite of his extensive acti-vities abroad. During the War he was cut off from part of his family, wholost their lives in the Riga Ghetto. He suffered from heart disease and passedaway in 1944, at the age of 53.The following description of him will be found in the Hebrew *‘LatvianJewry”, p. 426:“... He held office and took an active part simultaneously; and wher-ever he was he dedicated all his soul and all his might to the matterat hand. Every day he would be consumed by his fervent ideals andenergetic activity. Yet every morning a new Hoffman would be bom,bubbling over with fresh energy. If he was a friend his friendship wasboundless. If he was a rival and opponent he was a relentless one.298Towns & PeopleYet always, in every manifestation, he remained the same hundredper cent, entire human being who never fought anybody behind hisback, or tried to trick or mislead anybody. He loved open warfare...”In the days of Independent Latvia those who heard the speeches ofYerahmiel Vinnik with their pure Yiddish, or read his essays in “Dos Folk”,“Der Weg”, “Unser Weg”, etc. found it hard to imagine that he came froma family in which German had been the language in daily use.His was a poetic, romantic soul. He knew most of Lermontov’s poemsby heart and himself wrote Russian poems which made a great impressionon his younger companions. While still a schoolboy a friend told him of agroup of youngsters who dreamt of a distant country which might becometheir Homeland one day; and he was at once drawn to all the yearnings ofRedemption, to the romance, the far-off ideal, the poesy of the thought.From that it was but a step to the whirlpool of party propaganda and theexploitation of his natural capacities. His gift for enthusiastic oratory andhis effective pen found their place in the Zionist Movement and its parties.Y. Vinnik was born in Riga in 1895, attended the Real School andbegan to study medicine in Dorpat. But the First World War and its effects,the establishment of Independent Latvia, the condition of the Jewish com-munity and the place of the Zeirei Zion Party within it (he had been amember from the beginning) upset all his plans. He began to study at theFaculty of Laws of the Riga University, but never found the time or leisureto graduate.He had a hand in establishing the greater part of the Jewish press ofLatvia. He was a founder and editor of the “Iddishe Folkstimme” whichwas closed down because of the War. He was on the editorial staff of “DosFolk”, which he left in 1925 because of differences of opinion with his col-leagues. He was one of the editors of “Der Weg” and “Unser Weg”, whichdid not last long, and edited “Der Ruf”, of which only a few issues appear-ed He also edited the afternoon paper “Oventpost”’ which passed into otherhands, and also contributed sometimes to the “Frimorgen”.For several years Y. Vinnik was a member of the Riga Municipal Coun-cil, the most important function in the country after membership of the Seim.Wherever he appeared, in the press, the Municipal Council, or the JewishCommunal Council of Riga, he would fight for the principles of his party;and he was particularly outstanding in the struggle to secure equal rightsfor Hebrew as a language of instruction in schools. During the final years299The Jews in Latviabefore the Fascist seizure of power he was on the staff of the Jewish SickFund.“Those who knew Yerahmiel Vinnik will remember him first andforemost as an active communal worker. Everything else — his privatelife, his livelihood, his studies — they were all secondary to that.Whenever his private life clashed with his public duties the latterwould win. It might almost be said that his public life ruined hisprivate life” (Latvian Jewry, p. 433).When the Russians entered Riga in 1941 he was arrested and sent to acamp at Solikamsk, where he was compelled to engage in hard labour in thenotorious “Chertiozh” Section. He died of exhaustion there in 1942.Dr. Benjamin Sieff was born in Lithuania in 1879, and came to Latviain 1918. His important work as an economist, and his achievements forJewish economic institutions while he lived in Latvia, entitle him to be re-garded as one of the most active Jewish communal workers of IndependentLatvia.After studying at a Lithuanian Yeshiva he proceeded to Germany andFrance, where he studied Philosophy, Economics and Languages. From 1904he worked in St. Petersburg, Russia, being employed by large banks; andhe also edited an economic section in the press and published a series ofbooks on financial problems.In 1918 he moved to Riga, became the Economic Editor of the Russianpaper “Sevodnia” and published a number of studies on financial mattersconnected with the Latvian economy.He was intimately associated with Jewish public affairs. His essay inthis volume, “Jews in the Economic Life of Latvia”, indicates his sharein organising Jewish economic institutions. He worked together with the Jew-ish deputies in the Seim, — a fact of considerable importance because hewas an economic adviser of the Ministry of Finance. He was likewise amember of the All-Latvian Society of Writers and Journalists.When a boycott was proclaimed against German goods he took an activepart in organising it, and went abroad on behalf of the Boycott Committeein order to coordinate activities with other Jewish bodies elsewhere.After the Fascist seizure of power he proceeded to Eretz Israel, wherehe founded the Tel Aviv High School for Law and Economics together withProfessor Laserson and others. He lectured at this institution and publisheda number of studies on local economics, besides translating leading economicworks into Hebrew.300Towns & PeopleHe passed away in Tel Aviv in 1947.In the Hebrew “Latvian Jewry,” Tel Aviv, 1953 there is a detailedaccount of his life and works.IVThe common factor in the last section was the fact that all those des-cribed belonged to various sections of the Zionist Movement.Below will be found an account of protagonists of various other ap-proaches who played their part in the public and communal life of LatvianJewry.In this work frequent mention has been made of the Seim deputiesMordechai Dubin and Simeon Wittenberg, both representatives of the AgudatIsrael. Any description of Jewish personalities in Latvia must give an ac-count of them, for they were among the most outstanding figures of thecommunity, and defended Latvian Jewry after their fashion. Although cer-tain groups did not accept their political approach, it did correspond totheir own point of view, and in their opinion it offered the most certainmethod of helping the largest possible number of Jews.Mordechai Dubin, a member of the Habad Hassidic Movement and amerchant, most of whose time and energies were dedicated to Shtadlanut,would also have accepted this definition. Incidentally, all the Jewish Deputiesfound it necessary to “help” and intercede for those who came to them asfar as possible. In the case of Dubin, however, this was his main functionon account of his position, status and connections. In the morning when hecame to pray at the “Bazar Bergy Minyan (prayer group) his clients werealready waiting for him. From there he would accompany them to publicinstitutions where he would “arrange” matters.Whether passport, permit or release from arrest, there was nothing thatDubin could not arrange. Such, at least, was the general belief, and as a rulepeople were right. Everything he did was done without considering whetherthe person asking for help was his supporter or an opponent. It was a Jewwho was asking for help, and that was what mattered. His popularity amongthe Jewish public was unbounded.Dubin was a member of the National Council, the Constituent Assemblyand all Four Seims. As a matter of principle he supported the Right-winggroups, claiming that the Left-wingers, the Social Democrats, etc., wouldsupport the Jews anyway in accordance with their party principles; and sinceit was often necessary to obtain the help of the Antisemitic groups, they301The Jews in Latviahad to be supported... True, he did his best to justify his approach. Heoften said that it was impossible to rely on either the Left-wing or the Right-wing, but the latter should be and could be bribed in the Jewish interest. Healso polemicized frequently with the other Jewish Deputies because theysupported Left-wng coalitions; all of which has been described elsewhere inthis volume.Simeon Wittenberg, a leader of “The Young Agudat Israel”, entered theFourth Seim. He was a gifted man who had graduated from the Faculty ofLaws, and who made an outstanding impression during his brief term inthe Seim as a person of ample knowledge in the fields of economics andfinancial policy. However, the Fourth Seim was dispersed upon the Ulmanisseizure of power, and the heavy clouds of approaching Fascism also hadtheir effect after the Nazis came into power in Germany. During this periodthe Aguda deputies also changed their approach, but the wheels of historycould not be turned back by post factum speeches.During the period between the Ulmanis coup d'etat (15th May 1934)and the Russian entry into Latvia (17th June 1940) the Aguda constitutedthe representative Jewish institution. Their paper. “Haint”, which wascontrolled by Wittenberg and Yehuda Leib Samunov, was the only organof expression. After the Jewish Department in the Ministry of Culture wasabolished, the Aguda made use of its authority in order to liquidate seculareducation in the Jewish schools.Upon the Russian Occupation Dubin was arrested and sent to InnerRussia. He was released before long, but since he continued to take partin Jewish affairs he was arrested again and finally incarcerated in a lunaticasylum. Till the end of his days he continued to be a strictly observantJew. It is reported that he died in 1956 in Central Russia.Like all other Riga Jews, Simeon Wittenberg was imprisoned in theGhetto after the German Occupation. He displayed exceptional courageand resourcefulness in organising the Jews there, together with a vastdevotion and self-sacrifice on behalf of the sufferers. He died of exhaustionin the Buchenwald Camp in 1945.Both lost their families in the Riga Ghetto.The Jewish workers of Latgale provided the Jewish radical represent-atives in the Seim. These were Professor Max Laserson, who has alreadybeen described, and Dr. Noah Maisel, representative of the Bund.Noah Maisel was bom in the small town Nesvezh, in the Minsk Gov-ernment District, in 1891-2, and graduated as a physician at Dorpat Univer-302Towns & Peoplesity. During the First World War he was in Dvinsk, and in 1919 when theBolsheviks held the city he was in charge of the Department dealing withthe transfer of refugees and prisoners of war. Dvinsk was occupied by the“Right’" Poles, who handed it over to Independent Latvia. Maisel remainedin Dvinsk and became a Latvian citizen.He came from a well-to-do home. During his school years he was in-fluenced by Bund theories, and when Dvinsk began to recover after havingbeen ruined in the War, he helped to establish a local Bund organisation.To begin with this numbered a handful, but as the population grew andafter ties had been established with Riga where there was a large Bundistcentre, Dvinsk became an important Bund centre as well; for Latgaleprovided a suitable terrain for the development of this party.The Bund had considerable influence in Dvinsk. Maisel was a memberof the Jewish Community Council and the Municipality. At the electionsto the First Seim he was elected on the Latgale list of the Social Democrats.He continued to belong to this fraction, even though a separate list for theBund emerged in due course.Dr. Maisel abandoned the medical profession, dedicating himself ex-clusively to communal activity. In order to be more effective in this fieldhe studied at the Riga University and graduated from the Faculty of Laws,He was also a deputy in the Second and Third Seims.He would make thorough preparations for every public appearance,both in the Seim and elsewhere, and was a keen and enthusiastic orator andpolemicist. He exploited these qualities effectively against opponents, bothin the struggle for Yiddish against Hebrew in the Municipal and Stateschools, and against Jewish and non-Jewish reactionary deputies slike.He was the spokesman on matters of citizenship — a matter of theutmost importance for many Jewish residents of Latvia, who were classedas aliens on account of surviving Tsarist laws. A new Citizenship Law waspassed with the support of the Left-wing Coalition in the year 1927. Heparticipated in the Bund press, writing in the “Neie Zeit” and in the “Lat-galskaya Misl”, the organ of the Social Democrats in Latgale.Following the Ulmanis seizure of power he was imprisoned in theLibau Camp, but did not sign an undertaking to refrain from political acti-vities. After the dissolution of the Camp he was therefore kept in detentionuntil July 1935.He proceeded to U.S.A. in 1937 on behalf of YIVO (The YiddisheWissenschaftliche Institute) and conducted a successful campaign on behalfof the Institution. But he did not wish to become a professional campaigner303The Jews in Latviaand be supported until he mastered the English language, and could findhis proper place in public life. He therefore resolved to return to Latviaand refresh his medical knowledge.In 1941 he was arrested by the Russians. His fate is not known, buthe is said to have been exiled to Northern Siberia where he died in 1956.“Strange is the way in which a child of wealthy Jews could be trans-formed into the spokesman of the Jewish poor in poverty-strickenLatgale... We knew little about his personal life... He was not anascetic. He liked good clothes and was always a European in thefull sense of the word, not only in his behaviour but in every detailof his appearance. Incidentally, he had a deep knowledge and vastunderstanding of music.”(The above is taken from the appreciation by his comrade and friendIsaac Levin-Shatzkes in the Hebrew “Latvian Jewry”, entitled: “NoahMaisel, the Communal Spokesman of the Bund in Latvia.”)Zeev Latzky-Bertholdy was driven from place to place for many yearsby the events of his times and of his own personal life. It is true that ac-cording to his official papers he was a citizen of Latvia, received his educa-tion in Riga and for many years was a journalist there. Yet it is hard toassign him to any specific Jewish popular group. He was a general Jewishleader who worked in many countries, changed his opinions, was linked toseveral Movements; yet consistently supported every tendency which, in thegiven circumstances, seemed to offer a constructive future for the Jewishmasses, particularly those who lived in Russia. On account of these quali-ties of his he deserves to be mentioned among Latvian Jewish personalities.Zeev Latzky was born in Kiev during the pogrom year 1881. Thepogroms caused his parents to move to Riga where he was educated, gra-duated from the Secondary School and entered the Riga Polytechnicum,from which he was expelled in 1901 on account of his political activities.He then moved to Berlin and under the influence of Nahman Syrkinbegan to sympathise with Zionist Socialism. On his return to Russia hebecame a founder of the “S.S. Zionist Socialist Party* and worked in theUnderground, helping to organise a Jewish Self-Defence Movement. Hewas arrested several times, and during the period of Russian reaction be-tween 1906 and 1912 was in Germany and Austria. There he engaged injournalism, dedicating himself to investigating Zionist Socialist principlesand working out a joint platform for the Zionist Socialist parties.In 1907 he appeared in Stuttgart on behalf of his Party in order to304Towns & Peoplepersuade the International then meeting there to admit it to membership.In 1908 he proceeded to New York in connection with Migration affairs.On the eve of the First World War he returned to Russia, where he workedwith the ORT and IKOPO in providing for Jews expelled from their homesowing to hostilities.In the Revolution year 1917 he took an active part in organising Rus-sian Jewry and bringing about a general Jewish Convention. During thisperiod he decided to leave the “S.S.” Party, and was among those whorenewed the activities of the “Folkpartiei”.While organising the General Jewish Convention he returned to Kiev,the city of his birth, which had become the capital of “Independent Uk-raina”, at the time of the partially-realised Jewish national autonomy inthe Ukraine. This is not the place to describe the tempestuous, hopeful anddisappointing period which ended with the terrifying Ukrainian pogromsthat accompanied the first five years of Bolshevik Russia. Latzky took anactive part in all events, and for a short while served as Minister of JewishAffairs in Ukrainia.The liquidation of Independent Ukrainia and the course of eventswithin Russia compelled Latzky to leave in 1921. He returned to Latviaas a refugee, but proceeded to Germany at once and helped to establishthe “World Committee in aid of Refugees.” During the years 1923-1925Latzky twice visited South America to investigate the possibilities of im-migration for victims of the War.In 1925 he returned to Riga, where he worked in “Dos Folk" and wasafterwards one of the editors of “Frimorgen” until 1934, when the paperwas closed after the Fascist putsch.While in Latvia he once again drew close to Zionism. He became amember of the League for Labour Eretz Israel, a non-Zionist Member ofthe Jewish Agency for the Baltic Countries and, unlike the majority of“Folkists”, supported equal rights for Hebrew as a language of instruction.In 1935 the cycle of his wanderings came to an end when he pro-ceeded to Eretz Israel. He joined Mapai (the Eretz Israel Labour Party),but this period was a brief one, for he died in 1940, when less than sixtyyears old.As a journalist and publicist Latzky published many essays on politicaland general events in the daily press of Riga, Warsaw and elsewhere,and finally in Eretz Israel. He published several booklets: “The Pogromsof Denikin” on the Massacres of the Jews in the Ukraine after the FirstWorld War; “Die Einwanderung in die Yiddishe Yishuvim in Darom305The Jews in LatviaAmerica” (Immigration among the Jewish Centres of South America)based on his missions to those countries; “On the position of the Jewsin Eastern Europe and the Upbuilding of Eretz Israel.”Some of his essays and studies were collected in his book “Erdgeist”(Spirit of the Earth), which he first published in Kiev in 1918 and reissuedin Riga in 1932, with several more essays. In this work he based hisopinions first and foremost on the “Socialist Territorialism” which wasand remained his ideological basis. It also contained essays on art andliterature, painting and sculpture, music and the theatre, etc.In spite of his “practical activities” in political parties, in the JewishSelf-Defence, in provisions for refugees and the expelled, and in spite ofhis share in public activities and politics, he remained a thinker for whomabstract ideas, traditional Romanticism and Mystcism in literature, paintingand the theatre were closest of all to the heart.Zalman Levitas was one of the important Folkists of Riga. He wasborn at Zhagar, Lithuania, in 1876 and lived for many years in Warsawwhere he established the “Yavneh” Publishing House, which issued booksin Hebrew and then began to publish in Yiddish. Under the pressure ofthe Polish authorities he left Warsaw and came to Riga.There he became a merchant and took an active part in communalactivities. In 1910 he was one of the founders of the daily “Die IddisheStimme”’ (The Jewish Voice). Within the Jewish community he organiseda census of the Jewish population of the city and prepared all the necessarystatistics. In 1918 he was one of the group that initiated the opening ofYiddish schools, and in 1925 he helped to found the Yiddishist paper“Letzte Neies” (Latest News).He was Chairman of the ORT Executive in Latvia from the time theSociety was established there. He was also a member of the ORT Executivein Berlin.His fate under the Nazis Is not known.Abraham Braun-Sergei was born to a well-to-do family in Riga in1881; a family in which communal activity was a tradition. In 1900 whenhe was a student at the Riga Polytechnicum he joined the Bund. As aresult of illegal political activities he was expelled from the Polytechnicumin 1901, and thenceforward dedicated himself entirely to underground poli-tical work. He was a brilliant propagandist and speaker, engaged in hisactivities in several cities, and was repeatedly imprisoned. After the perse-306Towns & Peoplecution of the Revolutionaries in 1902-1903 there was a tendency on theirpart to engage in terrorist activities as “organised revenge” against theregime. Braun was one of the heads of the Organisation in Riga, wherehe had the conspiratorial name of “Sergei”.In 1906-1907 he attended Conferences and gatherings of the Bund inBerne and Lemberg. His party sent him to South Africa. After the 1917Revolution he was active in the Central Committee at Minsk. He protestedagainst Bolshevik methods but denounced every sign of Counter-revolu-tion. At the Eighth Conference of the Bund in 1917 he was elected to theCentral Committee.In 1921 he returned to Riga where the Latvian Government suspectedhim of being a Bolshevik representative. He was arrested and sentencedto death, but was released thanks to the intervention of Social Democratsin other countries. He worked in his party during the years that followedand was one of the editors of “Dos Folk” for a short time. Following theFascist seizure of power in 1934 he was arrested and detained in the LibauConcentration Camp. After his release he had to leave Latvia. He spentseveral years in Esthonia and proceeded to New York in 1938. He wrotein “Der Freind”, but his main occupation was as a lecturer for the “Ar-beiter Ring” (Workers’ Circle). In 1940 he prepared to return to Europe,but had a heart attack at his farewell party and died.Although Sergei-Braun was always dedicated to his party he did notfollow the beaten track but offered an approach of his own to all questions,both political and literary. His main gift was his power of speech. Hislectures were always creative achievements which were fashioned and de-veloped while actually lecturing. His persuasive powers, his pleasant andattractive personality, his original way of thinking, all helped to establisha bond of close sympathy between him and his enchanted audience.Isaac Levin-Shatzkes was one of those public figures who combinedjournalism with communal activities. He was born in Dvinsk in 1892 andpassed his matriculation examinations at Vitebsk in 1914. Between 1915and 1919 he served in the Russian army, was captured and sent to a pri-soner-of-war camp in Germany. After his release he was recruited for theRed Army.He joined the Bund in 1912 and from 1920 was active in Dvinsk, onceit became part of Independent Latvia, as a member of his Party’s CentralCommittee, member of the Municipal Council, Secretary of the Jewish307The Jews in LatviaCommunity Committee, Chairman of the Trade Unions of Latgale, andMember of the Sick Fund Executive.He began his journalistic career in Russian in 1913, and commencedwriting Yiddish from 1921, after which he participated in the entire Bundpress, “Unser Wort”, £<Neie Zeit”, etc. He was also a regular contributorto A Dos Folk”' and “Frimorgen” and edited the Russian journal “Lat-galskaya Misl” which appeared in Dvinsk.After the Fascist seizure of power in 1934 he was detained in theLibau Concentration Camp and was sent to prison. In 1936 he arrived inNew York where he became Secretary of the “Yiddishe Sozialistishe Ver-band” (Jewish Socialist Society) in U.S.A. and editor of the “Wecker”(Awakener). He contributed to a number of journals including “Die Zu-kunft” (The Future) and “Der Freind” (The Friend), and was an activemember of the “Allweltliche Yiddishe Kultur Congress” (World JewishCultural Congress), “ZIKA”, etc.He passed away in New York in 1963. A number of essays were dedi-cated to his memory in the 1st January 1964 issue of “Der Wecker”.VAs can be seen in earlier sections, it is sometimes hard to decide pre-cisely where the communal worker ends and the journalist begins, and viceversa. But in dealing with Michel Kitai there is no doubt whatsoever thathe was a journalist pure and simple; although his history shows that hewas connected with several parties. For him, however, that was purelyincidental.M. Kitai was born in Riga in 1886. As his family had no right ofdomicile there, some of them moved to Zhager in neighbouring Lithuania.After he had finished his Jewish studies in the Heder he went back to hisfather in Riga, where he worked for a watchmaker. It is hard to knowwhether he intended to adopt that profession or did so to obtain the rightof residence which was available for craftsmen working at their own crafts.He joined the “Dovrei Ivrit” (Hebrew Speakers) Circle, went on to theBund and afterwards entered the S.S. movement. All this came to an endwhen he was arrested and spent the year 1907 in prison. After his releasehe went abroad for a year, and worked as a harness-maker upon hisreturn.He printed his first poem in “Die Iddishe Stimme”’ in 1910. Afterthat he wandered from town to town and paper to paper on account ofthen current conditions, war, papers that closed down, etc. In 1912 Kitai308Towns & Peoplewas in Vilna writing for “Der Tog”, “Vilner Wochenblatt” and “Freind”.In 1913 he was in Berditchev writing for “Die Folksstimme”. In Odessahe spent almost five consecutive years. There he wrote in “Unser Leben”and was the Secretary of the Committee of the “Vereinigte”.During the war years he was in Kiev, Yekaterinoslav, Hommel andMoscow. In 1921 he returned to Latvia, settled down in Riga and beganto work for “Dos Folk”. A few years later he left the paper together witha group of other journalists on account of the changeable policies of theeditor. Together with Mikhail Yo, of whom more will be told below, hebegan to publish humorous journals from time to time and was the Se-cretary of the “Arbeiter Heim” Publishing House (a cover name of theCommunist Movement in Latvia) under the management of M. Shatz-Anin.He afterwards worked for the journals of the Zeirei Zion; “Der Weg”and “Unser Weg”", also in the “Letzte Neies”, a strictly Yiddishist paper,and in the daily “Frimorgen” from 1926.The latter journal was closed in 1934 after the Fascist seizure of powerin Latvia. During the following years Kitai was in Poland as one of theeditors of “Literarishe Bletter” (Literary Pages). During 1938 he publishedhis book on “Unser Shreiber and Kinstler” (Our Writers and Artists) inWarsaw. His wanderings from place to place, his meetings and acquaintance-ship with writers, journalists and artists gave Kitai plenty of material. Inthe introduction to his book he wrote: “With few exceptions the authorhas written on the basis of personal knowledge, impressions and memories.What he writes of some of them is a synthesis of their work...”The descriptions in the book are the fruit of his feuilletons and criti-cisms of the theatre and painting. With an observant eye, like a watcherfrom the side, he drew attention to what was specific and characteristic,noting weaknesses and also describing the valuable and beautiful elementsin the artist’s work.This Bohemian of the Latvian Jewish press was a quiet and modestperson. He had a brother in Copenhagen whom he used to visit from timeto time. In 1942 he died entirely alone at a hospital in Samarkand.M. Gertz, the pseudonym of Gershon Movshovitz, may rightly be con-sidered as the historian of the Jewish press in Latvia on account of hisYiddish “Twenty-five Years of the Yiddish Press in Lettland”, which ap-peared in Riga in 1933.In this book he gives a lively account, in fluent Yiddish, of all thepapers that had appeared during the years before Independent Latvia,309The Jews in Latviafrom the “Natzional-Zeitung” of 1907 and “Die Iddishe Stimme” of 1910;and of all the newspapers, pamphlets, one-time publications, etc., whichappeared until the year his book was published.M. Gertz was born in 1892 in the Kovno Government District, and wasbrought to Riga at the age of seven. He studied in the traditional Hadarimand at the Lithuanian Yeshivot Mir and Slobodka — which was a centreof the “Mussar” pietist group. At the age of 19 he went to Vilna, wherehe published his first feuilleton in the weekly “Vilner Wochenblatt”.He spent the war years 1914-1918 in Riga and Central Russia. In 1919he returned to Riga, where he stayed until the War Front approachedthe city in the Second World War. From 1940 he lived in Russia, returningto Riga in 1945 and living there until 1950. He was arrested and exiledto the Teitchet Camp in Siberia, from which he returned to Riga in 1956,passing away there in 1958.It may be said that M. Gertz displayed very extensive fluctuations inhis journalist ideologies, ranging all the way from Communism to theAguda.Riga was under Communist rule from January to May 1919. Theauthorities published a daily, ‘Der Roiter Ernes” (The Red Truth) whichwas full of articles calling for the Class War and against Jewish religiousfunctionaries and the Bourgeoisie. M. Gertz actively participated in thisjournal.In 1920 he began to write for the daily “Dos Folk”, which was noto-rious in the Latvian Jewish press for its lack of any consistent policy. Inthe book referred to above M. Gertz described this journal as follows:“... Left-wing today. Right-wing tomorrow, Zionist and pro-Hebrew today,Yiddishist and Socialist soon after, an Orthodox paper today, and Free-thinking tomorrow...”A number of journalists like J. Heilman and J. Vinnik left the paperalmost immediately. At the end of 1922 it, was abandoned by a wholegroup of journalists, including M. Kitai, M. Razumny, M. Yo, J. Levin-Shatzkes, etc., and others. They combined to publish a sheet entitled “DieGele Presse” (The Yellow Press). M. Gertz was not among them. He left“Das Folk” only in 1925 and together with several of those already men-tioned published a one-time paper, “Unser Folk” (Our People). Imme-diately after this a group of journalists including himself began to negotiatewith the publishers of the popular Russian daily “Sevodnia” (Today) forthe establishment of a new Yiddish daily, “Frimorgen” (Early Morning)which began to appear in January 1927.310Towns & PeopleWhile writing for “Dos Folk” he also took a hand in editing humorouspublications, children’s books, etc. He worked for “Frimorgen” as long asit appeared, and was also the editor of the afternoon paper “Batog” (Inthe Daytime), which appeared in 1932. He likewise wrote for journalsabroad, including the New York “Morgen Journal”, the Warsaw “Lite-rarishe Bletter”, “Hazonim Veit”, etc.Apart from his book on the History of the local Jewish press he alsowrote a book “Mussarnikes”, describing life as lived amid the followersof the Mussar Movement with whom he had studied at Slobodka. Whenhe was in Russia in 1940 he wrote for the Soviet press. After his returnto Riga he planned to publish essays on the sufferings in the Ghetto. Indeed,he described this period in “Fun Grub” (From the Grave). Subsequentlyhe published: “Neigebornener Yid” (The New-born Jew); “Noch meinMamen” (After my Mother); “Misha Alexandrovitch”, about the singerof that name; and other works.Some of these have been issued in print, while others remain in manu-script.On the last page of his book on the Yiddish Press, M. Gertz-Mov-shovitch publishes the photograph of a bespectacled man with a tiny littlebeard, which bears the text: “Jacob Zhagorsky, the unwearying collectorof printed Yiddish in Lettland.”Who did not know this man with his battered briefcase under his arm,who collected contributions for the Keren Hayesod in Riga? Yet very fewindeed knew that in spite of his most modest opportunities Zhagorsky de-voted himself day and night to the collection of printed Yiddish material.He was born in Riga in 1880 and was one of the founders of the LinatHatzedek Maternity Hospital, and the Hachnassat Kallah Society for pro-viding poor brides with dowries. He also helped to establish the AlephSociety of Journalists and Writers, etc. But his main concern was this col-lection which filled every corner of the rooms in his little apartment. Healso held a one-time Exhibition of his treasures. Only after boundlessentreaty was he finally given a room at the Craft School, where he couldhouse his collection in fitting style.It was with good reason that M. Gertz included the photograph andthe words beneath it. The Collection must unquestionably have been veryuseful in writing his book.As for the fate of Jacob Zhagorsky and his Collection, one can only311The Jews in Latviaguess that they went the way of all those thousands who perished or wereexterminated in the Riga Ghetto during the years of the Holocaust.In the theatrical and artistic, journalist and communal circles of Rigaduring the days of Independent Latvia there was a particularly noticeableyoung man of stocky, medium height with a mop of reddish blond hairand an almost dreamy expression on his face. This was the painter MikhailYo. It is possible that some Riga old-timers in Israel still have a few ofhis paintings, which could once be purchased at a reasonable price.Meir Jaffe, who signed his articles and paintings with the name MikhailYo, was born in Vitebsk in 1895. When young he came to Riga and under-went many vicissitudes, poverty and privation. He worked for a watch-maker, helped a house-painter, sang in the Choir of the famous CantorRosovsky and while still a boy joined an amateur dramatic group. Heprinted an essay in a local Russian daily, began to paint, and whateverhe did displayed ample energy and originality.During the First World Mar he was conscripted, fought in battle, waswounded, underwent treatment in military hospitals and finally returnedto Riga.The lively Jewish life of Independent Latvia provided his many-sidedtalents with ample fields for activity. He painted pictures, illustrated books,or prepared scenery and costumes for the Yiddish theatrical troupes whichfrequently came to Riga from Vilna and elsewhere and stayed there forentire theatrical seasons. He was also a theatrical critic.I still remember his essays on the first performances of “Habimah”after it left Russia. Those performances were held in the largest theatreof Riga.Yet whatever he earned from his many-sided labours did not give himthe opportunity of expanding his horizon, of going out into the wide world,of seeing and studying all that lay beyond the frontiers of Latvia andRussia. He had a great desire to do something in this direction, which isso vital for any painter; but without success. On one occasion he suggestedan idea of his to me: Let the Zionists, the Eretz Israel Office or some otherinstitution place at his disposal the means for going abroad and visitingEretz Israel, and he would return the money from the sales of pictures hewould paint there.Now it is necessary to realise what the situation then was in Riga. WhenHalutzim had received certificates permitting them to immigrate to EretzIsrael it was necessary to go virtually from door to door in order to raise312Towns & Peopletheir fares by ship. In such circumstances it is obvious that no money wasavailable for such a “fantastic” proposition as that suggested by MichailYo. I do not wish to say that at the time there were no people in Rigawho would have been capable of finding the money for this; but imagina-tion and willingness were also necessary...Yo, was not a party man. His efforts and interests were exclusivelyartistic. It was in the field of the arts that he sought achievement and per-fection, and he demanded equally high standards from others... He offered sharp criticism, consistently and without any senti-ment about it, in order to lead to a better theatre; and he combineda fine artistic sense with a thoroughly healthy instinct.”In the Thirties he held an Exhibition consisting of more than eightypictures, oil paintings, theatrical scenery and book decorations. Most ofthem were on Jewish themes such as the Vilna Ghetto, market women,porters, etc.“... Yo never aimed at a specifically Jewish art, and it may be thatthe harsh impression left by most of his works are the outcome ofa difficult childhood and his bitter memories of the War.”The above two quotations are taken from Michel Kitai’s book, towhich we referred in the previous section.During the Second World War Yo was in Russia, where he workedfor a Moscow publishing firm. After the War he returned to Riga. Likeso many others, part of his family had been killed in the Holocaust; whilehe himself suffered from heart disease.He published children’s stories with illustrations, and a monograph onthe painter Isaac Levitan. Towards the end of his life he planned to issueillustrations for folksongs, but never lived to do it.“... Within him he bore a yearning for loftier and more beautifulworlds... He always marched ahead with a straight back, obstinatelyfighting throughout his life against all that was in bad taste or petty-bourgeois, against niggardliness of heart or thought. He did not followthe beaten track but unweariedly sought for whatever is quintessentialin the arts, in literature and in life.”His friend and companion Mark Rasumny commemorated him inthose words in the Warsaw Yiddish paper “Folkstimme” after he passedaway in Riga in the year 1960.VIThe name of Israel Hayyim Taviov was at a certain period one to con-313The Jews in Latviajure with among students and teachers of Hebrew and readers of theHebrew press and literature throughout the whole of Russian and far beyond.He was bom in a small Lithuanian town in 1858 and Lithuanian Jewstherefore regard him as one of their fraternity. However, at the age of twohe was brought to Riga where he grew to maturity and received his educa-tion. Apart from a few years spent in Vilna as one of the editors of theHebrew journal “Hazman'' (The Times) and the period of the First WorldWar which he spent in Moscow, he lived and died in Riga. The Rigaenvironment, which differed so much from the towns and cities of the Paleof Settlement, exerted considerable influence on his character and education— on this point all his biographers are agreed — and he therefore deservesto be included among the personalities of Latvian Jewry.His was a wide-ranging culture combined with philological interests,dedication to study and a desire to expand his range of knowledge, whichcontinued all his life long. These expanded his horizons and prepared himfor literary activities in various fields: The daily press, to which he con-tributed feuilletons and political surveys; pedagogics and text-books, studiesand researches in general and Talmudic philology, and translations of thechoicest works in European literature.Those of his works which appeared in book form included: “OtzarHamilim Ufitgamim” (Treasury of Words and Epigrams); “Otzar HashirahVehamelitza” (Treasury of Poetry and Rhetoric); and a “Mivhar Hasa-frut” (Anthology of Hebrew Literature). The more important of his studieswere collected and published after his death as: “Kitvei I. H. Taviov”(Works of I.H.T.), Berlin 1923. Among his translations into Hebrew men-tion should be made of the Autobiography of Solomon Maimon from Ger-man; “Ephraim Kuh” from the German of Berthold Auerbach. “TomSawyer”, by Mark Twain; “The Pickwick Papers, Part I”’, by CharlesDickens and “The Picture of Dorian Gray” by Oscar Wilde.I. H. Taviov was a keen and zealous protagonist of Hebrew and cam-paigned by all the means at his disposal against the spread of Yiddish. Astudy of the man and his work was published by M. Bobe in “Heavar”16, 1969.He died in Riga in 1920.Taviov’s whole personality was marked by his keen opposition to thespread of Yiddish; but Latvian Jewry also produced two of the most im-portant students and architects of the scientific study of Yiddish, namelyMax (Meir) Weinreich and his son Uriel Weinreich.314Towns & PeopleMax Weinreich was born in 1894 in Goldingen, a small town that wasthoroughly imbued with the German culture of Kurland. He studied firstin Goldingen, later in Dvinsk, and in 1912 entered the Faculty of Historyand Philology of the University of St. Petersburg. He continued his studiesin Germany and in 1923 received the degree of Ph.D. at Marburg Univer-sity for a dissertation on the History of Jewish Philology.In 1924 he went to Vilna where he was one of the founders of the“YIVO” (Yiddishe Wissenschaftliche Institut or Yiddish Scholarly Institute,now in New York). It may be said that all his life long, first in Vilna andlater in New York to which the YIVO was transferred after the SecondWorld War, his life was bound up with the scholarly work, editing andorganisation of that Institution.He began to write for the press when still young, in the papers of theBund and several journals in Riga. His works include studies, researchand philology, a grammar of Yiddish, essays, introductions, notes to books,etc., etc. An even partial bibliography would require several pages. Mostof the material is available in Volume III of the Yiddish “Lexicon of theNew Yiddish Literature.”The crown of his work is his comprehensive study of the “Historyof the Yiddish Language”, containing the history of the language fromthe 13th Century to the present day. This work took him more thanten years.In 1947 he was appointed Professor of Yiddish at the City College ofNew York, and Visiting Professor in a number of other Universities.He passed away in New York in 1969.His son Uriel Weinreich followed in his father’s footsteps, engaging inphilology and linguistic research. He was born in Vilna in 1926 and cameto New York in 1940, together with his father. His book “College Yiddish”is one of the basic text-books of the language. His modem English-Yiddishand Yiddish-English Dictionary is the best that has appeared hitherto.He also published studies in general philology. In 1959-1960 he lecturedat the Hebrew University in Jerusalem, where he also worked on an Atlasof the spread of Yiddish dialects and culture.He passed away in New York in 1967, at the age of 41.Jacob Israelson is not known to many nowadays, but occupies a specialplace of his own in the field of scholarship on account of his extensiverange of knowledge, despite his modesty and reluctance to advertise himself.He was born in Mitau in 1856, graduated from the Libau Gymnasium315The Jews in Latviaand afterwards entered the Faculty of Oriental Langages at the Universityof St. Petersburg. In 1878 he received a gold medal for his study of theSyriac “Peshitto”, the Syriac translation of the Bible. In 1889 he receivedthe degree of Magister.He dedicated himself to the study of Semitic languages and publishedbooks with several firms in Germany and France. He contributed to theRussian Jewsish organ “Voskhod”* and translated several volumes ofFlavius Josephus. He contributed to the Russian Brockhaus-Efron Ency-clopedia.He translated the works of Professor Daniel Chwolsohn, on the RitualMurder Charge against Jews, from German into Russian. During the trialof Mendel Beiliss he was one of the leading experts of the Defence on ac-count of his learning and scholarship.Israelson’s work, “Religious Sources on the Ritual Murder Chargeagainst the Jews” is held by YIVO in manuscript.In 1920 he lived in Kiev, where he wrote his Yiddish study on “Nathan-Nata Hanover, his life and literary activities”, which was published by theYIVO in its “Historical Studies”, Warsaw, 1929. (Nathan-Nata Hanoveris best known for his Hebrew work “Yeven-Metzula” — the Nether Deeps—, a historical account of the Chmelnitzky Massacres of Polish and Li-thuanian Jewry in 1648-49, which was first published in Venice in 1653.)After the First World War Israelson returned to Libau, where he diedin 1926.Jewish physicians played a considerable part not only in their pro-fessions but also in communal and cultural areas that helped to shapeLatvian Jewry.Mention has already been made in the present essay and elsewhere inthese pages of Dr. M. Scheinfeld and Professor V. Mintz of Riga; Dr.Isaac Jaffe the historian; Dr. J. Hoffman the Revisionist leader; and Dr.N. Maisel, the Bund Deputy in the Seim.However, it is only fitting to mention some more of these physicians.They include: Dr. B. Du bins ky, member of the Management of the “Ar-beter Heim” and the “Kultur Liga”, and Chairman of the OZE (JewishHealth Organisation), who was also one of the founders of the papers“Letzte Neies” and “Frimorgen”; Dr. B. Hertzfeld, founder and directorof the Linat Hatzedek Society, who wrote a book on “Mother and Child”;Dr. Julius Eliasberg, chairman of the Curatorium of the Bikkur HolimHospital and member of the OZE Board of Management, who was an316Towns & Peopleactive member of the Social Democrats and the Bund; Dr. Abraham Sal-kind, a leading Riga Zionist and member of the Executive Committee ofthe Physicians” Association; Dr. M. Sand and Dr. Z. Gordin, both ofDvinsk and active in the Zeirei Zion — ZS Movement and the OZEExecutive, while Dr. Gordin was also a writer and journalist; Dr. J. Wolpe,Dr. B. Lifshitz, Dr. Werth, all of whom took an active part in organisinga General Latvian Sick Fund; Dr. Z. Kantor of the “Jewish” Sick Fundin Riga, etc.; Dr. N. Grinstein, head of the Health Department of the TownCouncil in Riga.Special mention should be made of Dr. Hermann Wassermann whoseinitiative, energy and ceaseless efforts led to the establishment of institutionsthat played a large part in the spread of Hebrew in Latvia.Dr. H. Wassermann was born in Livonia in 1874, studied at DorpatUniversity and proceeded to advanced studies in Berlin, coming to Rigain 1900. He engaged in professional activities and was called to the armyas a physician during the First World War. On a number of occasionshe was elected Chairman of the Society of Jewish Physicians.His communal activities were in the field of culture. He founded andpermanently headed the “Society for Improving Science and Arts in Lat-via.” This Society founded the Popular Conservatoire which was directedby the composer Solomon Rosowsky. It also established the first HebrewKindergarten and, in 1925, the Hebrew Gymnasium in Riga where a wholegeneration of Jewish youth grew to maturity.It was by no means easy to maintain these institutions, not only ma-terially but also at a satisfactory cultural level; and Dr. Wassermann wasresponsible for all this. However, these institutions, which were establishedby dint of so much love and toil, shared the same fate as the other Jewishinstitutions after the Putsch of 1934, the Russian Occupation and the Ger-man Conquest.In 1941, during the Russian Occupation, Dr. Wassermann was arrestedtogether with the other leaders of Latvian Jewry and was sent to the KirovConcentration Camp in the Urals. First he was sent to physical work butbefore long he was exploited as a physician. About a year later he joinedpart of his family in the Krasnoyarsk Government District of Siberia, andremained there until 1947 when he was permitted to return to Riga. Heworked as a hospital physician there rntil 1950, when he was arrested againand exiled with his family to Kazakstan. Two years later he died there.Joshua or, as he was generally called, Zhano Tron was widely known317The Jews in Latviain Riga and Independent Latvia. He was bora to a rabbinical family inMitau in 1864, graduated from Moscow University, engaged in law andwas a veteran Zionist who immediately after the First Congress foundedthe first Zionist Society in Riga under the name “Zion”, together with E.Ettingen.He was one of the founders and the Secretary from the beginning (1901)of the “Disseminators of Enlightenment Society” of which he was an hono-rary member, remaining Secretary until he came to Eretz Israel in 1935.At the time of the Kurland expulsion in the First World War he was anactive member of the Legal Committee, which sent him on a mission toPetrograd.In Independent Latvia he was a member of the National Council onbehalf of the General Zionists, and was afterwards elected to the Consti-tuent Assembly, in which he was a member of the Legal Committee.For many years he headed the Jewish National Fund in Riga, and wentto U.S.A. together with Professor Laserson in order to raise funds for theHebrew Gymnasium in that city.In 1935 he came to Eretz Israel, and passed away in Haifa in 1939.Professor Solomon Tron, his brother, was not known in Latvia but wasfamous elsewhere. He was born in Mitau in 1874, studied engineering inRiga and Brussels, where he helped to organise the Strike of 1900. Heworked for the General Electric Corporation as a Construction Engineer,and came to Russia as its representative. He engaged in building and elec-tricity at Vladivostok in the Far East and at Baku on the Caspian Sea.As a revolutionary Socialist he took an active part in the 1905 Revolution,from which time he maintained close ties with Russian revolutionaries andin due course was in close touch with Trotzky, Vishinsky, Mikoyan, etc.During the First World War he was in U.S.A., but returned to Russia in1916 in connection with the production of electricity in Finland.After the Revolution his name is connected with the famous Dnie-prostroi Dams across the River Dnieper. Thanks to him the General ElectricCorporation agreed to send dozens of engineers under his leadership toRussia long before normal relations had been established between U.S.A.and U.S.S.R. He remained in Russia with brief intervals until 1933.In the Second World War, Tron and his wife were given the difficulttask of selecting 2,000 refugees from Occupied Europe for admission to theRepublic of San Domingo. On this occasion Tron met Germans, some ofwhom helped him to take Jews out of Concentration Camps. At this time318Towns & Peoplehe was also one of the Directors of United States “Land-Lease” Opera-tions. In this connection he went to China in 1943, developed an affectionfor the country and spent five years there as Personal Adviser to GeneralChang Kai Chek.He was one of the advisers at the Potsdam Conference of 1945, withthe rank of Colonel. He visited U.S.S.R. in order to rehabilitate the Jewishsettlements in Crimea, but could not find any trace of them.From China he proceeded to India, where he became one of the eco-nomic advisers of Pandit Nehru for three years.In 1952 he came to Israel. At the request of the late Eliezer Kaplan,then Minister of Finance, he undertook to serve without salary as EconomicAdviser to the State of Israel. He headed a team of engineers for about ayear, engaged on various projects, but resigned on account of differencesof opinion with the Government, chiefly with regard to the exploitation ofthe Compensation Payments from Germany. Tron insisted that this moneyshould be a basis for developing the industry and economic independenceof the country, rather than permitting individuals to become rich withthe money.He spent his final years in London. Friends and guests regularly visitedhim in order to converse with him and benefit from his vast knowledge,not only of economics and engineering but also of literature. In 1969 hepassed away in Italy at the age of 95.VIIIn this section we shall include several persons from Dvinsk withoutwhom no account of Dvinsk and Latgale would be complete; even thoughtheir names became known far beyond their own homes. Their activitiesadded lustre to their place of origin.R. Abramovitch was the pseudonym of Raphael Rein at the time heengaged in illegal activities, and it clung to him all his life long. He wasbom at Dvinsk in 1880 and attended Heder and the Ponivezh Gymnasium,taking the final year of his course in Libau. In 1899 he entered the En-gineering Section of the Riga Polytechnicum. He had a preference for theexact sciences. Mathematics, Physics, etc.At the turn of the century the Riga Polytechnicum was a focal pointfor revolutionary movements. The mass student demonstration of 1902in Riga has not yet been forgotten. Here he met underground circles, theSocial Democrat Movement, and the slogan of the Class Struggle which319The Jews in Latviaaccording to Socialist dogma is a direct outcome of Capitalism. This “re-alistic” and materialist approach towards the solution of the problem ofthe exploited convinced him with its unimpeachable logic.At that time two movements contested for the Jewish community ofEastern Europe: Zionism and the Bund. In those early days of Herzl,Abramovitch regarded Zionism as a Utopia that lacked every realisticfoundation for fulfilment and, even in the best of cases, would call for acombination of all the forces of the Jewish people, including the Jewishcapitalists; and such an eventuality was in direct conflict with all his viewsaccording to the principles of Orthodox Marxism.R. Abramovitch joined the Bund and became one of its central pillars.In the course of time he also became a leader of the Menshevik SocialDemocrat Movement in Russia. His story is typical of the revolutionaryof that period. His spiritual qualities placed him at the head of eventswherever he came, and his share in the Russian Labour Movement wasconsiderable.In 1902 he was expelled from the Riga Polytechnicum on account ofpolitical activities. He moved to St. Petersburg and in 1903 crossed the Ger-man frontier illegally. It was his intention to continue his studies in Liege,but he made his way to Switzerland whch was the centre for Russian re-volutionaries. In the consultations of the Bund in Geneva he was the spokes-man on the National Question.In 1904 he returned to Russia, became a member of the Warsaw Com-mittee of the Bund and was arrested there. Following his release he attendedthe Sixth Conference of the Bund in 1905. After the St. Petersburg revoltof 1905 he was the Bund representative on the Labour Councils establishedthere, and was the editor of the Russian “Yevreiski Rabotchi” (JewishWorkers) and “Nashe Slowo” (Our Word).In 1906 he helped to organise the Seventh Conference of the Bund, andinfluenced the return of the Bund to the General Russian Social DemocratParty. (The Bund had left that party on account of differences of opinionregarding national issues such as the separate organisation of Jewish work-ers.) During the same year he was elected to the Bund Central Committee.In 1907 he attended the Social Democrat Conference in London, andwas sent to U.S.A. by the Bund. In 1908 and 1909 he taught Mathematics,Jewish History and Physics in Vilna while simultaneously engaging in un-derground activities.He was arrested in 1910 and exiled to the Vologda Government District,from which he escaped and reached Heidelberg, where he published a study320Seated r. to 1.: Weinberg, Mrs. Weinberg. Mrs. D. Nurok, Rabbi M. Nurok. A. Weinberg.B. Vishnevsky. J. Gorfinkel, Z. Shazar (Rubashov), Dr. J. Heilman. —, —, M. Bobe,Mrs. E. Bobe. Dr. S. Lipshitz, Z. Rabinovitz. Mrs. D. Genin. Mrs. Gottesman.Mr. Gottesman.-Curt on.*o215»cO' (/>-O' LUNIoJ*N•J P*< £> NUJ o* 25 j-j -■< «l—« *->r” ^c«< .£ *5 UJ §Z . cO ft. £X .f- »- 5Tc/5 3? ^* cZ j= If""Ore<£ ff-SH « s>£22 . N2 <N u'“OX cE x£ •2z .*— (/>^ £Pf.o -2 oJ *I«C/52 >^ o. JCo^ sO02O>LUC w5 -S’.*3 cX> S•S X* <V)3aEoc153o£o3£Li.COaiEoj=JCgcrejzUVe«*■»C/5inxpiltte $yjrTX®?®±mife#| *^iC\t£iCriCTK9| ' ^ ^■pK#rs| -T # IV W | / * 2 P*»fc 1 4 1 Ijjsssr.. ,.„ ”1* i#W|-/ 1 :/i\jgt^. “VlWIlOf -Tto • ■‘httfttyW * H ipI / %j i%;rf"i# W P w 1 4 IS%::%. -SKMSSSefS %%i #' ty#1*W *ii| > 5^<&•:•$# 4, *#■ inmmitv **|y y iy| y »<# «##$**% :%• <*5;if •*■■ l %y* ♦ ^,p■*#*: mxi mx ify mm." % ■* «w# % %** $* s% pp: pSfc- -$■ -p1 y # y*»*; «»*; ■«(% •#* «*» Sit WSfc* i|/yi l-iy* £N 1 *% *% •$?• p£:p>i#:p •■#>*<: ;*> ypfc % ppy*s> p* j»p *9ff>: *fc p p p :p PtepWt* ^ «<p $ p y^-- <-';_pr P%<%. ;pp#p; $$»«%*1 ffSJ*' l|:^$$* %. & %m fcfc P***{> S *>'y y y %. :p Pp p p1 ^laj i 4 j>:8»fe »»Ml|^ te* **S*.:T $ < .# .*««& ^ I .#* 1P*X p Pp p. -fe: pllp^v | i* M- * /ypp- Pppp pyp.p Py».PPp :P»:-Ppp-**. p ppp| •# $.4p % S $$P:P % plwS%| .*Jfc i /p -p Pw. p pp ppip %*»p %• P**i i.sm| I ip p. p1 *y #y yP.ty> P Pws p;* 4 *«l -l«4Py*; p ppf**,* M 1Py Piy| / ^ i#«•'>«;*.: fewv i*. *:.;!»|/ 1 ?%J“iK'O'THp; p yp# 1 4p ^Wfe ^■$>. ip*##i lu /4Ip pp py pp %p^:'%:</ 1 I ^rVav% | ^y 11**%, fcj*.# 4 4UNHID^ 1'V.: ;-v 1 ! %hyny’itcmK3y%p: y=p 4|-%%I / •/' w% 1 iMONUMENT TO THE CONGREGATIONS OF LATVIA AND ESTHONIA ATMOUNT ZION IN JERUSALEM.Towns & People“On the Sources of the Bible”. From then until 1917 he lived in Vienna,where he conducted Bund activities and participated in all Yiddish journalsincluding “Zukunff”, “Forverts”, etc. He favoured legal activities, i.e.,through Cooperatives, Trade Unions, etc.At the commencement of the First World War he was a supporter ofthe “Zimmerwald Conference”, which called for the opposition of organisedworkers to participation in the War.In 1917 he returned to Russia in one of the “sealed” railway coacheswhich Germany sent on to Russia with the leading revolutionaries, includingLenin. After the Revolution he became a member of the Central Com-mittees of both the Bund and the Menshevik Social Democrats, and tookan active part in the propaganda for ending the War. He was also activelyengaged in the consultations aiming at a common platform between theBolsheviks and the other Socialist Movements.In 1918 he moved to Moscow together with the Central Committee ofthe Mensheviks and was on the staff of the journal “Vperyod.” He was ar-rested by the Cheka (Bolshevik Secret Police) that year for trying to hold aConvention of Unorganised Workers, and spent several months in prison.During the years 1918 to 1920 he conducted Menshevik activities to-gether with I. Martov and F. Dan, and also wrote in all Bund publications.In 1920 the Bund split. Some of its members joined the BolshevikMovement and established the “Combund”. Abramovitch headed the partthat remained faithful in principle to the former functions of the Bund,and was elected Chairman of its Central Committee. The relations betweenthe Bolshevik Government and the other Socialist parties became so badthat he moved to Berlin and in 1921 was one of the founders of the Russian“Sozialisticheski Vestnik”, a journal which engaged in propaganda againstthe Bolsheviks and gave reliable information on what was happening inRussia. In due course he became the editor of this journal, and contributedto it as long as he lived.He was the representative of the Mensheviks at the Vienna Internationalin 1921, and helped to bring about a union with the Second International.In 1923, after the meeting of the International in Hamburg, he becameone of the leaders of the World Socialist Movement.Between 1924 and 1930 he lectured in the United States, and wrotefor the Yiddish daily “Forverts” of New York. In 1933 he moved to Pariswhere he became one of the editors-in-chief of the Yiddish 4 Allgemeine(General) Encyclopedia”. In the volume on “Jews” he wrote a study ofJewish history in Lithuania, Poland and Russia. He moved to New York321The Jews in Latviain 1940 as one of the editors of “Forverts”, while at the same time con-tinuing to edit the “Sotz. Vestnik”. From 1942 to 1950 he edited the“Modem Review”.Apart from essays in newspapers and journals he wrote a number ofYiddish works in book form, such as: “Textbook of the History of (Bi-blical) Israel”’, Berlin 1923; “In Two Revolutions — Reminiscences”, NewYork 1944; “The Vanished World”, New York 1947; “The Future of So-viet Russia”, Berlin 1923; “Anti-Socialist Terror in Soviet Russia”, Berlin1923.He died in New York in 1963.His negative attitude to Zionism has already been referred to. BenjaminEliav, who translated his book on “The Soviet Revolution” (Am Oved, TelAviv 1966) remarks in his introduction: “Yet towards the end of his lifehe displayed great enthusiasm for the emergence of Israel, particularly forthe Labour Movement... He dreamt of visiting the country but it nevercame about.”Quite different from Rein-Abramovitch, the pellucid theoretician forwhom everything was based on reality and rationalism, was the revolutionaryIsaac Nahman Steinberg, also a native of Dvinsk. Steinberg was imbuedwith a Hassidic fervour, and not only because he remained an observantJew all his life long but because of some inner uneasiness, some splitbetween cold logic and spiritual conscience, a contradiction between mercyand terror, between righteousness and the persecution of opponents, betweenthe sufferings of the Jewish people and his own incapacity for finding asatisfactory solution.The following is a brief account of his life. He was born in Dvinsk in1880 and from 1903 lived at Pernau in Esthonia, where it was possible tostudy without profaning the Sabbath.In 1905 and 1906, those fateful years for the Russian RevolutionaryMovement, he found himself caught up in the whirlpool of revolutionarydiscussions. The orthodox materialism of the Social Democrats, who claimedthat economic conditions were invariable and not subject to the influenceof the human will, did not speak to his heart. Far closer were the SocialRevolutionaries, who recognised the influence of national and personalideals; and who found moral justification for their support of individualterrorism, which was directed against tyrants and oppressors.In his youth in Dvinsk he had been influenced by Zionism, but now hededicated himself entirely to the movement for all-Russian freedom since322Towns & Peoplethat would cause the Jewish question to be resolved of itself; religion beinga private matter of which a person needs to give an account only tohimself.In 1906 he proceeded to Moscow University to study law. He was ar-rested and sentenced to exile in Siberia, but thanks to the intercession ofhis parents he was expelled from Russia instead. He continued his studiesin Germany, where after three years he received his Doctorate of Lawsfor a dissertation on “Political Judgment according to the Talmud.”While he was outside Russia he established contact with the Revolu-tionaries in exile, and was present at the Congress of the Second Inter-national in 1907. During all these years he was a member of the Social Re-volutionary Party.In 1910 he returned to Russia, took the law examinations and beganto work as a lawyer’s assistant. He married in 1914 but was expelled fromMoscow to Ufa in 1916, staying there until the 1917 Revolution.At the outbreak of the Revolution he was one of the extreme opponentsto the continuation of the War. He opposed the Kerensky Government anddemanded immediate implementation of the Agrarian Reform. He becameone of the organisers of the left wing of the Social Revolutionaries, andin December 1917 he was co-opted to the Soviet Government as Ministerof Justice. As such he abolished the former legal system, established Re-volutionary Tribunals, and since there was no Bolshevik majority whenthe Constituent Assembly met, it was Steinberg who helped to have it dis-persed. During his three months in office he did his best to introduce ahumane attitude towards the opponents of the Revolution; but the Chekahad the upper hand, and only rarely did he succeed in acting accordingto his conscience.The idyll between the Left-wing Social Revolutionaries and the Bol-sheviks lasted only a short time, and they left the Government after thelatter signed the Peace Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany.Until 1922 the Left-wing Social Revolutionary Party could still functionin Bolshevik Russia; although he spent a year in prison where he wrote hisbook “From February to October.” In 1923 he left Russia and from thattime edited various works and journals which conducted propaganda againstSoviet Russia. He published books on: “The Image of the Revolution”;“I was a People’s Commissar”; “Maria Spiridonova”’. He also wrote plays.In 1926 he began to issue the journal “Freie Schriften” (Free Writings),first in Warsaw and later in London. He began to concern himself with the323The Jews in LatviaJewish Question and in 1928 published his book “In Stormy Times” inwhich he warned of the increasing danger of Nazism in Europe.He held that Zionism was unable to solve the problems of the Jewishpeople, and therefore revived the defunct Jewish Territorialism of the de-cade before the First World War in a new movement called the “FreelandLeague of Jewish Colonisation.” His aim was to find some possibility ofexistence for Jews and “Jewishness” by setting up autonomous centres onSocialist foundations in which the Jewish culture would be based on theYiddish language.He made many efforts to find his “Freeland”: In Angola, Alaska,Madagascar and finally the Northern Territory of Queensland in Australia;to which Dominion he went to engage in negotiations, and where he re-mained for four years on account of the Second World War. All his effortswere doomed to failure.The annihilation of European Jewry was a heavy blow, while theestablishment of the State of Israel could not satisfy his desires. He becameone of its critics, both because it set out to be the only objective and long-range solution for the problems of the Jewish People, and also because heheld that it could not exist in the Arab world.He died in New York in 1957. A Yiddish work devoted to him waspublished there in 1961.The revolutionaries Rein-Abramovitch and Steinberg fit well into therevolutionary tradition of Dvinsk. Entirely different were two men whoachieved renown in the fields of art. One was the sculptor Nahum Aaron-son and the other was the actor Shlomo Vof si-Mikhoels.Nahum Aaronson was bom to a Hassidic family in 1872, in the smallLatgalian town Kraslavka. From his childhood he used to carve figures,but in his town there was no possibility of study or development. At theage of 15 he went to Vilna, where he studied at the School of Art for threeyears under conditions of poverty and want. Aaronson did a bust of theDistrict Superintendent of Schools, who tried to secure his entry to theAcademy of Arts in St. Petersburg; but his efforts were in vain. Aaronsonhad no right of residence outside the Jewish Pale, and also lacked the basiceducation required. He made his way to Paris without money and withoutknowing French, entered the Municipal Ecole des Arts Decoratifs withoutneeding to pay, and made a very scanty living by technical work for asculptor. Upon completing the school he was given its highest prize.In 1894 he returned to Russia in order to serve in the army, was324Towns & Peopleexempted from service and returned to Paris. There his early years at thistime were very difficult indeed. Lack of food caused him to faint fromexhaustion one day; but luckily for him that was the day when he receivedhis first major commission. He became famous in 1897, after participatingin the Annual Exhibition of the Salon. He exhibited at various Europeancapitals, became widely known, and his works were acquired by leadingmuseums throughout the world.He spent most of his life in Paris, where he received the “Legiond’Honneur”. In 1941 he went to U.S.A. because of the War and the NaziOccupation of France, dying in New York in 1943.He prepared statuary and statues on general and Jewish themes, carvingallegorical personages and symbols from the distant past and the present,as well as writers and scholars including Tolstoi, Turgeniev and Pasteur.Composers included Beethoven, Berlioz, Chopin and Wagner. Statesmenincluded Roosevelt and Lenin. He prepared single and group statues, memo-rials and fountains.Among his Jewish figures from the distant past were “Eve,” and “theProphet” (in the Tel Aviv Museum). Those of the present included: AnOld Jew, Pogrom, busts of Nordau, Louis Brandeis and others. Aaronsonis thought to have been particularly influenced by the culture and art ofWestern Europe. His statues of adults and children show his tendencyto penetrate to the unconscious self of his subject, and to lay bare thedeepest urges in the latter’s soul.The ties between Aaronson and his city can be judged by this passagefrom a letter written in 1930 to a fellow-townsman:“Until now I have not answered your letter which has brought tomind my Kraslavka, small and aged, drenched in sunshine, whereI spent the best years of my life. In any case that time is engravedto this day in my memory as the best years. Your letter brought thepast and all that was precious before my eyes.”9Solomon Vofsi-Mikhoels was bom in Dvinsk in 1890 in a traditionallyobservant family, and went to Heder for his Jewish schooling. At the ageof thirteen he began to study general subjects and the Russian language.In 1905 he entered the Riga Realschule, which he completed in 1908. Whilestudying he gave private lessons in the Russian language and distinguishedhimself at school when reciting select passages from Russian literature.He continued studying in Kiev and afterwards joined the Juridical Facultyat the University of St. Persburg.325The Jews in LatviaIn 1918, when he was 29 years old, he entered the School for theTheatre. From 1919 he began to appear at the Yiddish Dramatic Studio,which was headed by Alexander Granovsky.* He appeared in Maeterlinck’splays and Shalom Asch’s “The Sin” and “Amnon and Tamar”. At thistheatre he adopted the pseudonym Mikhoels, apparently in memory of hisfather whose name had been Michael.In 1920 he proceeded to Moscow with the Theatre, which now changedfrom a Studio to a Chamber Theatre, “The State Jewish Theatre”. Mikhoelsappeared in Asch’s “God of Vengeance”, Gutzkov’s “Uriel Acosta” andGoldfaden’s “The Witch”, etc. In 1925 he appeared in a film, in whichhe played Shalom Aleichem’s Menahem Mendel.In 1926 he was honoured as a “most productive” actor of U.S.S.R. In1928-29 he and the Theatre went abroad and appeared in France, Belgium,Holland and Austria.In 1929 he was appointed Artistic Director of the Theatre, and parti-cipated in performances of plays by Bergelson, Nissonov and others. In1925 he achieved very high fame with his performance as King Lear.Between 1926 and 1939 he performed in plays by Kulbak, Goldfaden andPeretz Markish, and acted the parts of Shalom AleichenT’s “Tuvia theDairyman” and Shakespeare’s “Richard the Third”.In 1939 he was awarded the “Order of Lenin” and honoured as Pe-ople’s Actor of U.S.S.R.During the war years from 1941 he served as Chairman of the JewishAnti-Fascist Committee, and his Theatre was transferred to Tashkent. In1943 Mikhoels and Itzik Pfeffer visited U.S.A., Canada, Mexico and Eng-land to conduct anti-Hitlerist propaganda and win support for U.S.S.R. asrepresentatives of the Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee.He returned to Russia in 1944 and continued his theatrical work andhis professorial activities. In 1948 he was killed in Minsk. His death issurrounded with mystery, and many people believe that he was liquidatedamong the other Jewish writers and artists who met their deaths duringthe terrorist years of the Stalin period.Mikhoels was an exceptional actor, in whom the qualities of the born* Alexander Granovsky or Abraham Azarkh studied at the same private Realschule,known as “Friedrich German”, in Riga as S. Vofsi. The writer of these linesstudied together with them there. Jewish pupils at this school amounted to 90%since they could not gain admission to Government or Municipal Schools onaccount of the Governmental numerus clausus against the Jews.326Towns & Peopleartist were combined with knowledge, widely branching culture and meti-culous care for every line and motion. He was a small man with a facethat was almost ugly, but his intelligence and intellect enabled him to over-come his physical difficulties. He could achieve the highest artistic levels,as when playing “King Lear”, where tragedy and grandeur combined intoone complete and impressive figure.VIIIThere is a certain prayer which comes to the mind and heart of awriter of reminiscences, a lament for bygone years combined with a fearfor the future. It is the universal human plea: “Do not cast us away frombefore thee and do not take thy holy strength away from us. Do not castme away in old age, and when my strength fails do not abandon me...”When I was young I used to go to hear this prayer being sung by theCantor Baruch Leib Rosowsky at the Riga Great Synagogue in GogolStreet. The memory has led me to write the following section on the musicalfigures of Riga.The official Synagogue of Riga Jewry was the Great Synagogue inGogol Street, known as “Die Gogol Schul”, where the Chief Rabbi usedto pray during festivals and the notables of the community thought it anhonour to possess a permanent seat. The high esteem in which it was heldwas due in no small measure to the famous Cantor Baruch Leib Rosowsky,who served there for 48 consecutive years, from the time the Synagoguewas built.B. L. Rosowsky was born in the small town Nalewki, in the VilnaGovernment District. Until the age of 23 he lived there, married, had threechildren, became a well-versed and keen student of the Talmud and rab-binical authorities, and was a good-looking man, but otherwise did nothingin particular. The livelihood of the family was provided by his wife. How-ever, his prayers and Sabbath and festival hymns, sung in a fine lyrical tenorvoice, were already outstanding.Business affairs brought his father to St. Petersburg where he intro-duced his son Baruch Leib to the wellknown local merchant brothers RebMeir and Reb Moshe Arieh Leib Friedland.Thanks to their influence Baruch Leib entered the Conservatoire thatwas directed by the famous musician Anton Rubinstein. Thanks to theirmaterial aid he completed his studies there, spending six years at the insti-tution.327The Jews in LatviaHe afterwards went for further study with Cantor Sulzer of Vilna, butdid not find the latter’s manner of prayer to his taste, and proceeded toKoenigsberg, to the famous Cantor Hirsch Weintraub. “As a man of thepeople and an outstanding lyricist, Weintraub was in accord with myfather’s taste”, writes his son the composer. Professor Solomon Rosowsky,in his essay: “How my Father was accepted as Cantor in the Great Syna-gogue of Riga”, in “Latvian Jewry”’ Tel Aviv, 1953.On his way home B. L. Rosowsky visited his kinsfolk in Vilna, wherehe was asked to lead the congregation in prayer. But the far-famed city ofVilna “did not yet have any culture at all in the cantorial field,” and hisappearance was a dismal failure. At that period, in the Seventies of thelast century. Cantors were expected to perform all kinds of tricks andengage in various growlings and unnatural warblings, to repeat words end-lessly, and so on. A cantor like Rosowsky, one of the first with a highly-cultured approach and full musical training, did not accord with the generaltaste of the Congregation.“A group of Riga merchants who used to float logs of timber down theRiver Dvina... decided to contribute a large part of their profits towardsbuilding the Synagogue... When the building was finished they requestedCantor Weintraub in Koenigsberg to inaugurate the new edifice... Herecommended his pupil Rosowsky to them.”This time as well there was every prospect of failure, for many of theRiga congregation “had also grown up with corrupt concepts of cantorialmusic”, and the intellectuals were the only ones who supported him. Ro-sowsky then appealed again to his benefactor Friedland, who wrote tothe Governor of Riga and requested his help. The Governor appeared atthe Synagogue during the service. After it was over he went to Rosowsky,to whom he took a great liking, and warmly thanked him for his prayers.That settled the matter. He began praying at the Synagogue in 1872 andcontinued until 1919, passing away that year only a few months after heceased to lead the services.B. L. Rosowsky composed many melodies, some of which were pub-lished by his son. Professor Solomon Rosowsky (Fifteen Selihot — Peni-tential Prayers — for the Days of Awe) in 1924 through the “Yuval”Publishing House in Berlin as “Part Two.” The First Part, consisting ofPrayers for the Sabbath and the Three Major Festivals, was never pub-lished for lack of money.Professor Solomon Rosowsky inherited the love of music from his328Towns & Peoplefather the Cantor. The latter wished him to be a lawyer and he commencedto study law, but his natural tendencies proved stronger and he continuedthe family tradition. He was born in Riga in 1878, and as remarked beganto study law. However, he abandoned this field and dedicated himself tomusic, first in Kiev and afterwards in Leipzig. In 1906 he moved to St.Petersburg and entered the Conservatoire in which his father had studiedsome forty years earlier. In 1908 he founded a “Society for Jewish FolkMusic” and thenceforward became known as a composer using Jewishthemes. He was also the musical editor of the daily “Den”.In 1918-1919 he was the Musical Director of the Jewish DramaticStudio under the management of Alexander Granovsky, and wrote musicfor “Amnon and Tamar”, “Uriel Acosta” and other plays presented bythe Studio. In 1920, when the Studio was transferred to Moscow, Rosowskyreturned to Latvia.There he headed the Jewish Conservatoire established by “The Societyfor improving Science and Art”’ which had been founded by Dr. HermannWassermann. He was the musical critic of the Russian daily “Sevodnia”.In 1924, as recorded above, he published part of his father’s works inBerlin.He proceeded to Eretz Israel in 1925 and commenced his musicalcareer in the Studio of the “Gdud Haavoda” (Labour Legion). He wasone of the founders of the Musical Academy of Jerusalem, where he wrotemusic to the performances of “Sabbethai Zvi”, “The Treasure”, “TheLocks of Absalom”, “Jacob and Rachel”, etc. The Jewish National Fundcommissioned a collection of “Music of the Land” from him. When thePalestine Broadcasting Service commenced in 1936 he suggested the musicalsignature tune of the Hebrew news, based on the cantillation of the firstwords in the Torah.The Palestine Institute for the Musical Sciences was established at thistime, and there he began his life’s work, a study of the musical aspectsof the Cantillation of the Torah. This study was published in New Yorkin 1957 under the title: “The Cantillation of the Bible.”He went to U.S.A. after the Second World War, returning to Israelfor a short while in 1959. He then went back to New York, where hedied in 1962.“The Cantillation of the Bible” has been translated into Hebrew byDr. Shneur Zalman Zeitlin jointly with and under the editorship of Dr.Hayyim Bar Dayan, and is due to be published shortly. (Dr. Zeitlin has329The Jews in Latviaalso been good enough to provide me with most of the information on theRosowsky family.)Cantor Rosowsky”s Choir included two singers who in due courseachieved fame in the larger musical world. These were Joseph Schwarzand Herman Jadlowker.Joseph Schwarz, who was born in Riga in 1880, had a Baritone thatwas very well suited for Concerts and Operas. He began his musicalcareer in Rosowsky’s Choir, and in due course began to appear in suchwellknown European Opera House as the Volks-Oper in Vienna, theHofoper in Berlin, etc. In 1921 he joined the Chicago Opera and appearedas the chief singer in a performance of “La Traviata” in New York. Allhis appearances were crowned with great success. Unfortunately his careerwas interrupted in 1926, when he died in Berlin at the age of 46.Hermann Jadlowker was bom in Riga in 1878. His was an operatictenor. From Rosowsky’s Choir he proceeded to the Vienna Conservatoire.He began to appear at the Cologne Opera House in 1899, and passedthrough a large number of European cities including the Opera Housesof Stettin and Karlsruhe, finally making his way to Berlin where he becamea leading singer. Kaiser Wilhelm II was particularly fond of his outstandingcoloratura. He appeared at the Metropolitan Opera House in New Yorkin 1910, 1912, and again in 1919. After 1924 he appeared as a guest singerand at concerts. In 1929 he returned to Riga, assuming the post of ChiefCantor at the synagogue in Gogol Street where he had been the choristerof Cantor Rosowsky. He proceeded to Eretz Israel in 1939, dedicatedhimself to teaching music and sang at Memorial Meetings to the Martyrsof Latvia and Esthonia.In 1953 he passed away in Tel Aviv.Most of the musicians mentioned here were famous in several countries,but the composer Marc Lavry found his place in Eretz Israel once he camethere, and developed his qualities and talents in that country.Mark Lavry was born in Riga in 1903 and was a composer and con-ductor. After graduating from the Riga Conservatoire he studied in Leipzig,Between 1927 and 1932 he lived in Germany where he conducted orchestrasfor Ballet, Opera and Radio, besides being Conductor of the Berlin Or-chestra for four years. During this period he began writing musical com-positions. From 1932 to 1934 he was a conductor of the National Operain Riga.330Towns & PeopleIn 1935 he came to Eretz Israel. Between 1941 and 1947 he conductedthe Israel People’s Opera” and later served as the Musical Director of“Kol Zion Lagola” (The Voice of Zion to the Exile).The compositions he wrote in Eretz Israel combined folklorist elementswith others that are characteristic of the new life developing in the country.Such were his Opera “Dan the Watchman” and “Tamar”, his symphonicpoem “Emek”; his Oratorio “The Song of Songs”; his “Holy Service forthe Sabbath”; and his Concertos for piano, violin and viola.The final years of his life were spent in Haifa where he was the Mu-sical Adviser of the Youth and Sports Department of the Municipality.He worked on a “Symphony for Drums’”, which should have been per-formed on the forthcoming Independence Day but never lived to com-plete it.He suffered from heart disease in his final years, and passed away inHaifa in 1967.Finally it is only proper to mention the violinist Professor Adolf Metzof the Latvian Conservatoire, who used to appear free of charge at partiesand celebrations on behalf of charitable institutions in Riga.He was murdered in the Riga Ghetto in 1944.IXIn several Latvian communities there were official Crown Rabbis whoengaged not only in their official semi-registrar, etc., functions but also incommunal activities on behalf of their congregation and Russian Jewryas a whole. Their activities were usually highly appreciated and they wereaffectionately remembered for many years by the local Jewish population.Shlomo Pucker officiated between the years 1859 and 1893 in Mitau,and later in Riga, as a Crown Rabbi. He was born in Poland and waseducated at the Government-sponsored Rabbinical Seminary of Vilna. Afterhis appointment he did a great deal on behalf of communal institutions,and fostered the spread of religious and general enlightenment among theJews of Kurland. He wisely and successfully conducted a struggle, both bysermons and by polemic essays in the German press, against the ProtestantMission which was very active among the Jewish community of Kurlandduring the 1860s. In 1864 he was invited to St. Petersburg as a memberof the Committee which considered the granting of the right of residenceto Jewish craftsmen outside the Pale of Settlement.331The Jews in LatviaBetween the years 1883 and 1889 there was a “Higher Committee forrevising Present Laws regarding the Jews” which was known by the nameof its Chairman, Count Pahlen. It recommended various ameliorations inthe civic status of Russian Jewry, but these were disregarded by the auto-cratic rulers of the Empire. Pucher submitted memorandums to this Com-mittee with the aim of improving the legal position of the Jews, both inthe Baltic region and in Russia as a whole. He was persona grata inGovernment circles, and various distinguished Orders were bestowed onhim for his communal activities.In 1893 he proceeded to Riga to function as Crown Rabbi, and passedaway there in 1898. A special Fund was established in his memory by theRiga Society for the Dissemination of Enlightenment.Aaron Pumpiansky, also a graduate of the Vilna Rabbinical Seminary,served as Crown Rabbi in Riga between 1873 and 1893. He was a writer,publicist and translator. In 1881 a Russian monthly, “Yevreiskiya Zapiski”(Jewish Notes), began to appear in Riga under his editorship. Twelvenumbers appeared in all containing historical surveys and records of local,general and foreign life.This was the first attempt to issue a Jewish periodical in Riga. Theissues contained an essay on “The Jews in the Government Districts ofLivonia and Kurland”, as well as a drama entitled “Solomon the Wise”which he himself wrote.Dr. Judah Leib Kantor, the writer and publicist, officiated as CrownRabbi in Libau from 1890 to 1904, and held the same office in Riga from1909 until his death in 1915. He was a writer and journalist with a con-siderable reputation in Russian Jewry. Here we shall consider only hisinfluence on the Jews of Riga and Kurland.Dr. Kantor was one of the representatives of Latvian Jewry at the All-Russian Jewish Conference held in Kovno in 1909, where an attempt wasmade to revive the Community organisation as the basis of Russian Jewry.His standing was such that he was elected to the Presidium of the Con-ference.Thanks to his initiative a group of Riga communal workers and per-sons of means founded the Yiddish paper “Di Iddishe Stimme” in 1910,with the aim of accustoming the Jews of the Baltic territories to view ajournal in Yiddish as their national means of expresson. The Chief Editorwas the writer Dr. Eliashiv, who went by the pen-name of “Baal Mach-332Towns & Peopleshoves”. It was of a high standard, but closed down after 51 issues. Thelocal Jewish elite at the time was indifferent to a Yiddish journal, whilethe contents were too abstract and intellectual for average readers.Rabbi Dr. Aaron Ber Nurock headed the Libau community, first asRabbi and Crown Rabbi and later as President. His term of office beganin 1907 and for thirty years he represented Libau Jewry and defendedtheir rights, particularly during the German Occupation of the First WorldWar.He was a delegate to the Constituent Assembly of Latvia on behalfof the Jews of Kurland, and was also a Deputy in the Third Seim.XLatvian Jewry’s charitable institutions resembled those that were to befound elsewhere in the Diaspora. Here I wish to make particular mentionof two philanthropists who helped to establish institutions which were thepride of Latvian Jewry. These were Ulrich Milman and Abraham Sobo-levitch. Here we quote some of the reminiscences which E. Ettingen pub-lished about them in “Latvian Jewry”.Ulrich Milman, one of the leading industrialists of Latvia, distinguishedhimself by hs numerous contrbutions towards the needs of the Jewishpublic. He was born in Bausk in 1882 and displayed business acumen fromhis youth. In 1902 he entered into partnership with the owners of theMaikapar Cigarette Factory. The firm prospered greatly under his manage-ment. He also invested large amounts in industrial and commercial enter-prises, both in Latvia and in other countries.His contributions to various Jewish and general institutions increasedwith the expansion of his business interests. In 1905 the large Synagoguein Petau Street in Riga was erected thanks to his initiative and with hisaid. Several years later he donated one of his houses in Elizabeth Streetto the Latvian Red Cross. He also contributed a large sum towards theerection of the Jewish Club in the city, and it was he who established theBikkur Holim Hospital.The Bikkur Holim Society for visiting and aiding the sick was foundedin 1870. For most of its existence the help it provided was restricted to theupkeep of a clinic and the provision of remedies for needy patients. Inspecial cases doctors were also sent to their homes. The Society wished toestablish a Hospital, and before the first World War it had succeeded in333The Jews in Latviacollecting more than 300,000 roubles for the purpose in a Fund that borethe name of the philanthropic Reb Isaiah Berlin; but during the war yearsalmost all the money was expended to support victims of the hostilities.In 1920 Ulrich Milman placed the means for building a Hospital atthe disposal of the Society. The Joint Distribution Committee helped toprovide equipment, and in 1924 the Hospital was opened in a handsomesix-storey building in Moscow Street. Milman received the “Three Stars”Order from the Latvian Government because of his philanthropic activities.When Hitler came to power in 1933 Ulrich Milman was in Berlin, andthe Latvian Government offered to appoint him as Consul for Latvia inorder to protect him against Nazi persecution. He refused and emigrated tothe U.S.A., where he continued his commercial and communal activities,serving as Chairman of the Russian Committee of the United Jewish Appealin New York. During the Fifties he passed away in that city.Abraham Sobolevitch was born in Kalvaria, in the Suwalk GovernmentDistrict, in 1867. He was a large-scale man of affairs and a model com-munal worker. While still young he conducted industrial affairs in Vitebsk.After the Russian Revolution he moved to England and from there wentto Latvia. In Riga he established the “Continent Galoshes Factory”, andalso had similar enterprises in Lithuania and Poland. He developed thetransfer of raw materials from Soviet Russia through Latvian ports, andre-established the Tannhauser Beer Breweries.As in his business affairs, he displayed far-reaching capabilities in com-munal activities. In Riga he established the Tushia Hebrew Gymnasiumas a continuation for the Reformed Hedarim. He was a member of theCommittee of the Society for the Dissemination of Culture and was Chair-man of the Keren Hayesod in Riga.The late E. Ettingen wrote of him as follows:“The Linat Hazedek Society was founded in 1910. In 1921 it acquireda building of its own to serve as a Maternity Hospital, and at onceexpanded its activities. This Hospital was headed by Dr. B. Herzfeld,who was not only an outstanding physician but also a dedicated com-munal worker. In 1929 the Lutheran Church took legal action againstthe Linat Hazedek, claiming that it owned the Hospital building.“After protracted legal proceedings the Church won the case, andone day we witnessed a shocking scene: The patients, women withtheir newly-born babies, were evicted and left without a roof to covertheir heads.334Towns Sc People“By chance the industrialist and philanthropist Abraham Sobolevitchhappened to pass. He was so taken aback at the sight that he decidedto erect a new hospital. Without delay he sought for and found aplot in Moscow Street, and gave orders for construction to commenceat once. As soon as the building was complete he handed the keysover to the Hospital Management, and made an express provisionthat it would not be called by his name. Indeed, he refused to be amember of its Directorate. The Hospital was constructed in accord-ance with all the latest medical principles, and was a credit to itsfounders and to the Jewish community of Riga.”In 1929 he came to settle in Eretz Israel. Even before his arrival hehad a building erected for the Bnei Akiva Yeshiva in Kfar Haroeh.In 1947 he passed away in Jerusalem.Apart from those mentioned above there were many other Jews inLatvia with open hearts and hands who, each one according to his owncapacity, aided every national and cultural enterprise, the Halutz PioneerMovement, and charitable institutions. The names of these many unknowntogether with their deeds are all recorded in the “Book of Memories'”.May the memory of them all be blessed.Here ends this account of Latvian Men and Deeds, as far as my in-formation and the material at my disposal have taken me. Mention hasbeen made only of those who have passed away.It is not impossible that I have missed individuals who deserve to havebeen included. If so, it has not been done of set purpose.There is no terminal point in history. There is always something toadd. We belong to a generation who lived in Latvia at a certain periodthat has now come to an end. Others will undoubtedly follow and willadd what may be missing here. May they do all they can to make the talecomplete.335Ella Amitan-WileiiskyESTHONIAN JEWRYA HISTORICAL SUMMARYDedicated to the memory of my parents,Joseph Michael and Rachel Wilensky,who were murdered by the Nazis in Esthoniaat the end of 1941.1BEFORE THE TWENTIETH CENTURYTHE State of Esthonia was founded in 1919 and consisted of the formerRussian Government District of Estlandia and half of the one-time Govern-ment District of Livonia. At the height of its development the Jewish com-munity of this little country numbered about 5,000, or some 0.4% of thetotal population, which amounted to rather more than 1,125,000. In spiteof their scanty numbers compared with the Jewish populations of Latviaand Lithuania, however, the Jews of Esthonia constituted a kind of multumin parvo.The first Jews in Esthonia were the Kantonists: Jewish boys who werekidnapped from their homes while still children in order to serve in theRussian army for twenty-five years (from the time they reached militaryage). They underwent terrible persecutions on the part of those to whomthey were entrusted, in order to “persuade” them to convert to Christianity.Only a small proportion of the boys succeeded in remaining true to the fateof their fathers. Most of them converted or perished.In addition to the Kantonists, Jewish soldiers known as “Nikolai’s sol-diers’ (so called after Tsar Nikolai I) served in the garrisons of Reval(Talinn), Dorpat (Tartu) and Pemau from about the time of the CrimeanWar. At the end of their period of military service, which might also lastup to twenty-five years, these Nikolai’s soldiers were allowed to marry andestablish families, which were maintained by the Russian army. They andtheir offspring were permitted to live in any of the cities of Russia outsidethe Pale of Settlement; and they constituted the foundation of many com-munities which came into being in Esthonia.Thus the basis of the modem Jewish community goes back to themiddle of the Nineteenth Century. However, the names of individual Jewsare found in the Archives of Reval as early as the Fourteenth Century.Nor was it a matter of chance that the names of individual Jews were re-corded in these Archives during the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries.336Towns & PeopleThe Reval District was for a long period the property of the Danish Crown,which treated Jews in a more humane fashion than the Knights of theLivonian Order; who then ruled the Baltic countries and mercilessly per-secuted not only occasional Jews but every Christian who was not a RomamCatholic.With regard to the Kantonists it should be mentioned that most of theboys who were taken to Russian army camps in Esthonia were themselvesEsthonians. The number of Jews was smaller, while Russians proper werevery few indeed. David Epstein, a Kantonist who reached Esthonia in agroup of several thousand Jewish boys, relates that not more than fifty ofthem remained Jews. The others converted to Christianity or died whilethey were still children.As remarked, many Jewish Kantonists converted to Christianity becausethey could not withstand the cruel persecution of their army chiefs. Whenthe first group of Kantonist boys, who had numbered several thousand,arrived in Reval in 1828, only about fifty Jews were left. The others hadconverted or died. But the authorities still suspected that many of the Jewshad converted only in appearance and were continuing to observe Jewishpractices in secret. Ordinances providing for this contingency were publishedas early as 1786. Every Jew who changed his faith and became a Christianhad to proclaim the fact publicly in Church. An Order was also publishedthat in cases involving Jewish converts Jews might be brought as witnessesonly if there were not enough Christian witnesses. In Reval, 110 Jews con-verted to Christianity during the year 1844.Sweden ruled over Esthonia from 1621 to 1710. In accordance withan Ordinance published in September 1621, the presence of Jews was notto be tolerated in the country, as being harmful to the local inhabitants.Even earlier, in 1595, the King of Poland who then ruled over SouthernEsthonia issued an Order forbidding Scots (who were then beginning tomake their way into Muscovite and neighbouring territories) and Jews toreside in the regions of Dorpat, Pemau and Wenden. However, the localauthorities did not act in accordance with this Order and so an even stricterone was issued in 1598. This prohibited the presence of Dutchmen, Scotsand Jews in the aforesaid regions.The fact that this prohibition was issued serves to indicate that by theend of the Sixteenth Century there were already Jewish peddlars in nosmall numbers to be found in Northern Livonia (South Esthonia). Thisis also shown by an Order of the Commissioners for the King of Poland337The Jews in Latviadated 1598, prohibiting Scots and various other peddlars, Jews and vaga-bonds of whatever kind to be present, as remarked, in the Land of Livoniaunless they were provided with authorisations from the cities of Riga,Dorpat or Pemau. The Order also specifies that the presence of all thesepeddlars and wanderers was not to be tolerated, and they were not to beprovided with lodgings or refuge, because they harmed the local merchants.At the end of the Seventeenth Century, when trade between Swedenand Poland was on the increase, Jews played an important part as middle-men and were under the protection of the authorities, having the status ofwhat were known as “Schutz-Juden” (Protected Jews). In the protocols ofthe Municipal Archives of Reval (the present-day Talinn) we find the for-mula of an oath that were specially composed for Jews. The following is aspecial formula quoted in connection with the oath to be taken by the JewElias Salomon in 1783, when he and the Christian craftsman Hornschachwere authorised by the Russian Government to prepare seals for the latter.The two craftsmen were ordered to take oath that they would not abusethe privilege granted to them. However, the Christian took a brief oathwhereas the Jews Salomon swore at full length:“Adonai who created Heaven and earth. Thou who didst create meand all mankind, I, Elias Salomon call upon Thee by Thy Holy andall-powerful Name to confirm these my true words: That apart fromthe seals which I shall prepare in accordance with the royal authorisa-tion granted to me, I shall prepare no other specimens of the saidwares, I shall not abuse this authorisation and I shall not preparesimilar specimens of seals like these, either by myself or at the handsof others... So help me God.“And if I act deceitfully and misuse my authorisation — then let mebe accursed forever, may the fire that consumed Sodom and Go-morrhah consume me, and may all the curses written in the Torahbe fulfilled in me...“And may the Lord of Truth never stand any more at my righthand...”As late as 1830 the Jew Ber Gottlieb had to take a similar oath inReval. His oath contained additional curses such as: Let the earth swallowme up as it swallowed the followers of Korah, etc., etc.Early in the Eighteenth Century the Russian Tsar, Peter the Great,conquered the Baltic countries, and from 1710 until her Proclamation ofIndependence more than two hundred years later Esthonia belonged toRussia. Peter the Great granted many Jews the right of residence in Es-338Towns & Peoplethonia, since he needed them for commercial and building purposes. Thesewere “Schutz-Juden” whose presence depended on the good will of therulers. However, the Tsarina Elisabeth his daughter treated the Jews cruelly,and according to a Decree which she issued in December, 1742, Jews wereforbidden to dwell within the boundaries of Russia and were all to be ex-pelled. This Decree was carried out to the full, and Jews were expelledfrom Esthonia as well.Greater comprehension as to the part played by the Jews in the develop-ment of trade and industry was shown by the Empress Catherine the Great,in whose reign Jews returned to Esthonia, although illegally for the greaterpart. The Archives of the Reval Municipality towards the end of the Eigh-teenth Century contain letters from Jewish merchants living in the cities ofShklov and Mohilev who had close trade relations with the Christian whole-salers of Reval. These Jewish merchants sometimes even had branches inLeipzig and London, and frequently visited the cities of Esthonia, thanksto special permits. Even if these visits were occasionally against the law,the police officials preferred to disregard them on account of the greatbenefits which the city enjoyed thanks to this trade with the Jews.The general population of Esthonia, particularly in the villages, adopteda friendly attitude towards Jews and not infrequently helped them to con-ceal themselves from the authorities. It should be noted that the Christiansof Esthonia were less anti-Semitic than their Latvian and Polish neigh-bours. This may possibly be due in part to the influence of their otherneighbours, the peoples of Scandinavia. And this in turn may help to ac-count for the relatively considerable number of mixed marriages betweenJews and Esthonian girls during the Twentieth Century.And so we come to the Nineteenth Century during which the JewishCommunities of the country were founded and firmly established. An Orderissued by the Military Commander of the Estlandia District in 1807 showsthat he permitted Jewish gold and silversmiths, whose residence period inEsthonia had expired, to remain in that territory until the annual fairs hadbeen held. The Esthonian villagers told legends and tales about the braveryof Jewish peddlars or merchants, who forcibly resisted the confiscation oftheir property and their expulsion from the country.In the Nineteenth Century, during the reigns of Nikolai I, Alexander IIand Alexander III, three different types of Jewish communities came intobeing in the country. The first consisted of the offspring and descendantsof the Kantonists and Nikolai’s Soldiers, who were mostly craftsmen andvery largely destitute of Jewish learning in spite of their religious fervour.339The Jews in LatviaSecond came Jews of Kurland, who moved to Esthonia and were markedby their devotion to German culture and speech. Third were Jews whocame from Lithuania, from the Pale of Settlement and from Latgale. Thesewere mostly Jewish scholars; and despite the fact that most of them werepoverty-stricken they showed a certain contempt for the well-to-do but un-lettered offspring of the Jewish soldiers. This lack of homogeneity amongthe local Jewish communities continued in the Twentieth Century as well.During the Eighteen Thirties Jewish patients from the Pale of Settle-ment were given special permission to come for treatment to the hospitalsof Dorpat, which had an excellent medical reputation. Later many Jewishstudents from the Pale of Settlement and Inner Russia also came to thisfamous University City. The first Jewish student known in Dorpat was acertain Alexander Wulfius, who was there in 1840. After he graduated inlaws he converted to Christianity and remained in Dorpat permanently. Atthe same time he maintained his friendship with Jews and helped those ofthe city considerably in their communal and cultural affairs. He also madelarge-scale contributions to the Community. It is interesting that he waspopular and highly respected by Jews and Christians alike.During the second half of the Nineteenth Century, as remarked, therewas an increase in the number of Jews in Esthonia. Apart from merchantsand hawkers there were now many craftsmen, including shoemakers, tailors,tinsmiths and, above all, shingle-makers. These craftsmen came from Li-thuania, Poland and Kurland. Like the hawkers and peddlars they foundthat they could make an easier living in Esthonia than in their formerdwelling-places, although they had no right of domicile. In 1865 Tsar Alex-ander II granted the right af residence in the Baltic Provinces to Jewishcraftsmen who were engaged in their specific occupations. However, inaccordance with an Order dated 1842, those Jews who had the right ofresidence in Esthonia were forbidden to employ Christian workmen. Thuswe read that in 1859 the Jewess Hannah Meirovitch of Reval was accusedof employing a Christian female help to work in her home, and was sen-tenced to pay a fine of 5 roubles for every twenty-four hours of such em-ployment. The total fine she had to pay was 450 roubles to the MunicipalTreasury. If she was unable to pay this amount she was to receive 55 strokesof the rod (!) from the Police.The German merchants of Dorpat also displayed their hostility towardsJewish peddlars and hawkers. In 1841 they applied to the Mayor to forbidthe Jewish peddlars to engage in trade since the activities of the Jews un-favourably affected the material condition and standing of the German340Towns 6c Peoplemerchants, which was declining in any case. They also proposed that ped-dling should be prohibited for Russians and Esthonians as well.Alexander II granted rights of residence in Esthonia and the whole ofRussia under the Order of 1865 not only to craftsmen but also to thefamilies and descendants of Nikolai’s Soldiers, to merchants of the FirstGuild, and to university graduates. In 1856 there were already about 60families of Nikolai’s soldiers in Reval, and about 10 such families in Dor-pat. These may be regarded as the pioneers of the Jewish Community ofEsthonia.Nikolai’s Soldiers, who included several scholars with rabbinical diplo-mas, were in Reval by order of the army. Almost completely unknown tothe general Jewish public, they established a small synagogue and Jewishcemetery during the Forties. In order to find the necessary money withwhich to erect a fence around the cemetery the soldiers sold their rationsof bread and food.In the Eighties the Nikolai Soldiers, whose numbers in Reval hadreached almost 800, resolved to have a Torah Scroll written from theirown resources. For this purpose they invited a special Torah scribe to thecity. The military authorities approved of this step, and the traditionalending of the Scroll was celebrated with much pomp and circumstance.At the meeting of the Reval City Council, the local Jewish corset-makerJacob Kuklinsky, who represented the soldiers belonging to the local com-munity, announced that they had selected a certain Semyon Cohen to bethe representative of their Community. This Kuklinsky is met with againon account of a denunciation against him brought by a convert, to theeffect that the said Kuklinsky had spoken contemptuously against the Chris-tian faith and against Jesus when he tried to persuade three Jews not tochange their faith.In December 1870 the Ministry of the Interior issued a permit for theerection in Reval of a Synagogue for Jewish civilians residing in that city.As remarked above there was already one synagogue for the soldiers, butit was far from the centre of town and lay near the military barracks. Inany case both synagogues together were too small to contain all those whocame to pray. In 1882 the foundation stone of a large, spacious and hand-some synagogue was laid, and it was officially dedicated a few years later.At this period the position of Reval Jews was satisfactory, particularlyafter 1876, when Jews were permitted to purchase real estate.A “heder” (old-style Hebrew school) was set up by a Hebrew teachefamong the Nikolai soldiers in Reval, and teachers also taught general sub-341The Jews in Latviajects there. During the Seventies this became a Jewish elementary schoolfor the children of Jews of restricted means. Wealthy Jews, however, usedto send their children to Christian schools.THE TWENTIETH CENTURYJewish National Cultural AutonomyOn 12th February 1925 the Parliament of the Esthonian Republicpassed a law providing cultural autonomy for all National Minorities in thecountry, including the Jews, with permission to use the national languageof the minority for all cultural activities. Even the Jews of the neighbouringLithuania and Latvia never achieved such full autonomy, for which theonly requirement was that the minority should consist of not less thanthree thousand residents of the country. As a result the Jews of Esthoniawere placed on an equal footing with the Russian, German and Swedishminorities. The statement issued by the Esthonian Government informingthe Jews of their full cultural autonomy was issued at the celebration ofthe first decade of the country’s independence, and was published in bothHebrew and Yiddish. This document, which is to be found in the JewishNational Library in Jerusalem, is sui generis, being the first and only one ofits kind issued during the two millennia of exile in which official use wasmade of both Hebrew, the national language, and Yiddish the Jewish ver-nacular.The institutions of Jewish cultural autonomy began to function in 1926,and included the folloging:1. A Kultur-rat or Cultural Council of 27 members, who were electedfor three years;2. A Kultur Verwaltung or Cultural Administration of 7 members, whowere elected by and from the members of the Cultural Council;3. Local Committees which were concerned with rates and taxes andschools.The income of the autonomous institutions derived from the rates leviedon the members, subsidies granted by the Government and municipalities,and other sources. Elections to the Cultural Council were general, directand secret.The question of the language of instruction in the Jewish schools ledto sharp differences of opinion until a compromise was reached wherebythe two languages, Hebrew and Yiddish, were given equal rights as lan-guages of tuition.342Towns Sc PeopleIn 1926 a Society was established for Jewish schools. In Talinn itfounded a Yiddish kindergarten and elementary school. Later the Jewishschools in Talinn united and provided parallel classes in both Hebrew andYiddish.In 1932 there were 204 Jewish children attending secondary schools,of whom 115 studied in Hebrew or Yiddish classes, 19 in Esthonian schools,25 in Russian schools and 45 in German schools.Details about the Jewish school in Dorpat, which was founded as earlyas 1875, will be found below.The cultural autonomy introduced fresh vitality in the Jewish Com-munity of Esthonia, where there were soon a large number of cultural,educational, sport and entertainment societies — a number that was indeedsurprising when the size of the local Jewish population is taken into con-sideration. Naturally most was done in the two major cities Reval (Talinn)and Dorpat (Tartu), which competed with one another for the hegemonyover the Jews of the country. Reval was the largest city and the capital,with a wealthy Jewish community, while Dorpat prided itself on its Univer-sity, Jewish students and student institutions.A few statistics on the Jews of the country between the two WorldWars are given here. According to the official population census of 1922there were 4566 Jews in the country, constituting 0.4% of the total popula-tion. Almost all of them lived in towns, practically half in the two majorcities Reval (Talinn) where there were 1,203 Jews, and Dorpat (Tartu)containing 920. They constituted about 1.3% of the urban population.There was not a single Jewish representative in the Esthonian Parliament.In 1934 a total of 1,688 Jews were active in economic life. Of these,514 were engaged in trade, 409 as clerks or in services, 249 in variouscrafts, 233 as workers, 158 as members of the free professions, 26 landlordsand 16 Jewish religious functionaries. Most of the Jews had small or me-dium-sized shops.Of the 249 Jewish craftsmen 77 were tailors, 40 furriers, 39 tinsmiths,33 leather-cutters for shoes, and 16 technicians. There were no shoemakersamong them. Most of the craftsmen worked alone, without any helpers.Jewish physicians constituted 8.9% of all those in the country. In 1932there were 85 Jewish physicians, of whom 65 were men and 20 women.They did not all engage in their profession. In fact no more than a fewdid so as there was no need for so large a number of Jewish physicians,to whom Christian patients hardly came at all. As a result they worked in343The Jews in Latviathe businesses of their parents, and in many Jewish shops one might beserved by a “Herr Doktor”.In Reval, Dorpat and Narva there were Jewish Cooperative banks. In1936 all three of them together had 610 members. There were also Jewishindustrial plants in the country, of which the largest, ETK, manufacturedpaints and cosmetics.The following is a list of some of the many Jewish institutions to befound in Reval (Talinn) in the year 1928:A religious communal administration; Management of the Jewish Na-tional Cultural Autonomy; The Public Jewish Society; The Bialik Literaryand Dramatic Society, founded in 1928; The Zionist Organisation; TheMaccabi Sports Association; The Charity Society; The Burial Society; TheSociety for the Study of the “Ein Yaakov” (a work containing all the non-legal sections of the Talmud); The Hanoar Pupils’ Zionist Organisation;etc., etc.Between the years 1871 and 1925 the number of Jews in the city rosefrom 412 to 2,352.There was no Yiddish daily, but the Lithuanian journals “YiddisheStimme” and “Dos Wort” used to publish a weekly supplement dedicatedto Esthonian Jewry.The Dorpat CommunityReference has already been made to the friendly competition betweenthe communities of Reval and Dorpat. The latter was given vitality by itsJewish University students and the Institutions they established.Until the introduction of the numerus clausus in secondary and highschools of Russia in the year 1887, the University of Dorpat was a centreof attraction for Jewish students, who numbered 235 in 1886.Juedische Studenten Kasse (Jewish Students’ Fund)The University of Dorpat was more liberal and easygoing towards Jewsthan other Russian Universities. Life was relatively cheap, it was close toJewish centres, and at the end of the Nineteenth Century the language usedwas German which did not constitute an obstacle for Yiddish-speaking stu-dents. The Medical Faculty was of a very high standard, and as a resultthe University attracted Yeshiva students from Volozhin and other centresof Talmudical studies. Most of these had no means of their own, and inorder to ease their studies at the University the “Juedische Studenten Kasse”or Jewish Students’ Fund was founded in 1875. Its original name was“Unterstuetsungkasse fuer unbemittelte Studierende in Dorpat” (Fund for344Towns Sc Peoplethe Support of Persons without means studying in Dorpat). At its firstMeeting the Fund had 22 members. It received a monthly grant from theSociety for the Dissemination of Enlightenment. Each member paid hismembership fees every semester.The Jewish Elementary School in DorpatBesides providing support for Jewish students without means, the Fundplayed an active part in the life of the community. As long ago as theSeventies of the last century Jewish students began to teach, free of charge,poor Jewish children in Dorpat whose parents did not have the means tosend their children to the general school. A certain Eliezer Perkin appliedto the Ministry of Culture for the establishment of a Jewish School in Dor-pat, and a favourable reply was received. However, the community was toopoor to satisfy the Ministry’s condition of paying 300 roubles a year tothe Government, in return for which the latter would open the school forthe children. So the students came to the aid of the community. Severalpublic-spirited Jewish students called a General Meeting attended by com-munal representatives, at which it was decided to establish an elementaryschool with two shifts. The girls would learn in the morning from 8 to 1,while the boys who attended Heder in the morning would go to schoolfrom 2 to 6 p.m. The course of studies included: Russian, German, Arith-metic, Geography and Jewish History. The students undertook to teachfree of charge, while well-to-do householders undertook to provide themoney to hire premises, buy books, instruments, etc. And so the Jewishschool came to be opened. It should be noted that the members of theStudents’ Fund paid not only their membership fees but also a certain sumin support of the school, which they administered until the year 1907.In addition to clubs, large libraries and various groups and societies,Dorpat also had an institution which crowned its communal activities. Thiswas the “Akademischer Verein fuer Juedische Geschichte und Literatur”(Academic Union for Jewish History and Literature), which was foundedin 1884 on the initiative of a number of students, including Dr. J. Bernstein-Cohen. The Society was established in order to foster comradeship amongits members, and even more in order to permit the thorough-going studyof Jewish History and Literature, spread Jewish culture among the massesand make them nationally conscious. The Society had a considerable in-fluence on the cultural level of the community. Its meetings and lectureswere open to the general public, were very popular and always attracteda large audience. The lecturers included the Hebrew poet Saul Tschemi-345The Jews in Latviachovsky who called Dorpat “The Heidelberg of Russia”, Dr. AlexanderGoldstein and other notable personalities. Many former members now livein Israel as physicians, teachers, clerks, workers and kibbutz members. InIsrael there are also two women writers born in Dorpat who were membersof these Society. These are the poetess Ella Amitan-Wilensky and the writerIda Priver-Bakst.All one-time members of the Society remember it affectionately as partof their youth. On occasion they have met together in Israel to celebrateits anniversaries. At the beginning of the Twentieth Century the meetingsand lectures were held in the home of the Gens family, six of whose sevenchildren were university graduates and members.It is possible that the Society was originally intended to be a Jewishversion of the numerous Christian Student Corporations of Dorpat, butit turned into a small-scale spiritual centre for the Jews of the city, andfar beyond. It also had a large library.In 1926 there were 188 Jewish students at the Dorpat University. From1934 on the University maintained, as part of its Faculty of Philosophy,a special Chair for Jewish subjects (History and Philosophy) headed byDr. L. Gulkowitz, who had formerly been Professor of Philosophy in Leipzig.This was possibly the only University in Eastern Europe which had a spe-cial Department for Jewish scholarship.In 1934 the number of Jewish students declined to 94.Apart from institutions connected with the student body, the DorpatCommunity also maintained the Societies, etc., that are usually to be foundin Jewish Communities, such as the Synagogue, Burial Society, CharitableSociety etc. Of these the more important included: The Religious Com-munity; The Autonomous Cultural Administration; The Academic Societyfor Jewish Literature and History; Three Student Societies, one exclusivelyfor women, one assimilationist in trend, and a third consisting of Zionistsupporters of Jabotinsky; The Zionist Organisation; Democratic Club; Ma-ternity Home; Society for visiting the sick; Societies for the study of theMishna and Ein Yaakov; Friends of the Yiddish Language, founded byPayensohn and J. Gens; Society for the expansion of Jewish Scholarship atthe Dorpat University; Hehalutz; Dorpat Society of Jewish Youth for His-tory and Literature, founded by the students Leo Wilensky and Jacob Gens.The Jewish population of Dorpat rose from 616 in 1879 to 920 in 1934.The Zionist MovementThe Movement engaged in widespread activities, chiefly in Reval and346Towns <£ PeopleDorpat. During the Hovevei Zion period, in 1890, a Society was establishedin Dorpat with the aim of providing material support for settlement in EretzIsrael. Membership grew from year to year, and by the middle of the Nine-ties it sent an annual sum of 100 roubles towards Jewish settlement in theLand of Israel — a by no means small amount for such a small communityin those days. *‘Hehaver” was a lively and active Zionist Society in whichLeo Wilensky and Jacob Gens played a considerable part.In 1917 a special Childrens’ Library was established in Dorpat in me-mory of the wellknown communal worker Dr. J. Eiges, and received about250 books from the Library of the Literary and Historical Society.The Zionist families of Dorpat included: Uswansky, Baksht, Wilensky,Gens, Zalmanowitz, Kruskal and Rubin in Reval. Some of their childrencame to Eretz Israel. In the guest room of my parents’ home the portraitsof Herzl and Nordau were hung besides the portraits of Tsar Nikolai IIand his family.The Jews of Esthonia were relatively fortunate, as about 4,000 of themwere evacuated into Central Russia during 1941 before the German Occu-pation. About 1,000 remained behind and were extermined.In the present Soviet Esthonian Republic there are now close on 4,000Jews once again.Note:A special Bibliography on the Jews of Esthonia will be found in theGeneral Bibliography.347RUIN AND ANNIHILATIONMax KaufmanDTHE WAR YEARS IN LATVIA REVISITED*I am the man who hath seen affliction by the rod HiOof His wrath (Lamentations of Jeremiah. HI. 1.) ,(| ,||| n&X) irrasr MEDTO write of the great destruction of the Jewish community at the hands ofthe Hitlerites is far from easy, for in doing so many nightmares are re-vived. The urge to write this article has been furnished by the famouswords of Queen Esther: “For how could I endure to look on the evil thatis to befall my people? and how could I endure to look on the extermina-tion of my kindred ?” (Esther, VIII, 6).In a similar vein immediately after the Holocaust I answered an innercall to make a record on paper, and thus preserve for history, my recollec-tions of what happened to Latvian Jewry during the Second World War.1Thirty years have now passed since the beginning of the tragic eventsfor us Latvian Jews. The cries of our men, women, and children marchingtoward their death accompany the survivors to the present day. For formerinmates of German camps it is still difficult to grasp psychologically whatcame about during those dark days in the history of the Jewish people.Some are attempting to forget, or may even have done so. Perhaps thisis a law of nature. Yet in actuality this tragedy can never be forgotten, andone must always “remember what the Amalekites have done to you.”The Latvian Jewish population in 1939 numbered nearly one hundredthousand. Although small in size, it occupied an important place in WorldJewry. With the establishment of Soviet bases, and the subsequent Sovietoccupation of Latvia, the number of Jews began to decrease somewhat.Some who had connections abroad or possessed other means left thecountry; and a further decline occurred on 14 June 1941, shortly beforethe Nazi attack. Approximately five thousand Jews as well as very manyLatvians were forcefully relocated on that date and transported to theinnermost regions of the Soviet Union, particularly Siberia. The victims* For the valuable assistance rendered in preparing this article for publication Iam grateful to Professor George Schwab of City College, The City University ofNew York. Of course the responsibility for anything written here rests entirelyupon me.1. Die Vemichtung der Juden Lettlands (Munich, 1947).351The Jews in Latviaincluded a considerable segment of the Jewish intelligentsia, among themthe Jewish representatives in the Latvian Parliament; Rabbi Dr. M. Nurock,M. Dubin, and N. Maisel. Most of these deportees died in Siberian campson account of the sub-human conditions there and the treatment meted outto helpless Jews by the Stalinists. Further population transplantations in-tended by the Russians came to nothing because of the German invasion of22 June 1941. Some Jews accompanied the Russian retreat. Quite a numberof Jewish boys were conscripted into the Red Army in which they foughtvaliantly, a not inconsiderable number losing their lives in the fighting.On 26 June the Nazis occupied Dvinsk (Daugavpils), thereafter Libau(Liepaja), and Riga on 1 July.Riga, which was referred to as Little Paris, was the centre of the BalticStates from the viewpoint of culture. It was very strongly influenced byits neighbours: By Russia to the East and, on account of the very largeGerman population, by Germany to the West. Jews who found it impos-sible to attend institutions of higher learning in Latvia before and afterthe Czarist period usually went abroad to study. The language spoken inJewish homes was predominantly German. After the Great War Yiddishand Hebrew, as well as religious schools, were established and were wellfrequented, and Yiddish became quite popular. Besides the Jewish andRussian press in Jewish hands, Riga was also an outstanding focus forJewish theatrical life. As a Jewish cultural centre the city attracted manyJewish personalities from abroad; for example, O. O. Gruzenberg, Pro-fessors Simon Dubnow,2 Benjamin Sieff, Zentnershver, Rabbi Dr. YehudaLeib Kantor (Editor of the first Hebrew newspaper “Hayom” in St. Peters-burg). Rabbi J. Schneuerson from Lubavitch, Dr. J. Hoffman who togetherwith V. Jabotinsky founded the Revisionist Betar Youth Movement inRiga, etc. There were also many outstanding Latvian Jews there. Amongthese were Professors Paul Mintz, Vladimir Mintz (who was summonedfor consultation in the treatment of Lenin), both originally from Dvinsk,Dr. Jacob Heilman, and a great many others.The Latvian population of Riga welcomed the Nazis in their Sundaygarb. Most of the buildings were decorated with swastikas, and “Perkon-krust” (the Cross of Perkons) members (a Latvian ultra-nationalist move-ment) prepared plans for the destruction of the Jewish community. Underthe leadership of the Latvian Voldemar Arajs Latvian columns werebrought into existence for the purpose of murdering Jews; and many lost2. Dubnow is the subject of a chapter in my book. Ibid., pp. 259. ff.352Ruin and Annihilationtheir lives all over the country. But the “Perkonkrust” members did notremain alone in their patriotic endeavours. Accompanying the German for-ces were Gestapo contingents, who systematically began to decimate Jews.On 28 July the Jews were ordered to affix the yellow Star of David(the yellow badge of shame) on the left chest, and subsequently in thecentre of the back as well. Jews were prohibited from walking on pave-ments, from entering parks and public baths. They received half as muchfood rations as non-Jews, were conscripted for compulsory labor, wereprohibited from establishing social contact with non-Jews, and were forcedto surrender their valuables. As can well be imagined, the Jews becamemore than depressed as a result of this treatment. But in due time theyadjusted themselves to the new situation and wore the Star of David withpride, despite the biting sarcasm of the Latvian population.These were but minor points in the overall context of the Nazi plansto solve the Jewish question. Serious were the synagogue burnings, andcatastrophic the practice of chasing Jews into houses of worship and thensetting these on fire together with the people within and the Holy Scriptures.8For example, in the Stabuiela Synagogue Rabbi Kilov and his worshipperswent up in flames; and in the new Jewish cemetery synagogue Cantor Mintzperished with his family. Mass arrests followed by the slaughter of Jews inthe forests were followed by the order to establish a ghetto in Riga by 25October 1941. The numbers moving into it were small, since very manyhad already been eliminated.Hammers were beating powerfully and quickly as the ghetto had tobe ready by a particular day; and we were finally separated from the restof the world and locked up on 25 October. Now we were surroundedentirely by enemies. Our only consolation was that in our history we Jewshave experienced so many difficult periods and have lost so many membersof our people, but again and again we have survived and thus in the finalanalysis have been victorious. In the midst of our new tragedy I alreadyimagined a new and healthy generation emerging, a generation tried inbattle. Even though we were in the process of losing millions, people wecan never replace from the viewpoint of human values and knowledge,time will, perhaps, permit us to regain and even surpass the number mur-3. The only Jewish house of worship to escape destruction was the Petaus syna-gogue. It was surrounded by other buildings which could easily have caught firefrom it. But the interior did not escape the wrath of the beasts.353The Jews in Latviadered. Our brothers went to their deaths with Hatikvah on their lips.4After more than twenty years I see that the thoughts which I recordedin my book in 1947 were prophetic in so far as our people, although stillsmall in number, after several thousand years have succeeded in reestablish-ing an independent sovereign state with our old capital, Jerusalem. Withits magnificent accomplishments Israel constitutes an example for the restof the world. As a whole the Jewish people have survived and reached newheights.The ghetto was established in the section of Riga known as MoskauerVorstadt. Well-trained Gestapo murderers assumed control, and their pre-sence was immediately felt. The actual task of guarding the ghetto wasentrusted to uniformed Latvian volunteers, who participated not only inmurdering the inmates of the Riga ghetto but also those of Warsaw andother ghettos and concentration camps. On the very first night several Jewswere shot without warning near the double barbed-wire fence. Occasionallythe guards paid “small” visits to the inner sanctuary of the ghetto, andthese always resulted in additional Jews being murdered.Under the able and wise leadership of attorney Michael Eljaschew aJewish committee was created in the ghetto. Other members of the com-mittee were Blumenau, Minsker, Kaufer, Dr. Blumenfeld, and Schlitter, animmigrant from Austria who by virtue of his Austrian heritage had easieraccess to the Nazi authorities. As can well be imagined, the committeehad difficult and responsible tasks to preform: The touchy endeavor ofassigning living quarters to approximately 33,000 Jews in a space whichhad formerly housed 5,000 non-Jews; to assure a continuous flow of foodand fuel for the approaching winter and, among other tasks, adequate pro-visions for sanitation facilities. Regarding medical attention, we possesseda number of wellknown physicians, but at our disposal was only a verysmall hospital (the former “Linas Hazedek”) and the drug supply was farfrom adequate. Also established in the ghetto was a Jewish police forceunder the leadership of Michael Rosenthal, as well as a labour office underthe guidance of J. Goldberg (formerly of Rujene).5 Without synagoguesindividuals wishing to pray did so privately at the abodes of Rabbi Zack4. Die Vemichtung..., pp. 79-80.5. The Nazis ordered food to be distributed according to the amount of workperformed. To receive a relatively adequate food supply everyone was forced towork. Some highly prized specialists received additional food coupons whichwere stamped with the initials W.J. (Wertvoller Jude, Valuable Jew).354Ruin and Annihilationand the attorney, Simeon Wittenberg who had succeeded in rescuing manyHoly Scriptures which were brought to the Ghetto, where he began toestablish a Jewish school; as well as other private quarters. In additionto the prevailing atmosphere, the severity of the first winter under theOccupation was responsible for the suicide of many Jews — one of themost extreme cases being that of Mrs. Ghana Meisel, who poisoned hertwo daughters and four-months old nephew before committing suicideherself.Germans employed Jews inside and outside the ghetto. Men were putto use for heavy duties, women and children for lighter tasks. With clothingtorn and under heavy guard, Jews marched dejectedly in columns to andfrom work. The only thing we were really provided with was the old andwellknown Jewish cemetery. It happened to be located in the area whichsubsequently became the centre of our phetto. The cemetery, which wasstained with our blood and tears and contained the bodies of very manywellknown Riga Jews, has been transformed into a blooming park sinceWorld War II, and there the young generation amuses itself.As is usual in such circumstances there were both pessimists and op-timists among us. But with the arrival of the Nazi minister, Alfred Rosen-berg, even the optimists gave way, since his decision was to liquidate mostof the ghetto inhabitants. Thus the duration of the original ghetto wasonly thirty-seven days, and with anguish I must now begin to recount theensuing “Ten Bloody Days.”Although these occurrences took place many many years ago, the criesof men, women, and children as they walked their last road are anchoredin my memory as if these events had taken place only yesterday. Almosteveryone who had to witness these events and hear the symphony of mourn-ing, and yet survived, reacts in the same way. Incomprehensible to me evento the present day is the fact that God was able to witness our hugecatastrophe. But on with the story.On 27 November 1941 an announcement appeared in the ghetto notify-ing Jews that it would be liquidated and the inhabitants resettled. Columnsof one thousand men each were ordered to appear for a roll call on 29November. This announcement had a lightning effect upon the ghetto in-habitants. The streets were crowded with people, and disconcertedly theystood in front of the grave notice studying the meaning of the words “liqui-dation” and “resettling.” Nobody wished to believe that behind these wordslurked something dangerous and calamitous.355The Jews in LatviaAnother decree ordered that specific streets be evacuated before theevening of 28 November. The inhabitants of these streets were almost im-mediately chased into the inner part of the ghetto. This act constituted inactually the creation of a new ghetto, the so-called Small Ghetto.The bloody evacuations began on the night of 29 November. Thousandsof totally drunk Latvian0 and German guards in uniform swarmed into thelarge ghetto and started hunting Jews. Like wild animals they broke intoapartments. Many Jews were beaten and some murdered. Children weretorn from their parents, and some were thrown out of windows by theguards. Jews were ordered to dress quickly and fall into columns.Under German leadership these were surrounded and heavily guardedby Latvians. Children, the weak and the ill were taken in public trans-portation buses towards Salaspils. There they were joined by other Jews.At the Rumbuli railroad station adjoining the forest graves had alreadybeen prepared by Soviet prisoners of war under German guidance. In bittercold, men, women, and children were ordered to undress, after which theywere horribly beaten, pushed to the edges of the graves and slaughtered.Thousands of victims had to wait their turn in the meantime and watchthe mass killings.The blood-bath ceased after several days, and those returning fromwork who had not been caught in the ghetto massacres found a new placeto live, namely in the newly-created small ghetto. Under the noble guidanceof the late attorney Simeon Wittenberg, everyone from the small ghettowas now mobilized to bury, in the cemetery, those who had been murderedin the large ghetto. Mass shootings then began anew. In the days that fol-lowed far more than twenty-seven thousand innocent men, women, andchildren were mercilessly butchered and buried in the Rumbuli forest —among them Rabbi M. Zack, the world-renowned Jewish historian SimonDubnow, the members of the Jewish ghetto committee, and many of themost prominent members of the Riga Jewish community.6 76. The Latvians were led by the notorious Herbert Cukurs, a “Perkonkrust” mem-ber, who afterwrads found political asylum in Sao Paulo and was executed in1965 in Montevideo by members of a group called ‘Those Who Can NeverForget.”7. Many years later the Soviet authorities acceded to the pleas of Riga Jews anderected a small monument with the following inscription in Latvian, Russian, andYiddish : THE VICTIMS OF FASCISM. From this inscription future genera-tions will not know that the majority buried there are Jews, and this monumentcannot therefore be regarded as a Jewish memorial.356Ruin and AnnihilationThe Small Ghetto was inhabited by some five thousand Jews, includingseveral hundred women and some children. A barbed-wire fence separatedthe women and children from the men. These few Jews constituted theremnants of the old and beautiful Riga, the Riga which so many of us hadonce cherished.Deep in mourning for the tragic happenings, we marched daily withthe women to and from work. For a very long time none could adjust tothe huge losses we had incurred. In the ghetto thoroughly trained Gestapokillers headed by a commandant established a murder regime. The largeghetto was now being prepared for new Jewish arrivals from Germany,Austria, and Czechoslovakia. According to our estimates approximatelythirty thousand arrived and were divided at the Riga Skirotavas terminal:about half were brought to the large ghetto8 which now became knownas the German ghetto, and the rest were taken to the forests and murdered.These foreign Jews had brought much lugguge with them, but everythingwas immediately confiscated.9 To absorb some of the newcomers a campwas also established in the vicinity of Riga, at Jumpravmuiza.The foremen of both ghettos were Jews appointed by the German com-mandant. Two Jewish police forces were established, one for each part,a small hospital was set up in the German ghetto (besides attending to theirusual tasks Jewish doctors of both ghettos were forced to perform manyabortions), and an employment office in the small ghetto served both sec-tions. Jews were forced to work for the German armed forces, the Germancivil authorities and the Gestapo. They were exploited not only because oftheir capabilities and intelligence, but also because no language barrierexisted between Jews and Germans. Very many German units establishedworkshops, and Jewish experts and artisans were conscripted to man these.At the very end of 1941 so-called “marching commandos” were detainedin part or totally by the employers, so that Jewish workers could be moreefficiently exploited. The demand for non-reimbursed Jewish workers was8. Included among the new arrivals were many who had intermarried. The pff-spring of such marriages were considered half-Jews. While Jews prayed privatelyin Jewish homes, the Christians did likewise but under the auspices of a half-Catholic clergyman who wore a Star of David on his gown (German Jews hadto wear only one star).9. Much of the clothing which was confiscated was sifted in the ghetto, and ingratitude to the Latvians for their help the German authorities sold these to theindigenous population for next to nothing. Thousands of Latvians stood in lineto purchase clothing which was stiff with Jewish blood.357The Jews in Latviaheavy. After the first mass arrests in the ghetto those who had remainedbehind no longer felt secure, and therefore there developed among us adetention psychosis. These detention places, some of which were highlyprized by us and where each one had hopes of being detained, were trans-formed at the end of 1943 into something like branches of the Kaiserwaldconcentration camp.The extreme severity of the first winter took an additional toll. Thou-sands upon thousands of men, women, and children from both ghettos,irrespective of age, were conscripted for snow removal. Due to a lack ofproper clothing and an inadequate diet many perished. In February 1942the so-called “Duenamuende Tin Factory” action occurred in the German-Jewish part of the ghetto as well as at the Jumpravmuiza camp, and severalthousand were murdered in the Bikemi forest. At about the same time,750 who had recently arrived from Berlin were also slaughtered in theforest, and the blood-stained clothing of the perished Jews was returnedby the Nazis to the German ghetto. Thirty of our young men from thesmall ghetto were utilized for medical experiments and then killed. SomeRiga Jews were sent to work in Esthonia — in the Vaivara, Kivioli andKloga coal mines. There they were joined by other Jews from Vilna andKovno. Few survived. In the meantime a child was born in the section setaside for women in the small ghetto, and the infant was named Ben Ghetto.He was slaughtered shortly after birth. Another woman gave birth to achild, and on the order of the commandant the child was done away withthrough an injection. Outside the ghetto Germans began searching for Jewishwomen who were married to non-Jews. Those found were incarcerated andsubsequently murdered. The German ghetto was out of bounds for us, underthreat of capital punishment. In so far as our small ghetto was concerned,two transports of men and women (without children) arrived at the endof 1941 and in 1942 from Kovno. About a year later a transport arrivedwith approximately five hundred women from Hungary, and another onewith several hundred women from Holland. All were taken directly fromthe railroad station to the forest and slaughtered. One day a small groupof gypsy children (non-Jews) who were rounded up in Latvia arrived inthe ghetto. They were given toys taken from the luggage of some of theGerman Jews, and the same evening they were sent to be butchered.In such circumstances, how could anyone help but have a sense offutility regarding the future ? Each and everyone of us attempted to savehimself by whatever means available. Under penalty of death an order wasissued by the ghetto commandant, Kurt Krause, prohibiting the exchange358Ruin and Annihilationof goods with Latvians. Fifteen Jews returning from work in columns wereexecuted in June 1942 because the authorities found food in their posses-sion. In one instance, for example, on an inspection tour of the Germanghetto Krause visited a Czech physician. Upon noticing that he was smokingcigarettes not legally available, the physician was instantly shot by the com-mandant. If one wanted to survive there was no other way but to takerisks. An additional fear was that Latvians, with whom many of us hadentrusted things for safekeeping, would denounce us as they were interestedin keeping our possessions.A change occurred in the Riga ghetto in 1943. An Austrian Gestapoofficial of low rank, Eddi Roschmann, who had proved his sadism, wasappointed commandant. The intolerable situation forced us to seek a wayout. Even prior to Roschman’s appointment it had been decided to plana rising and establish contact with the partisans in the forests. Rifles, gre-nades, and old French machine-guns were provided by the Jewish workcolumn employed by the Riga Powder Tower (Pulverturm). As a rule thesewere smuggled into the ghetto in official food parcels, and stored withthe food in a cellar. Latvian Jewish youth were trained in handling theweapons, and during shooting exercises Jewish workers in an adjoiningsmithy provided the noise to drown out these exercises and allay the suspi-cion of the Germans. But through some loose talk by the trainees, theauthorities were informed of the planned revolt. It must be presumed thatthe Germans found a list of the names of the fighters, for at first only afew were arrested but subsequently these arrests assumed a mass character.Soon after the first arrests some members of the Resistance escaped ona military truck driven by a Latvian, to join the partisans in the forests.They were betrayed by the driver. The truck was ambushed by Germanforces outside Riga and the Jews replied by opening fire. Both sides suf-fered casualties, and one wounded Jewish youngster was returned to theghetto. Commandant Krause now announced that since there were weaponsin the ghetto, those found in possession of war material would be hanged.In connection with this affair the Germans decided to liquidate the LatvianJewish police force in the small ghetto. The policemen were gathered onthe Blechplatz and murdered with machine-guns. A few who succeeded inescaping were subsequently found and shot. Accidentally the Germans killeda fellow Nazi, and a small memorial was erected on the spot to honor him.Throughout our tribulations these policemen helped us immensely and theywill long remain in our memory.Of course, the revolt which took a long time to plan never occurred.359The Jews in LatviaThe Germans found and confiscated the weapons, the entire episode costthe Jewish community several hundred additional lives, and several campswere established outside Riga at Olaine, Dundagen, Popewaln, etc. ThereJews were utilized for cutting peat and other hard tasks. Whenever thebloody Roschmann with his aides Gymnich and Migge came for visits someJews lost their lives. For example, his visit to Shlock cost us three boys,including my son Arthur. I located these aides of Roschmann after theliberation, and had them arrested in Cologne. Max Gymnich committedsuicide in prison, and Kurt Migge received a prison sentence of only tenyears.In 1943 for the first time a not inconsiderable group of older men,women, and children of both ghettos were transported to Poland wherethey were gassed. At about the same time a large transport of men andwomen (without children) arrived from Vilna after the liquidation of theghetto there. In the same year a concentration camp was established in theRiga suburb of Kaiserwald, and gradually the remaining Jews of bothghettos were transferred to this camp. On 2 November 1943 German andLatvian military units surrounded both ghettos, and all the remaining Jewswere chased from their dwellings into the streets and transported to theconcentration camp. Some were detained by German employers in the city,the weak ones were sent to be slaughtered.Thus the existence of the Riga ghetto ended after 702 bloody days.Dvinsk (Daugavpils), the capital of Latgale, was the second largestLatvian city. Heavily influenced by Russian culture, the languages mostspoken at home were Russian and Yiddish. The German armies had rushedto occupy Dvinsk on 26 June 1941 since it was strategically located. It servedas an intermediate point in the rail connection between Germany and Le-ningrad via Warsaw, as well as between Riga and Central Russia (Orel).A main road also connected Koenigsberg in East Prussia with Leningradvia Kovno and Dvinsk. By rushing to occupy the city the Germans suc-ceeded in encircling large segments of the Soviet army in the Baltic States.Dvinsk had claimed the largest Jewish population of the Baltic Stateseven before Latvia had gained its independence in 1918. After World War Imany Jews moved to Riga, while others from adjoining small cities movedto Dvinsk. It was a city of profound contrasts, a city of some rich andmany very poor Jews, a city which possessed a distinct Jewish temper anda cosmopolitan atmosphere, and in view of these factors it is therefore noaccident that it had earned for itself an important reputation in the Jewish360Ruin and Annihilationworld. For example, the industrialist S. Zachs was in 1897 a representativeat the first World Zionist Congress at Basle, and the Socialist Movement,particularly “The Bund,” already, at the time of the 1905 Russian Revolu-tion, exerted a profound influence in all of Latgale. The hunger for educa-tion and the restrictions imposed upon Jews in the Czarist period forcedmany to study away from home. Educated personalities originally fromDvinsk were, among others. Professor Miron Vofsi who was later impli-cated in Stalin's plot against Jewish physicians, and Shlomo Michoels-Wofsiof the theatrical arts. Since Dvinsk was a city filled with synagogues andyeshivas it also claimed well known religious personalities, including RabbiMeir Simha Cohen and the so-called Rogachover Gaon Joseph Rosen. Theirscholarly publications dealt mainly with topics relating to intellectual thought.Both died a natural death shortly before World War II, and their graveshave remained unharmed in Dvinsk until the present day.The rapid occupation of Dvinsk by German forces engendered a pro-found shock in the Jewish community. By virtue of the proximity of theSoviet border many Jewish youngsters fled to the Soviet Union. During toincessant bombings by German planes many, unfortunately, never reachedtheir destination.As everywhere else in Latvia the organized Nazi-inspired Latvian Per-konkrust members made themselves felt even before the Germans had timeto organize their murder machinery. Almost immediately all houses of wor-ship were destroyed, and on 15 July 1941 Jews were ordered to affix theStar of David : women on the chest and back, and an additional one formen on the knee. Those who survived the immediate mass slaughters inthe prisons were incarcerated on 25 July 1941 in the ghetto which waslocated in the old military fortifications on the other side of the riverDaugava, at Griva. Only a few days later many of the elderly men andwomen were transported from the ghetto and murdered. Some months laterMrs. M. Gittelson was hanged in the ghetto, and for several days she re-mained hanging on the gallows. Many Jews also died because of the severityof the conditions, including starvation.The systematic execution of Jews at the hands of Nazi Germans andLatvians occurred in the forests of Pogulianka and Strope, and in otherplaces. Those who survived were transported in cattle wagons by Latvianvolunteers on 25 October 1943. Some hanged themselves en route and someothers took poison. The Jews were welcomed by the savage Roschmann atthe Riga Skirotava terminal. Under heavy guard the victims were thentransferred to the Kaiserwald camp. Included were a number of Jews from361The Jews in Latviathe small towns of Rezekne, Korsovka, Ludza, etc. Today Soviet Dvinskclaims only a few Jewish fomilies, and the same holds true for the othersmall towns of Latgale.Libau (Liepaja), capital of Kurland, was the third largest Latvian city.Like Riga and Dvinsk, it also claimed a large Jewish community. Withtheir ice-free ports Libau and Windau (Ventspils) had constituted “a windowto Europe” for the Russians. At the turn of the century large Jewish emi-grations to the United States, South Africa, and other countries took placethrough these ports. The Jewish Alliance of Courland in the United Stateshad approximately ten thousand members in 1940. Now only a few remain.Western culture predominated in Kurland, and the languages spokenby Jews were predominantly German, Latvian, and some Russian. Thisrelatively small geographic area produced some outstanding scholars as,for example. Rabbi Dr. M. Nurock and his brother, Rabbi Aaron Nurock,Rabbis Samunov and Kook (subsequently Chief Rabbi of Israel). ProfessorsAkzin, Brutzkus, Laserson, Weinreich (father and son), and Lina Stem.Among Libau Jews who studied abroad and returned was Dr. A. Schwab— student, assistant and protege of the renowned gastroenterologist. Pro-fessor Boas of Berlin. In the world of music Max Rabinovitsch, the Grau-dans, and others, attained international recognition.Libau as well as the rest of Kurland was occupied by German forcesat the end of June 1941. Orders emanating from Riga regarding the treat-ment of Jews by Latvians and Germans were very similar to those of theLatvian capital. By the end of July 1941 approximately four thousand Jews,mainly men, had been arrested and slaughtered in the vicinity of Libau, atSkeden.10 In the matter of a few days some three thousand five hundred weremurdered in December of the same year. Of the once flourishing LibauJewish community only approximately eight hundred remained alive. Aghetto was established for them on 12 July 1942, and was dissolved on8 October 1943. The inmates were then transported to the Kaiserwald camp.At present there are some sixty Latvian Jewish families in Libau.The large industrial and merchant town of Mitau (Jelgava), also inKurland, which the indigenous Jews had helped to develop, was Judenfrei(Free of Jews) by the end of July 1941. All the synagogues were burnedand the Jews slaughtered at the Jewish cemetery.10. Some photographs taken by Latvians and Germans showing disrobed womenand children being led to their death were found after the Liberation.362Ruin and AnnihilationWhile being transported to work by the Germans I witnessed Jewsbeing chased into the Tukum synagogue, whereupon it was set on fire. TheJewish inhabitants of Jakobstadt (Jekabpils), Kandava, and all the othersmall towns of Kurland shared a similar fate. Hardly any Jews live theretoday.Before the war Kaiserwald was something extraordinary, and all of ushad spent wonderful times there. But it became a huge cemetery. TheKaiserwald concentration camp was the headquarters for all the labour corpslocated in and around Riga, and as such it housed the Central LabourOffice as well as the huge index which contained the names of thousandsof prisoners of both ghettos, and those Jews who worked outside the camp.In Riga we were at first under the jurisdiction of the Gebietskommis-sariat. We were gradually taken over by the Gestapo and in Kaiserwaldwere subject to the SS. The head of the camp was Obersturmfuehrer Sauerof Berlin. Besides male and female SS assistants, he had at his disposalold-time incarcerated criminals who wore civilian clothing and were abovethe Jews. These criminals constituted the leadership within the camp. Humanbeings were of no consequence, and the whip reigned supreme.As in many other camps where I was subsequently incarcerated, newarrivals at Kaiserwald were first forced to relinquish their luggage. Imme-diately after the Jews were sent to the showers, where the rest of theirbelongings were confiscated and individuals searched in the rectum andvagina for valuable possessions. After the shower prisoners received stripedprison garb reminiscent of the pattern and color of zebras, and it was notunusual for authorities to refer to us as “zebras.” Each prisoner receiveda number which was affixed to his jacket. The confiscated belongings weretaken to a central clearing place in the camp (the Kleideramt) and searchedfor valuable possessions.Men and women were separated and the two parts of the camp weredivided by a double barbed wire fence. SS girls, including the notoriousKova who ordered lamp shades made of human skin (she was arrestedand put on trial after the Liberation), terrorized the women in the sectionof the camp assigned to them. Their heads were totally shaven while themen received very short haircuts with a broad stripe shaved from the fore-head across the top to the neck. The hair was packed, shipped to Germanyand utilized in the economy.The daily routine began and ended with a roll call. Twice a day Jewswere forced to line up in military fashion, the weak, ill and children as363The Jews in Latviawell, whereupon heads were counted. If the number did not coincide withwhat the authorities had expected the Jews were forced to remain standingat attention for a long time. Some even died standing at attention becauseof the strain, the extremely poor living conditions in the water-logged bar-racks and a diet which bordered on pure starvation.After the roll call and a breakfast which consisted of a slice of bread,a teaspoon of sugar and some black coffee, Jewish men and women wereforced to join work columns and were then marched like soldiers to thecamp gate, where SS men counted the number in each column. Then theJews were turned over for the day to German and Latvian employers.After the day’s work the Jews were returned to the lice-ridden barracks.Then suddenly events began to overtake the Germans as the frontgradually came closer to Riga. The SS began to consider the possibility ofevacuating Jews, and it was decided first to liquidate the old and weakand then to transport the survivors by sea to the Stutthof concentrationcamp near Danzig. The first transport left Riga on 6 August, and the secondon 9 September 1944.Officially Latvia became free of Jews.Like all the other concentration camps in Germany, Stutthof had aninternational air since there were many thousands of prisoners from allover Europe. The conditions at Stutthof were so catastrophic that the weakand ill were eliminated daily in the camp gas chamber. As could have beenexpected, Jews of many countries incurred heavy losses there. The remainsof those who were gassed were utilized to produce soap in a Danzig soapfactory. The soap was then distributed to prisoners in other camps.As a rule there was no demand for legitimate work. To keep Jewsoccupied they were forced to carry logs and other such things back andforth. While doing so many were beaten to death by SS guards. In the midstof this tragedy a Polish Catholic clergyman from an adjoining barrack in-sisted daily on organizing Jewish religious services. With the help of Dubinand Golovchiner (son and secretary respectively of the well-known deputyto the Latvian Parliament and head of the Jewish community in Riga) ser-vices were conducted every day. Dubin, Golovchiner, Simeon Wittenberg theattorney, and his son refused to eat the daily ration of soup since it wasnot kasher. Until their deaths they subsisted on mouldy bread, some sugarand black coffee only.From the Stutthof concentration camp Jews were also transported toother concentration camps including Bergen-Belsen, Dachau, Buchenwald,Sachsenhausen, Lauenburg and Burggraben. Those camps which were locat-364Ruin and Annihilationed not far from the Soviet borders were liberated at the beginning of 1945.Most other camps were freed by British and American forces in the westernpart of Germany in April and May 1945.Thus ends the sad chapter of the once brilliant Latvian Jewish com-munity. Its martyrdom cannot really be described. Many things can beprinted yet some things are difficult to comprehend, including what theJewish community suffered at the hands of the Germans and their colla-borators.The final solution regarding the Jews which resulted in the massacreof some six million was thoroughly prepared by Himmler, Eichmann andtheir assistants with Hitler’s approval. But shortly after the German occu-pation of Latvia the Latvians, too, prepared their version of the final solu-tion of Latvian Jews. While the Germans were still busy with occupationquestions Latvian volunteer groups were organized with German blessings;and these volunteers rounded up Jews in the provinces and to an extentalso in the cities. Later these Latvians also organized voluntary militaryformations, and together with German units they murdered Jews inside andoutside Latvia. In so doing the Latvians won the confidence of the Ger-mans, and therefore the Germans did not hesitate to transport thousandsupon thousands of Jews from other countries to be murdered in Latvia.This was confirmed in 1946 at the Riga trial of the former German com-missioner for occupied territories, Jekeln, and five other generals who weretried simultaneously. All were hanged in Riga’s Liberty Square (UzvarasLaukums).11Much archival research is being conducted on the number of Latvianand other Jews killed in Latvia by the Germans.12 I believe, however, thatthe exact number will never be accurately determined since Latvians hadmurdered many Latvian Jews even before the Germans took over. Theattempt made by the Latvian historian, Arnolds Spekke, in his History ofLatvia (1951) to shift the guilt for the merciless slaughter of Jews entirely11.1 had the opportunity to be present at the trial and heard the testimony of theformer German General Jekeln.12. The Nuremberg documents, and particularly the research conducted between 1947and 1969 at the Hamburg county court with which I was in constant touch,reveal much regarding the fate of Jews in Latvia. As related by Arnolds Spekke,the official report of “Stahleckers Einsatzgruppe” states that the total numberof Baltic Jews murdered was 264,000 (200,000 Lithuanian, 60,000 Latvian, and4,000 Esthonian. Jews).365The Jews in Latviato the Germans (p. 402) is not shared by this writer and also contradictsthe facts. As an eye-witness to the great tragedy in Latvia I cannot minimizethe German guilt. But from the Latvians, with whom we had co-existedfor several hundred years, and with whom we had passed through goodtimes as well as bad, we should have expected human rather than an animaltreatment. As for Mr. Spekke, he was certainly aware of what happened.Ample documents are available relating the misdeeds of Latvians in theirattempt to solve the Jewish question, and telling of Latvian collaborationwith the Germans on this point. He does relate that the Lutheran Arch-bishop Grinbergs attempted to intervene with the German authorities againstthe mass murders of Jews by Germans, but to no avail.The deans of the Lutheran and Catholic churches of Latvia (BishopJoseph Rancans is held to be the last President of Independent Latvia inexile) were certainly not blinded by the crimes committed by their fellowLatvians. Why did they not utilize their lofty and holy pulpits to preachagainst these mass slaughters, to which so many Latvians were party ?Finally they, too, left Latvia together with thousands of Latvians who wereinvolved in the crime of decimating Jews, and who escaped with possessionsrobbed from the victims. After all, it was the small Jewish community ofLatvia with its vast world connections in all fields of endeavour whichhelped peasant Latvia to win political independence. The reward was asanguine one indeed.The destruction of Latvian Jewry will remain an eternal stain on theLatvian and German peoples. Future generations must not forget the bar-barities of the wild beasts. The voice of our brethren will rise forever fromthe earth. History is very cruel and at times it repays what a people deserves.It is in this context that I venture to say that Latvians will be repaid fortheir complicity in the extermination of Jews, and for stabbing retreatingRussian forces in the back. With its millions of citizens, the huge neighbourto the East is flooding Latvia with its citizens; and Latvians are bound tobecome a minority in their own country in the not-too-distant future. Forus survivors, Latvia and Germany are symbols of a huge graveyard, a grave-yard without graves, a graveyard without monuments.Twenty-five years have passed since the rays of hope have again begunto shine for us. Twenty-five years have passed since we ceased to die, butit took a long time before we began to live again. The transition betweenthe cessation of dying and the revival of life was very difficult indeed foreach and every survivor. After all, those liberated from German concentra-366Ruin and Annihilationtion camps were physically and mentally far more dead than alive. Of themore than approximately seventy thousand Latvian Jews who fell into thehands of the Latvian and German criminals only a few thousand escapedthe claws of the murderers; and of the liberated only a small number werechildren. Many who succeeded in surviving died shortly after the liberationbecause of illnesses contracted in the camps, and because of sheer physicalexhaustion. Unfortunately these victims only sensed the rays of hope butwere not able to experience freedom itself.In all, only a few hundred thousand Jews survived in the various con-centration camps. They constituted the small remnant of the many millionswho had inhabited Europe before the Nazi and Fascist onslaught againstthem. With the liberation the new problem we had to confront was: “Thefuture.”My future I have crystallised in my book,13 and I assume that the restof the survivors shared the same thought: Am I free ? Yes, now I am reallyfree! It was far from easy to believe and comprehend that after many yearsI was free again. Was I really happy in the new situation ? After all, whatshould I now begin to do ? My wife had been killed, my son murdered,my relatives and friends exterminated, and my possessions robbed. Howshould I, ill and weak, construct the future ? What now with all this free-dom ? At the moment I was liberated I had the wish to perish with therest of the world and disintegrate into ashes and dust. However, I proceededto listen to my inner voice which gave me courage because I was againpresented with life, and thus I began to follow my new path into the un-known future.Immediately we began to feel the warm and helpful hands of our Jewishbrothers in the rest of the world, particularly North America, and this gaveus the sense of security that we were not alone. The Joint DistributionCommittee, HIAS, as well as other organizations, extended their activitiesto all corners of Europe. Displaced Persons’ Camps were established andcommittees formed for the distribution of food, clothing and medicine.Former concentration camp inmates could now receive medical and legaladvice, since many Jews were stateless. Also not forgotten were the culturalaspects, and even a Jewish press was established. But lacking a printingpress with Hebrew letters, Latin characters were utilized instead. A Jewishpolice force was active in almost all the camps.Slowly many of the displaced persons in these camps succeeded in13. Die Vernichtung ..., p. 508.367The Jews in Latviaestablishing contact with the world. Some found friends and relatives whohad escaped the Nazi holocaust and now helped them with food and clothingparcels, thus improving their existence. We, the former producers, thephilanthropists of the past, were now on the receiving line.In the camps we lived a kind of transitional existence, as though con-stantly in a railroad station with one’s newly acquired belongings, waitingto be called by somebody. Small groups migrated illegally from these campsto the Holy Land, and many were intercepted on their way by the Britishand sent to a special camp on the island of Cyprus. The free Aliya toIsrael commenced only after Israel had become an independent sovereignstate in the middle of 1948. The President of the United States, Harry Tru-man, was the first to recognize the State of Israel, and was also instrumentalin providing the possibility for many European Jews to come to the UnitedStates. The example furnished by America was followed by some othernations, and thanks to these various factors the Displaced Persons’ Campsin Germany were finally closed in 1950.The main purpose of this essay and my book has been to put downon paper my recollections of those terrible years, so as to recall the wordsof David,that the latest generation might know them, even the childrenthat are to be bom; that they may arise and relate them totheir children (Psalms of David, LXXVIII, 6).n*?v om rnrm m irr> nrctf?•(6 ,ri"v a^nn)368AFTERWORDIN this volume we have set out to recapitulate the History of Latvian Jewsfrom the time they are first referred to in the sources until their bitter end,in the Holocaust of 1941-1944.Yet that does not mark the final conclusion. The chain has not beenbroken. Latvian Jews, those of Riga in particular, have gradually driftedback from the vastnesses of Russia. With them have come a stream of Jewsfrom places that are geographically close at hand or distant. But the new-comers all feel an affinity with the former Jewish community.The people and the place exert a mutual influence on one another. Weare witness to the fact that the Latvian Exile of today maintains the tradi-tions and vitality of the bygone Latvian Jewry we knew. They uncompro-misingly and resolutely hold by their Jewish nationality, they long for libertyand yearn for a Jewish life together with their brethren in the State ofIsrael.A full and objective historical account of the post-Second-World-Warperiod will assuredly be prepared in its own good time, after present eventsand vicissitudes have ended, marking the close of a later epoch. That willbe another volume.One thing is certain. Jewish life during this new era will be no lessworthy of record than that of their predecessors, an account of which willbe found in these pages.We leave the preparation of the next volume to the generation thatcomes after us.Association of Latvian and Esthonian Jews in Israel369BIBLIOGRAPHYThe following bibliography includes the essential sources for studying the historyof Latvian Jewry.It is divided into 3 periods :a) From the Livonian Order in the 16th Century till the end of Russian Tsarismin 1917.b) Latvian Independence (1918-1940).c) Soviet and subsequent German occupation of Latvia, and annihilation ofLatvian Jewry (1940-1945).The most necessary, almost indispensible source is the memorial volume“Yahadut Latvia”, published by our Society in 1953. This book is largely dedicatedto the period of Latvian Independence, but also contains essays on the first andthird periods. These are classified and included in the relevant sections of theBibliography. The most important essays in the volume have been translated andare included in this work on “The Jews in Latvia”.M. B.I. PERIODR. J. Wunderbar, “Geschichte der Juden in den Provinzen Liv- und Kurland”,Mitau, 1853.Anton Buchholz, “Geschichte der Juden in Riga”, Riga, 1899..1911 ,1908 ,ninths DHiiTH na’tr ringin'' 'ft ann.1928 ,nm px itk h Pb vvym* 'T ,'pDr'ntK 'ft ainP. (Hjibhiii), «OqepK HCTopin Ph^ckmx eBpeeB» (1561—1818), «Bocxoji», 1885 r.(2, 3, 7, 8).K). TecceH, «JlapoiBaHHe rpa^Kji.aiHCKHx n pas eBpoRM b KypjiHH&iH», «Bocxoa»,1904 r. (9, 10).Dr. J. Joffe, “Regesten und Urkunden zur Geschichte der Juden in Riga undKurland”, Riga, 1910, 1911, 1912.«Perecn»i h Hajuntcw», T. Ill, C. UeTephypr, 1913.«Hcropifl eepees b PocciH», T. I (XI), Moores, 1914 r..1929 pnr*.1965 ^ax-to rvnrp rmVm D’pns" ,naia yua'mn fnw* ,"i7-n nx»n» *?nn rpiD^ rmrr *?v tr^ni o*>oa ,naia.1967 ,4/53Adolph Ehrlich, “Entwicklungsgeschichte der Israelitischen Gemeindeschule zu Riga”,St. Petersburg, 1894./'iTitrt nn,T" ,manat /'nna mav>xn iwxy' ; "trtaipn man" ftn.1953 ,x"n371The Jews in Latvia.1931 n /"wx^on px aausnixantfDranx *W’*r» am ps ma^tm n" ^mrawa .x.:.a"*>OT ,x"n ,i rrorm nw aso "frtixm wd* ,o*?xsa) awt» mx.1951 ,x"n /'rprvmp tmv dw ,naan" ,^nn asp.1962 4960 ,par-pa 41 4 *Taxa nia'toXT /naia p© ptt©nppa n"fl. H. rHMnejibCOti, «3aiKOHM o eBpenx». T. I, C. neTep6ypr, 1914; T. II, rTerpo-rpa^, 1915.«Kroira o pyccKOM eBpeftcTRe* (1860—1917), Hbio-HopK, 1960./T am "aasm" ,"mx»nn *a*a wn mm" ,awa pnr»«M3 nepHofl khhfh poccHftcKoro espeftcTBa — Marepotajibi jyra hctophh Boftssbi1914—1915», ^EiBpetacaH crapHna», 1918, T. X./'naittxa.a a^ism rmrtai mona aam>n m?©» ron tmu" ,prm mnn»/n 'am.1953 ,x"n "matrt nn»a*>" ,manat •’pas /*i9i5—1914 mP>D" ,panDX .*?xThe Jewish Encyclopedia (1901—1905).Riga — Vol. XCourland — Vol. IVLibau — Vol. VIIIBausk — Vol. II«EspeftcKaa 3mjyHKJioneiyH» (1908—1913).PtfraKypjiHH>AiflJIwbaBaMHrra®aAsHACKTom XIII.IX.X.XI.II.>>n. PERIOD.(1953) r’ttn ,x"n ,paat iso ,"mDta*? marr"“Latvijas Statistiska Gada Gramata”, 1929, 1932, 1934, 1935, Riga..1924 ,nm pX PPX H" ,pax-pxttf *».1933 ,y*n ,"aax^W7 ax* is" ,pnx» pwC. A. Macartney, “National States and National Minorities”, London, 1934.“The American Jewish Year-Books”, Philadelphia (1920-1945).(Dedicated to the Life and Work of Rabbi M. Nurok). 1967 ,D^unY ,"*©Y1» aDT".1967 ,a"* 'am ,"aasrn" "pan *aaa»" ,n©m *?aa».1934 ,wm /'aaxftjy1? px roms wrx ax* 25" ,nttf .».1934 ,»an /'Dipits pt^sxattaxV*© px p©p?t8©x&*tyTpa ptrn*x npan p© dp:©"C. rpH«ray3, «AaTOHOMiH b npH6ajrrwKe», «K«nra o pyccKOM 6BpeftcTBe»,1917—1967, Hbio-PIopiK, 1968..1930 ,m*a ,aaxaaxs ps ^ar ipnx*-50 on ixaxD^x ,"»ax"372Bibliography/i 15X3 ,17” ,r>73rax^say ya”»ya^x /nax^oy'? px pr* po mpaix px tsy1!?" ,nxa *idt»,"p>»xaxpy y^T*5" /^ax^oy*? px py^mo^np y^T” oxy' ,pttnim ,opeaw^).3—2 ,1 .an ,1937 ,ymxri“The Universal Jewish Encyclopedia” 1939-1943.Latvia — Vol. VILibau — Vol. VIIRiga — Vol* IXDaugavpils — Vol. Ill: "mnpn n'ns^p'xaxrt".3"’ *113 ,p0r3*7.X"3 773 #.T3D^.X"3 773 ,(P3*^) AW*III. PERIOD: 1953 ,p73T 730 ,"iY3tt*? min*'♦713P : pT-173 ’377D.7^0 Vm3 .T30* ITITP —.»T30* nn»T *w nai7nx«7 .7377 : 7D7p prftx.nPnan rrxpxn : y^T1? .a.10^3 H73TX : 7*73 'PW*.nan 10^3 ptya ; ]*7sp .*>.,13,,^3 nxwn •’a*’ : potyVix nm.nxw3 ww min ^axi d*>337 :73*»37 .x.r 37.7Max Kaufmann, “Die Vernichtung der Juden Lettlands”, Muenchen, 1947..1949 ,l?xy7oax» ,"94771 7y»ia aa^ooyn" ,ixa:rtXT"*pj”7fi .cE. Avotins, J. Dzirkalis, V. Peterson, “Daugavas Vanagi, Who are they ?”,Riga, 1963.Isaac Levinson, “The untold Story”, Johannesburg, 1958.,(379 #»y ,ooonp 7Ty,>,?x rmy) ,p3”x n^nx 7aa ■’OBtrai yvvn /x ,"mmp".a"3trn ^tyrrMoch# Tap, «OKKyina!iUH sb npn6ajiTHKe», Knera o pyocKOM eepefi'CTBe 1917—1967,Hbio-HopK, 1968.ESTHONIAN JEWRY.1927 — T"D7D ,0X37X7 "73X^00* pX ]TX ’7 p3 POSTON *’7" .pNissan Genss, “Zur Geschichte der Juden in Eestie”, Tartu, 1933.Nissan Genss, Material from the Archive of Reval, and the Registers of Townsand Villages — unprinted..1937 ,p*XD ,"pXa0*’1X-p*)77 MTl” J73 71*3731X^3’:*" ,W13 1M.1964 ,p7T’-T’3 /I 73X3 ,17” ,y*57y3X,?p*>X3y Votin'?* ,"7y73y*? yttPO^XS" ,7X3 *)DP: nnspn rvnsiVp'XJxri.'7 773 ,»T»3100X/n 173 ,1^0./n 773 ,1070373INDEXAaron (rabbi) son ofElhanan 224Aaronson, Nahum 324,325Aaronstamm 258Abraham, Joel 31Abramis 82Abramovitch-Rein,Raphael 16, 92, 319,320, 321, 324Abramson, Zalman 268Adler, Viktor 89Aharonovitch, Zalman(Aranne) 93Akzin, Benjamin 14, 362Albering 141Alexander IT 339, 340, 341Alexander III 339Alkishik 86Altermann 193Altschuler, B. 257Amende, E. 161Amir, Moshe (Bliach) 15,89, 216, 262, 272Amitan-Wilensky, Ella336, 346Anderson, A. 232Anochi, Z. 92Antik, A. 204Antin 269Antonovsky 88Arajs, Voldemar 352Arlosoroff, Hayyim 15, 92Aronstamm, Lazar 260Asch, Shalom 326Aspasia 69, 147, 148, 203Auerbach, Berthold 314Averbuch, Moshe 90Avin, Menachem Mendel(Rabbi) 46, 225Azaryahu, J. 208Bag, Baruch 14, 90, 194Bag, Isaac 75Bag, Miriam 194Bahir, Arieh 93Baksht (Family) 347Bamberg 244Bann, J. 52, 86,100Baranchik, Joel 221, 222Baratz, Joseph 92Barkman, J. (Rabbi) 224Bar-Dayan, Hayyim 329Bash, Raphael 14Baslavski 196Baslavski, L. 196Bastian, J. 137Bawli (Bernstein), Asher207Beck 129Becker, Abraham 56Beethoven, Ludovik van325Behrman 279Beiliss, Mendel 81, 270,290, 316Beliaiew 270Belinki 236Ben-Ari, Nahum 93Ben-Elul, Moshe 93, 193Ben-Gurion, David 15, 92Berg, Arved 111, 134Bergelson, David 92, 326Bergis, Peter 140Bergman 211Berlin, Alexander Zisskind246, 251, 252Berlin, Hayyim (Rabbi)224Berlin, Isaiah 220, 251,252, 334Berlin, Isaiah (Sir) 252Berlin, Meir 12, 252Berlin, Meir (Bar-Ilan)15, 92Berlin, Mendel 251, 252Berlin, Moshe 269Berlin, Naphtali ZwiJehuda 284Berlin, Shlomo Zalman251, 252Berlin, Beimish 252Berlin, Leib 252Berlin and Luria 252Berlin-Shalit 235, 236,252Berliner, Simeon (Rabbi)225Berlioz 325Berman, Shaul 279Berman, Zeev (Vassiliy)292Bermond-Avaloff 51, 56,97, 106, 107Berner, Gershon Paul 279Berner, Meir 279Bemstein-Cohen, J. 345Berz, Bertha 80Berz, Isaac 52, 60, 80, 86,100, 107, 113, 116, 119,192Berzin, A. 232Berzner 86Beth, Menachem 285Bialik, H.N. 15, 92, 208,266Birman 236Biron (Duke) 32, 33Bishoff, Prof. 257Bistritky, Nathan 92,208Blankenstein 244Blodniek 181, 183Blok, Alexander 91Blumberg 244Blumenau 354Blumenfeld 354Blumenfeld, Kurt 92Blumenthal, Jacob 279Bobe, Mendel 9, 11, 21,88, 243, 288, 314Boas (Prof.) 362Bogrow, Dimitri 290375The Jews in LatviaBoliwka 272, 274Borochow, Ber 268Botwinkin 75Bovshover, R. 190Bovshover, Ida 193, 204Brains, V. 58Brandeis, Louis 325Braun, Abraham (Sergei)16, 260, 306, 307Braun, Israel 80, 86Braun, M. 190, 192Breikesh 175, 180, 183Breitbard, M. 80, 197Brill 236Brodetski, Selig 16, 92Brown (Colonel) 279Brusevansky, Zelik 258Brustin, Elhanan David(Rabbi) 225Brukus 362Buchholz, Anton 288Budnik, David (Rabbi)224Burstein, Abraham 89Bushevitz 118Carlebach 181Caspi 208Catherine II 26, 339Cecil, Robert 128Chanutin, Zalman 88, 206Charles (Duke) 32, 33Chang-Kai-Chek 319Cherfass, D. 257Chemobrod, Zwi 89Chopin, F. 325Chukowsky, Komej 91Chwolson, Daniel 316Cohen (Rabbi) 227Cohen, Baruch 88Cohen, Feitel 258Cohen, Herman 258Cohen, Meir Simcha(Rabbi) 81, 255, 227,265—267, 361Cohen-Mintz, Edith 248Cohen, Moshe 88, 207Cohen, Raphael 225Cohen, Rosa 193, 195Cohen, Semyon 341Cohen, Willi 76Crystal, A. 87Cukurs, Herbert 356Damski 76Dan, F. 321Daniel, Shabbetai (Dan-Yahia) 14Danishevsky 50Dan-Jahia, Eleasar (Rabbi)81, 228Dan-Jahia, Ben-Zion(Rabbi) 81, 85Dekens, D. 148, 153, 155,189Denikin 105, 121Dickens, Charles 314Dimantstein 91Dinaburger, Reuvele(Rabbi) 265Dissentchik, Arye 14, 15,58, 87Dizengoff, Meir 208Dolgitzer, Lydia 87Dombrowsky, N. 232Donskoj, M. 189Draznin, Simeon 89Dribin, Moshe 86Drobish, Eliezer 90Dubin, Mordechai 17, 52,54, 60, 61, 73, 83, 84,100, 107, 120, 122, 127,141, 155, 157, 161—163,165, 166, 169, 170, 173,177—181, 183, 188, 220,222, 224, 229, 301, 302,352Dubin 364Dubin, Zalman Ber 220Dubinsky, B. 58, 91, 316Dubnow, Simon 17, 82,84, 352, 356Dukurs 120Ehrlich, Adolf 245Eidelman (brothers) 89Eidus, Tanhum 56, 82Eichman, Adolf 365Eidelstein 272Eiges, J. 347Eisenstadt, J. T. 254Elias 155Elias, Salomon 338Eliasberg, Julius 52, 91,107, 316Eliasberg, Mordechai(Rabbi) 11, 227, 277,284Eliashiv, A. (BaalMachshavot) 47, 332Eliav, Benjamin(Lubotzky) 15, 87, 322Elizabeth (Empress) 26,35, 339Eljashew, Michael 354Elkes, Moshe 89Epstein, David 337Epstein, Elijahu (Eilat)93Epstein, H. 233Epstein, Moshe Mordechai92Eshed (Eisenberg) 92Etkin, Zalman 88Ettingen, Abraham 90Ettingen, Eliezer 12, 48,57, 60, 86, 237, 252,255, 259, 281, 318, 333,334Ettinger, Jona 258Fabricant, Joseph 80Feinberg, Robert 16Feinstein, Z. (Shefer) 93376IndexFeitelberg, H. 235, 236Feitelberg, Morits 258Feldhoun, R. 235, 236Ferdinand, King ofDenmark 28Finkelman 87Finkelstein, M. 58, 159Firks 112, 113, 132, 135,143, 145Fisher 75Fishman, Ada (Maimon)92Fishman, Leib 17, 52, 60,91, 100, 101, 116, 117,120, 122, 127, 136, 192,245Flavius Josephus 316Freidberg, Hayyim 76Friedland 273Friedland, J. 92Friedland, Meir 327, 328Friedland, Moshe AriefaLeib 327, 328Friedlander 87Friedlander, David 277,278Friedman 244Friedman Israel 279Friedman, Naphtali 290,291Frumtchenko, A. 236Fuchs (Rabbi) 227Fussal 179Gabbai, Ephraim 225Gabbai, L. 200Gabbai, M. 190, 193, 194Gabbai, Z. 190, 195, 202,204Gailet 131Galili, Eliezar 93Galle, Sussman 88Gama-da 130, 131Gamadi, Pesah (Krollik)93Gamosh-Glickman, Etia90Gamzu, A. B. 87Genin, S. 87Gens (Family) 346, 347Gens, Jacob 346, 347Gerson, Leonard 279Gerson, Moshe 88Gertz-Movshovitz, M. 56,58, 82, 309—311,Gevartin, Isaac (Rabbi)224Gideon, Sarah 195Gil, Emanuel (Glickman)14, 90Gins burg 206Ginzburg, Jacob (Rabbi)228Ginzburg, Leib Saul(Rabbi) 228Gittelson, M. 361Glaser, Moshe 76Glickman 150—152Glinternik 271Golani, Arieh 93Godin, Abraham 13, 217Gold, Moshe 15, 87Goldberg, J. 354Goldberg, Max 52, 100Goldfaden 326Goldman, Alter 89Goldstein, Alexander 92,346Golovchiner 364Goltz, von der 50, 97, 100,102, 106Gor, Menahem Mendel85Gordon, Hayyim Joseph87, 197Gordon, Moshe 207Gordin, Zalman 88, 272,317Gorfinkel, Simon 150,211, 216Gorfinkel, Zwi 88, 188,194Gottlieb, Ber 338Gottlieb, Theresa 204Gram, Judith 194Gram, Samuel 80, 194Granovsky, Alexander(Abraham Azarkh) 326,329Graudan (Family) 362Greenman 187Grein 274Gribeshok, L. 52, 58Griliches (Family) 273,274Grinberg 206Grinbergs 365Grinblatt, Nathan (Goren)207Grinstein, N. 317Grodsky, Jacob (Rabbi)228Grossman, Meir 92Groys, Abraham 87Gruenbaum, Isaac 92,159, 178Gruzenberg, O.O. 81, 270,352Guenzburg J.G. 43Guliak, A. 56, 81Gulkowitz, L. 346Gurevitch (brothers) 272Gurevitch, Abraham 159Gurevitz, A.L. 187Gurevitch, Boris (Guriel)14, 87Gurevitch, Ezekiel 46,283, 291, 292Gutman, Rachel 269Gutzkow 326Gymnich, Max 360Hagai, David 93Hahn 236Haimovitch, Joshua 89, 90Halperin, Elhanan 87377The Jews in LatviaHanoch 171Hanoch, Gershon 92Harel, Ben-Zion 14Harel, Isser 14Harif, Eizik (Rabbi) 224Hasselblatt 161Hayat 272Heilman, Jacob 14, 54,56—58, 60, 82, 85, 88,89, 113, 116—120, 294,295, 310, 352Heilman, Shulamith 196Heller 159Heller, Yomtov Lipman(Rabbi) 228Henkin, Samuel 52, 97, 98Herr, Samuel 80, 90, 201Herzbach, Moshe 90Herzfeld, B. 91, 316, 334Herzl, Theodore 12, 284,289, 320, 347Hertz, Marcus 277, 278Hillman (Brothers) 236Himmelfarb, J. 52, 100Himmelstein, J. (Rabbi)224Himmler 365Hindin, Jacob 249, 250,251Hindin, Zalman 250Hirschfeld 244Hirschman 277Hirshberg, Ruth 193Hitler, Adolf 129, 160,176, 179, 180, 365Hochman, L. 187Hochman, M.L. 150, 187Hoff (Brothers) 232, 235,236, 240Hoff, Jacob 56Hoff, Reuven 176Hoffman, Jacob 15, 61,87, 298, 316, 352Hofstein, David 92Holtsmanis 120Holzberg 223Homschach 338Horvitch (Family) 273Horvitch, Sotse 267Horodetzky, S.M. 246Horvitz, J.A. 200Horwitz, J.D. 193Hovsha, Reuven 85Hurvitz, Jacob 258Hurvitz, Isaac (Rabbi) 225Hurvitz, Moshe Isaac 220Hyman, J. 235Israel 256Israelovitch, Moshe 76Israelson, Jacob 315, 316Itigin, L. 193Iwan the Terrible 35Jabotinsky, Zeev 15, 61,87, 92, 298, 346, 352Jadlovker, Hermann 46,82, 330Jaffe, Isaac 54, 86, 188,191, 192, 234, 287, 288,316Jaffe, Judah 88Jaffe, Leib 15, 92, 208Jakobsohn 244Jakobson, R. 189, 190Jekeln 365Joel, Naphtali 89Joelson, Jakob 75Joelson, M. 87Judovin 189Jungelson 86Juris, A.J. 92, 272Kaczmarek 160Kahaner 258Kajatzki 206Kalistratow 143Kalmanovitch, Z. 57, 92Kalnin, Arved 137Kalnin, Bruno 165, 185Kalnin, Nicolai 140Kalnin, Paul 95, 178, 185Kalnin, Peter 140Kalnin, Ringold 231Kaltun, Abraham Pessah(Rabbi) 225Kaltun, Joseph Naphtali(Rabbi) 225Kamenetzki, Deborah 248Kantor, Judah Leib 47,252, 332, 352Kantor, L. 198, 202, 204Kantor, Z. 317Kaplan 256Kaplan, Abraham 193, 199Kaplan, Aharon 193Kaplan, Eliezer 92, 319Kaplan, Rudolf 87, 298Kaplan, Wolf 245, 259Kaplansky, Shlomo 92Kaplinsky 270Karklinsh, A. 231Karnibad, Abba 88Kasso 291Kastral, Baruch 269Katz, A. (Rabbi) 224Katznelson, Berl 15, 92Katznelson, Nissan 12, 46,283, 284, 289Kaufer, Esra 354Kauffman, Elijahu 195Kaufman, Arthur 360Kaufman, Max 17, 351Keller 106Kemal Ataturk 130Kerensky, Alexander 269,289, 296, 323Kettler, Gotthard 22, 28Keshet, Benzion 14Kharash, Hayyim Zeev(Rabbi) 255Khodakov, H.M. (Rabbi)222, 229Kilow, Moshe (Rabbi)225, 353Kitai, Michael 82, 308—310, 313378IndexKlass 196Klaube 118Klein, Hillel 284Klein, Jankel 118Kliatzkin (Rabbinicalfamily) 228Kliatzkin, Israel Isser 228Kliatzkin, Naphtali 228Klieve 166Kluge 106Knopp, R. 140Kodesh, Simon Leib,(Rabbi) 220Koffian, A. 195Kogan, A. 232Kolchak 105, 121Kopolowsky (brothers)272, 274Kook, Abraham Isaac(Rabbi) 13, 81, 227, 265,277, 362Kova 363Kramer, Elhanan 14Kramer, Shabtai 91Kramarow, M. 204Krause, Kurt 358, 359Krievinsh, A. 170, 232Krillow 91Krupkin, Joseph 88Kruskal (family) 347Kuklinsky, Jacob 341Kulbak 326Kulman, Dov 188Kurshansky and Himmel-hoch 236Kurtzi-Kurchinsky 166Kwesis 166Landau, Jacob 17, 52, 60,67, 91, 107, 116, 166,187, 211, 232Lasers on, Mattatjahu(Max) 13, 60, 62, 68,69, 81, 85, 88, 94, 122,127, 132, 134, 137, 138,140—143, 149, 152, 154—156, 158, 159, 164,165, 169, 170, 172, 175,177—179, 203, 204, 295—297, 300, 302, 318,362Latt, Elija 75Latt, M. 80, 198, 202, 204Latzky, Philip 52, 88, 100,103, 104, 271Latzky-Bertholdy, Wulf-Zeev 16, 58, 61, 68, 81,82, 87, 91, 203, 260, 304,305Lavry, Marc 82, 330Lebstein 91Lederman, A.J. 222Leibovitz, A. 258Leibovitz, Jehoshua 14Leibovitz, Jeshayahu 14Lei kart 14, 183, 184Leiser, Salomon 31Lejser, D. 207Lemel 198Lenin, Wladimir 321, 325Lestchinsky, Jacob 81Levenberg, Shneour 11,89, 90Levenberg, Zalman 87Levenberg, Zeev 12, 88,260Levi, Luba 89Leviatan, P. 89Levin (Rabbi) 80Levin, Ber 88Levin, M. 80, 198Levin, Naphtali 87Levin, Zadoc 80Levin-Shatzkes, Isaac 86,271, 304, 307, 310Levinson, R. 190, 201,202, 204Lewinsohn 244Lewinson, Koppel 258Levitan, Isaac 313Levitan, Samuel 221Levitas, Ber 222, 236Levitas, L. 189Levitas, Zalman 91, 306Levius, Moshe 88Lewstein (brothers) 232,233Liak, Abraham 89Liak, Arieh 89Liak, Bella 89Libenson 91Lichtenstein (Rabbincalfamily) 46, 85, 227, 277,293Lichtenstein, Eliezer 227Lichtenstein, Levi 227Lichtenstein, Mordechai227Lichtenstein, Zwi 227Liebermann 211Lieberson, Tehia 269Lifshitz, B. 80, 91, 317Liknaitzky, Zwi 88Lilienthal, Max 43, 193,244, 279Lipmanovicz 188Lipschitz, Zalman Meir258Lipschitz, Shaul 15, 91,276Litwin, S. 193Loewenstein 244Lorenz 184Lubotsky, A. 236Lulov, Mendel 48, 86, 236,258, 281Lulov, Cilia 86Luntz, Wulf 48, 249, 255,259Luria 273Luria, Baruch Eliezer(Rabbi) 225Lutzow 148, 149Lvovitch, Moshe 88Machtus, S. 76Maeterlinck 326Magidson, Ezekiel 88379The Jews in LatviaMagidson, M. 48Magnus 112Magnus, Duke of Holstein28Maharik, Israel 89Maikapar 235Maimon, Salomon 314Maimon, Zwi 80Maisel, Noah 16, 60, 68,85, 86, 122, 126, 134,140—142, 148, 150, 153—155, 157, 164, 169,175—179, 203, 271, 302—304, 316, 352Malkin, Sarah 269Manger, Itzik 92Manoah, Joshua 92Manteufel (Baron) 98Maor (Meirson) Itzhak13, 78, 89, 194Margalit 159Mark, Judel 52, 80, 100Mark, Mendel 80Marein, S. (Rabbi) 224Markish, Peretz 326Martov, J. 321Masliansky, Moshe David(Rabbi) 226Matz, Ezekiel (Rabbi) 224Mayer, Benno 48, 232May of es-Epstein, Lea 193Mayofes, T. 195Meiksin, P. 86, 271Meierovitch, Hannah 340Meirovitz, Z. 216Meirovitch, Ziegfried 120,125, 128Meirson, T. 190Meisel, Ghana 355Mendelsohn, Moses 43,245, 277Menders 99, 183Metz, Adolf 331Michael! (Michelson) Z.13, 68, 80, 81, 88, 186,200, 204, 207Michelson, Zwi 88Michaelis, J. 204Michelson 236Michelson 244Michelson, M. 75, 87, 194Michlin, Nathan 87Migge, Kurt 360Mikoyan 318Milman, Dov 14Milman, Ulrich 55, 235,236, 333, 334Minkow, Hayyim Leib89Minkovitch 273Minsker 232, 354Mintz (Kantor) 353Mintz, Nahum 232, 254,255, 257Mintz, Paul 17, 48, 52, 54,60, 81, 91, 100, 101, 107,116, 119, 166, 186, 232,249, 254—257, 281, 287,352Mintz, Wladimir 254, 256,257, 316, 352Mintz, Jechiel Michel 254Mirlin, Zeev 88Mittel, J. 193Mizrah-Brill, Lily 248Mizrah, M. 235, 236Mohilever, Samuel (rabbi)250, 251, 284Moler, J. 216Montifiori, Moses 268Moshevitz, Marc 13Moskovsky, Nahum 56,61, 88Motzkin, Leo 132, 159,160Mushkat, A. 237Mushkat, E. 92Nadel, M. 197Nehru, Pandit 319Neishul, Nathan 89Neufeld, B. 206Neumann, Abraham 245Neuschloss, J. 201Niedra, Andrei 51, 99,101, 191Nikolai Nikolajevitch 96,221, 264, 280Nikolai I 336, 339Nikolai II 227, 264, 280,347Nis, G. 190Nisse, A. 237Nisselovitch, Lazar 46,283, 290, 291Nissanow 326Nobel 159Nordau, Max 325, 347Noske 100, 103Nurok (Rabbinical family)46, 277Nurok, Aaron Ber 60, 61,85, 116, 165, 169, 177,227, 333, 362Nurok, Mordechai 12, 14,46, 54, 60, 61, 69, 73,79, 84, 85, 122, 127,132, 141, 142, 144, 155,159, 161, 169, 170, 180,181, 184, 205, 222, 227,259, 281, 284, 292—294,352, 362Nurok, Zwi 227Ofentsak 166Ogen, Leah (Wittenberg)14Okun, Ovsei 75Osherov, Abraham Elijahu(Rabbi) 225Ovchinsky, Levi (Rabbi)81, 228, 286, 287Payenson 86Payenson, Jacob 346Paltis 213380IndexPapiermeister, Aaron 52,97Pasteur, Louis 325Paul, Hayyim AaronBezalel (Rabbi) 228Pauli uk 111, 185Pereferkovitch 81Perkin, Elieser 345Perniak, Jakob 197, 200Perniak, Rachel 87Persitz, Shoshana 208Pessis 192Peter (Duke) 33Peter the Great 34, 244,338Petrevitch 138Pfeffer, Itzik 326Pfeffer 98, 99Philipson, Ludwig 244,245Pines, M. 252Pinner 149Pintsov 193Piratinsky, Michael 248Pisetzki, J. 194Piter 198Pitkevitch, Golda 89Platzinsky, Jacob Meir(Rabbi) 228Platzinsky, Salomon(Rabbi) 228Plehve 289Polack 58Polotzkoi, Moshe (M.Palmon) 200Polotzkoi, Sarah 195, 200Polotzkoi, Shachne 200,202Polotzkoi, Zeev 80, 187,200Porgal 111Porochovnik 207Port, J.H, 80, 89Presniakoff 105Priver-Bakst, Ida 341Propes, Aaron 15, 87Pruver, A. 90Pucher, Shlomo 331Pumpiansky, Aaron 46,259, 332Rabbiner (Rabbinicalfamily) 46, 227Rabbiner, Mordechai 228Rabbiner, Zeev Arieh(Rabbi) 46, 85, 227Rabbinovitch, Zwi (Rabbi)284Rabinovitz, Abraham 258Rabinovitz, A. 232Rabinovitch, Isaac (Julius)52, 60, 86, 100, 113, 116,119Rabinovitch, Max 362Rabinovitz, Raissa 87Rabinovitz, Zalman 87Rabinovitz 206Rachman, Alta 89Radek 214Raik 86Rachmilevitch, Lipman250Rancans, Joseph 366Rapoport, Boris 14Rapoport, E. 199Rapoport, M. 204Rapoport, Esther 195, 200Rapoport, Miriam 195Rapoport, P. 190Rapoport-Michelson,Sonja (Ether) 195, 196,205Rashal, M. 222Raskin 232Rasumni, Marc 310, 313Ratner (Rabbi) 227Rauchwarger 211Ravdin 271, 272Ravnitzki 208Reich 159Reichrudel, Joseph 193Reichrudel, Shalom 193Reines, Jacob 284Reinis, Janis 68, 91, 148—150, 203Reinhardt 125Reitlinger, Gerald 17Reiss, Anshel 92Remez, David 92Ribovsky, Abraham 89Riebush, Feibush 88Ritow, Meir 222Risker, Hayyim Leib 258Rivlin, Jacob Elija 46, 224Rom, G. 190Romano 159Roschman, Eddi 359—361Roosevelt 325Rosen, Joseph (the Gaonof Rogatchov) 81, 221,225—227, 265, 266, 361Rosenbaum 269Rosenberg 197Rosenberg, Alfred 355Rosenfeld, B. 190Rosenthal, Michael 354Rosmarin 159Rosovsky, Baruch Leib46, 82, 245, 312 327,328, 330Rosovsky, Salomon 68, 82,193, 196, 317, 328Rothschild, Edmund 250,251Rotstein, Reuben 193Rubin (family) 347Rubinstein, Anton 327Sachs, (family) 273Sachs 206Sachs, S.Y. 269Salkind, Abraham 60, 87,188, 255, 259, 317Salkind (Mrs.) 187Samuel 140, 146Samunow (Rabbinicalfamily) 46, 228, 277,362381The Jews in LatviaSamunow, Ephraim 228,277Samunow, Jehuda Leib302Samunow, Mordechai Uri228, 277Sand, Mordechai 89, 272,317Sauer 363Schattenstein, Moshe 89,204Schattenstein-Lev,Shoshana 194Schatz, Shlomo 189Schatz-Anin, M. 81, 309Schechtman, Joseph 87Schechter 87Scheinberg 86Scheinfeld, G. 258Scheinfeld, Max 255, 257,258, 316Schieman, Paul 105, 107,112, 114, 117, 134, 136,138, 161, 177, 179Schiff, Jeshajahu 236Schlitter 354Schlossberg 254Schlossberg 232Schmuelson, Sholem 91Schneerson-Litwin,Hadassah 88Schneurson (RabbinicalFamily) 218, 220, 246Schneurson, Joseph Isaac(Rabbi) 81, 229Schneurson, Leib (Rabbi)224Schneurson, MenachemNahum (Rabbi) 251Schneurson, Schneur Zal-man of Liadi 219, 224,246, 251Schneurson, Schneur Zwi250Schneurson, J.L. 250, 251,352Schoenhoff, A. 106Schreiner, L. 100, 106Schwab, A. 362Schwab, George 351Schwalb, Moshe 89Schwartz 171Schwarz, Joseph 46, 82,171, 330Schwarzbord, David 259Segal, A. 204Segal, Elijahu 197Segal, Sonja 197Segal, Isaac (Rabbi) 224Seh-Lavan, Joseph 211Seligman, Isaac 86Seligman, Jochewed 195Selikson Eleasar 14, 90,297Seltzer, Jacob 88Sepp, P. 148, 149, 153Shaaref, Zeev 93Shakespeare, William 326Shalit, El. 48, 252Shalit, Leib 11, 248, 249,255, 257, 259Shalit, Lipman 252Shalit, Mordechai 252Shalit, Shlomo 248, 252Shalit, Tuvia 252Shalit, Zalman 252Shalom-Aleichem 326Shapira, Jacob 46, 283,289, 290Shapira, Moshe (Rabbi)46, 224, 225Shaktzer 250Shazar. Zalman(Rubashow) 15, 92Sheinessohn 244Shereshewsky, R. 204Shenkman, Sioma 90Shimoni (Dabin) 268Shiomansky 155Shkarota, Moshe (Rabbi)228Shirman, A. 190Shirman, S. 190Shkolnik, Levi (Eshkol) 92Shkooliansky 143Shlez, Jacob 89Shmuljan 236, 240Shraga, J. 87, 198Shuval, Zalman 14Sieff, Benjamin 13, 87,230, 300, 352Silbermann 190Sinai, Ephraim(Dissenczik) 14, 195Skujenek, J. 142—144, 147,166, 169, 170, 180, 183,237Slavjaciski 206Slivkin, Zalman 89Smolitzensky, Nissan 284Snapp, Elijah 270Spekke, Arnolds 365, 366Springenfeld 244Sobolevitch, Abraham 55,85, 210, 223, 235, 236,240, 333, 335Sokolow, N.A. 256Soloveitchik, N. 231Sragovitch, Samuel 89Steinberg, Isaac Nachman16, 322—324Stern 166Stern, Lina 362Stoll, Moshe Shalom(Rabbi) 227Stolypin 290Storch 272Stresemann, G. 159Strick (von) 98Stupnitzky, J. 58Stutzka 50, 51Sudarsky, S. 190Sulzer 328Susaieff, Zalman 13, 14Sussman, M. 87Sverdlov, David 93Syngalowsky 92Syrkin, Nachman 91, 304382IndexTabenkin, Isaac 92Tagger 159Tagger, Arieh (Leib) 57,88Taitz, J. 193, 204Tal, Louis 258Tartakover, Arie 92Taviov, Israel Hayyim313, 314Teitz, Pinhas (Rabbi) 223Teiz, A.M. 11Teller 155Tel-Zur, Moshe 90Thalberg, Ludwig 279Tikhonitsky 143Tolstoi, Lew 295, 325Tov, Hayyim 87Tron, Joshua (Zhano)12, 52, 60, 86, 100, 107,113, 114, 116, 117, 119,120, 255, 259, 317Tron, Salomon 318, 319Trotzky, Lew 318Truman, Harry 368Tssherniak, J. (Rabbi) 224Tschernichovsky, Saul 92,345Tscherow 204Tsivian, H. 92Turgeniev, J. 325Twain, Marc 314Uhrmacher, Z. 56Ulmanis, Karl 50, 72, 84,94, 99—101, 107, 111,119, 140, 143, 154, 166,167, 169, 180, 182—185,193, 216, 230, 232, 240,255, 302Ussishkin, Menahem 92,208Uswansky (family) 347Verlinsky, Nahum 92Vevier, Zalman (Rabbi)225Vildikan, Noama 190, 195Vinnaver 254Vinnik, Jerachmiel 12, 56,57, 68, 79, 82, 88, 195,203, 204, 299, 300, 310Vinnik-Rasby, Riwka 88,195, 204Vishinsky 318Volshonok, Avigdor 223,251Volshonok, Zalman Isaac251Vorobeiczik, A. 189—192Vorobeiczik, N. 190Vofsi-Mikhoels, Salomon324—326, 361Vofsi, Miron 361Wagner, Richard 325Wahrhaftig, David 58, 87Waldemaras 142Walters 129—131Wassermann, Elhanan(Rabbi) 228Wasserman, Hermann 60,68, 86, 196, 317, 329Wasserman, Dina 195Wasserman-Maimon 195Weinberg, Bertha 198Weinberg, Meir 80, 198,204Weinberg, Moshe 85Weinberg, R. 87Weinreich, Max (Meir)92, 314, 315, 362Weinreich, Uriel 314, 315,362Werzevicki 143Weissman, Fishel 194, 206Weintraub 81, 197Weintraub, Hirsch 328Weisspap, Isaac 88, 152,193Weizman, Chaim 14Werth 317Wiener, J. 200Wiener, Samuel 254Wi lbuschevitch-Shohat,Manja 270Wilde, Oskar 314Wilensky (family) 347Wilensky, Leo 347Wilfiszewski 143Wilhelm II 330Wittenberg, Moshe 226,273Wittenberg, Reuben 60,83, 122, 127, 141, 165,176, 226Wittenberg, Shimon 17,60, 61, 83, 177, 179, 222,223, 301, 302, 355, 356,364Wolfius 135Wolfson, Abraham 91Wolfson, B. 80, 189, 190,192Wolfson, L. 80, 190Wolpe, J. 317Wulf 236Wulfius, Alexander 340Wulfson, Meir 279Wunderbar, R. 28, 31, 276,278, 285—287Yatskan, Judah 88Y atskan-Wittenberg,Zosia 88Yaffe, Alter 268Yaffe, Hayyim 85Yaffe, Hillel 251Yaffe, S.M. 258Yo, Mihal 82, 310, 312Ysraeli, Joseph 93Yudenitch 97, 121Yurashevsky 158, 161—163Zacharovitch, Simeon 52,100, 101, 104, 189Zachs 232383The Jews in LatviaZack, Mendel (Rabbi) 81,224, 225, 229, 354, 356Zadoc-Kahn 251Zakodin 272Zadikoff, Eliezer 269Zak, Relia 190, 195Zakheim, Joseph 284Zaks, S. 11, 361Zalmanovitz (family) 347Zalmansohn, L. 258Zeitlin, Shneur Zalman329Zelbovitch, Mordechai(Rabbi) 225Zelens 148, 175Zelikovitch, M. 87Zelmin, Hugo 143, 166,167, 169, 174, 175Zemach, S. 92Zemgal, G. 232Zenziper, B. 206Zentnerschwer 81, 352Zhagorsky, Jacob 311Zhitlowsky, Hayyim 92,253Ziegler, Meir 88Ziegler, Rivka (Meirson)88Zifroni 93Zioni (Rabbinical family)228Zioni, David 228Zisling, Aaron 92Zivian, B. 188Zubatow 270Zuckerman, Baruch 92,295Zuckerman, Dov 251Zwi 273384