DAVIDAND SYLVIA STEINER YIZKOR BOOK COLLECTIONSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARYNO. OI552Kalisz Memorial BookThe Kalish book1?THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY - NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSTHE STEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARY PROVIDESON-DEMAND REPRINTS OF MODERN YIDDISH LITERATURE©2003 THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY ANDTHE NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERMAJOR FUNDING FOR THEYIZKOR BOOK PROJECT WAS PROVIDED BY:Harry and Lillian Freedman FundDavid and Barbara B. Hirschhorn FoundationDavid and Barbara MarguliesThe Nash Family FoundationHarris RosenDavid and Sylvia SteinerRuth TaubmanOriginal publication dataTITLEIMPRINTDESCRIPTSUBJECTadd'l NAMEThe Kalish book. [English version prepared by I. M. Lask.Tel-Aviv, Societies of Former Residents of Kalish and the Vicinity in Israeland U. S. A., 1968]327 p. illus., facsims., map, ports. 28 cm.Jews -- Poland — Kalisz.Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945) — Poland -- Kalisz.Kalisz (Poland) -- Ethnic relations.Lask, I. M. (Israel Meir), 1905-THIS BOOK MEETS A.N.S.I. STANDARDS FORPAPER PERMANENCE AND LIBRARY BINDING.PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.(Ak //’$ z~7^- (S’"?lainroiyannsipa putill) Jamily |The Kalish Book| Is 8 0 1 1,Sf3a '■ -' ■iiwwniisThe Kalish Statute designed and illuminated by Arthur SzykMEMBERS OF THE PUBLICATION COMMITTEESPUBLICATION COMMITTEE IN ISRAEL PUBLICATION COMMITTEE IN U. S. A.Zm AradEliezer Birnbaum. TreasurerJoseph HoltzGershon WroclawskiDrl Saul ZaludAbraham Zohar. SecretaryBaruch Tall, ChairmanMendel SieradzkiMenahem SzklanowskiJosevh Arnold, PresidentSam Berke, Vice-PresidentAbraham Bandel, ChairmanSamuel Okladek, Financial SecretaryIsrael Diamant, TreasurerPeretz Walter, SecretaryHersh ArkushMax SmolenNahum MedianJacob LeviSamuel RothKalman AronovitchHava ShurekFormer SecretariesJerusalem members : Moshe Carmeli, Joseph RosenbaumHaifa members : Arieh Eifodi, Shimshon Green, EliahuWinter, Fishel Katz, Moshe Fuyara, Israel Friede.Graphic Design and Lay-Out: Samuel Brandpo$i/cV*oxAll rights reservedTHE HEBREW AND YIDDISH TEXT OF THE FIRST VOLUME WERE COMPOSED IN THE YEAH1964, SEVEN CENTURIES AFTER THE PROMULGATION OF THE KALISH STATUTES (1264).THE HEBREW AND YIDDISH TEXT OF THE SECOND VOLUME WERE BROUGHT TO THEPRESS DURING THE SIX-DAY WAR OF ISRAEL 5-10 JUNE, 1967 (26 IYYAR, 2 SI VAN 5727).THE KALISH BOOK IS ISSUED BY THE SOCIETIES OF FORMERRESIDENTS OF KALISH AND THE VICINITY IN ISRAEL AND U.S.A.Composed and Printed at the EYLON Press 11, Hasharon St., Tel*AvivPhotographs printed at the M. ANABI Offset Press Tel-AvlvFOREWORDTwo decades after the Nazis exiled the Jews of Kalish from their homesto the Ghettoes and the death-camp#;Fifteen years after the end of the Second World War and the appearanceof the Survivors who brought the dread tidings of the destruction of theKalish Community and the extermination of the Jews who had been itsmembers;The vestiges of the Community in the State of Israel, in the United Statesof America and in other countries of the Dispersion, resolved to set up theirMemorial to Thirty thousand fathers, mothers, brothers, sisters, sons anddaughters who had fallen facing the foe, and who had been slain to Hallowthe Holy Name.The Committees of the (<Kalish Book?* in Israel and America gleaned thematerial page by page, testimony by testimony, article by article, item byitem. With efforts that continued for years they collected the material forthis Kalish Book.Here is the History of a very ancient Community, which existed for almosta thousand year#. On numberless occasions throughout the generations theCommunity fell, only to rise again and continue its life and way of livinguntil at last it was eradicated, so that not even a sign of it is left.May this Book be an everlasting witness to an outstanding Jewish Com-munity which reeled and fell. May its history serve as a memory for cominggenerations and a source of wide to those who came forth from our City,so that they may preserve ana continue the tradition of the Community andHoly Congregation of Kalish,THE EDITORIAL COMMITTEEH3T»» ewry, remember the City and Mother inIsrael cut down with her children. The cityremains as it had been, untouched.x1 he houses rise high, the gardens blossom,the River Prosna twines as of old, with banksthat are now paved with tombstones out ofthe Jewish graveyard.Y1 et the thirty thousand Jews of Kalish havebeen cut down one and all; never brought toa Jewish grave. Their ashes are part of theashes of millions burnt, their bones flungafar in alien fields, all they had was left be-hind in the city where aliens batten upon it.c** even hundred years ago and more theyarrived in the city and at once became theyeast in the dough; they minted coins for theking, they toiled and they traded. Swiftly theyspread beyond the narrow bounds of theJewish callings of those times and engagedin crafts and commerce.Skilfully, wisely they laboured until theymade their city into a leader in all embroideryand lace-making work.T1 his was a city of Jews, a Jewish city, acity of merchants and craftsmen, the city ofthe learned "Magen Abraham" and "NefeshHaya”; the city of Revolutionaries in 1905 andof Ghetto Fighters who came from YouthMovements, went to their brethren all overthe country and with their blood wrote pagesof valour in the Record of Polish Jewry; cityof pioneer Halutzim who went ahead to showthe way to the Homeland; city of All-the-year-round Jews who filled synagogues and stieb-lech with the chanting of prayer and the studyof Torah; city of youngsters in many a partycontending together, their hearts full of theLove of Israel, flaming with zeal for the Ho-nour of Israel; city of Erect Jewish Workerswith skilful hands who were honoured athome among their own people, and in theeyes of their Gentile comrades.Dut the murderers came like robbers atnoon, encompassing them with deceit andtrickery, and brought them to the flames be-fore they could utter their prayer, before theycould lift up their hands.c**ee them go to the Market Building, to therailway waggons, with little bundles and hugeeyes, sad Jewish eyes. For seven hundredyears they had contended here with hostile,envious neighbours who drove them awayand oppressed them; sevenfold they fell andsevenfold rose; their right to eat and prayto God they purchased with anguish, yearn-ing, intercession and money. Here or therethe hand of a Jew was raised to repay mur-derers their deserts. So it went on day afterday, century on century. Read the tale oftheir chronicles in the city and you will knowwhat brought the sad sheen to their eyes.w▼▼ omen pass clutching the babes to theirbreast, running naked to gas chambers, somestumbling and perishing. Children pass; andtheir wise eyes know the whole of the nakedtruth. The old folk pass with their handsclutching their prayerbooks. Men pass alongand their backs are bowed with the burdenof seven hundred years. Lads leap from thewaggons and smash against the stone per-manent way. The hopes of the people pass,and ironshod jackboots trample them un-derfoot in the sun.Remember and Never ForgetLET THE PEOPLE REMEMBER THEIR OFFSPRINGAND WRITE THEIR NAMES LARGEAND HALLOW THEIR MEMORY.YOU WHO WERE BORN IN THIS CITYOR WHOSE FATHERS AND MOTHERS WHERE BORN THERE,REPEAT AND REPEAT TO YOUR CHILDREN:YOUR FATHERS BEFORE YOU WERE PURE IN THEIR LIVESAND WERE MARTYRS IN DEATH,AND THEIR SOULS ARE BOUND UP FOREVERIN THE BUNDLE OF LIFE.MEMORIAL STONES...The deeds of humankind will swiftly pass awayand vanish from memory unless they are preservedby verbal witness or written documents.(From the Kalish Statute,10th September, 1264)Kalish is one of the middle-sized cities of Poland. In the year 1938 it had apopulation of sixty-eight thousand.Its size determined the style of life there, and saved the inhabitants fromthe monotony of the hamlets and small towns and that absence of a centrewhich marks the residents of a metropolis. Like the Prosna flowing slowlythrough the city, so the inhabitants wove the pattern of their daily lives. Mostof them earned their livings by light industry and retail trade. Special mentionshould be made of the Lace Industry which reached considerable dimensionsand opened commercial horizons to the city through exports, first to theexpanses of Russia before the First World War, and to Poland and the Westafterwards.Kalish, which lay on the former frontier between Russia and Germany,absorbed a Western atmosphere over the years. This atmosphere combinedwith the cultural life and enlightenment activities which were part of the localtradition. There were three Governmental Secondary Schools, a Public Libra/rybearing the name of Adam Mickiewicz, and a Society for Popular Music whosehandsome Concert Hall welcomed the leading musicians of the world. TheMunicipal Theatre, where renowned companies staged their performances, lieson the river bank at the entrance to the magnificent Park.After the destruction that followed the outbreak of the First World War,Kalish was rebuilt with modern streets and new houses. It had an extensivecircle of intellectuals who included most of the members of the free professions.From their midst came the Polish writers Adam Asnik, Maria Konopnicka andMaria Dombrowska.There were twenty-five thousand Jews in Kalish, whose life in generalresembled that of their brethren in other Polish cities.For the greater part they engaged in retail trade, in handicrafts, as agentsand in the free professions. They played a considerable part in establishingthe Lace Industry and expanding it. Among them a minority enjoyed veryconsiderable economic success. The majority made a bare living, suffering fromthe manifestations of anti-Semitism a'nd the animosity of the dominantmajority.Their social life was lived in and around the Jewish Community, in whichall parties and economic bodies were represented.Elections to the Community Council were important occasions. More thanonce there were “explosive” election campaigns, which were participated in byall the parties in the Jewish Street: The Bund, Agudat Israel, General Zionists,Labour Eretz Israel, Left Poalei Zion, the Hassidic “Stieblech”, the Hassidimof the Rebbes of Gur and Alexander, Craftsmen, Retail Merchants, Trade Unions,etc. Kalish was a citadel and stronghold of various Hassidic groups, and eachof these mantained its own “Stiebel”. As a whole, the Jews of the city pridedthemselves on the renowned outhorities who had served there as Rabbis.Secular life was equally lively. The political parties had their clubs wherelectures and entertainments were held. Intellectuals and youngsters foundreading matter in the libraries of these clubs. Two Yiddish weeklies, “KalisherLeben” and “Kalisher Woch”, were published and reflected the daily life ofthe Jewish Community.Thanks to local initiative a Jewish Gymnasium or Secondary School wasestablished and educated the younger generation for years, providing them notonly with their general training but also with the foundations of a nationalHebrew education.Sabbaths and festivals were clearly to be recognised in the Jewish Quarter,which ran from the Old Market to the Maikow Fields, criss-crossed withstreets that were always full of life. Kalish Jewry was blessed with an ever-fresh and effervescent younger generation. The Hebrew Gymnasium, theGovernment Gymnasiums, the Trade School and the many Yeshivot educatedhundreds of young men and women whose influence could be felt. Zionist andHalutz youth, trade union youth, school children and members of SportsOrganisations had their own regula/r meeting-places in the Old and New Parks.Many of their best came to Eretz Israel over the years and joined those whowere building up the Homeland.The Kalish Book describes the daily life of the Jewish Community, itsstruggle for economic, cultural and social existence from the early days untilthe end. In these pages the survivors of the Community have done their bestto set up a Memorial to their brethren. May it serve as a landmark for thecoming generations of our offspring.BARUCH TALLThe History of the Jews in KalishHISTORY OF THE JEWS IN KALISHby Dr. N. M. GelberrHE BEGINNINGSKalish on the River Prosna has been a city with considerable municipalrights of autonomy ever since the Thirteenth Century, by which time thepopulation already consisted of Poles, Jews and Germans from Silesia. Itbelonged to the Hanseatic League and was made a Free City in the year1360. Under King Kasimir the Great in the mid-14th Century it became thesecond capital of Poland. At the period of the Reformation it became a Pro-testant refuge. Early in the 17th Century the first astronomical observatoryin Europe was constructed there. Throughout the Middle Ages and after thecity, which was strongly fortified and had four gates, suffered the usualvicissitudes of siege, revolt, warfare, pillage, fires, etc.Jews were to be found in Silesia by the middle of the 12th Century andhad entered Great Poland by the first decades of the 13th Century, Severalplaces called 2ydowo (Jew-town) are referred to at that time, one beingclose to Kalish. According to Thadinski, the historian of the city, Jews werealready resident in Kalish as early as 1139, By the end of the 12th Centurythere were Jewish minting specialists in the city, as proved by one-sidedcoins known as “Brakmats” bearing the imprint “Joseph Kalish” in Hebrewcharacters. It appears that at this period Jews were masters of various mintsin Germany and Austria, and also supplied the metal for the coins. Jewishminters seem to have been among the first to reach Western Poland, andthey operated a mint in Kalish for seven years.THE KALISH PRIVILEGESOn 10th September 1264 the Jews of Kalish were granted the “KalishPrivileges”, consisting of 37 articles. Thirteen of these deal with matters ofJewish credit and two with Jewish trade. Under these Privileges the Jewshad the status of “servi eamerae” (servants of the Treasury or of the localGovernment authority). For this they had to pay the local duke certainamounts, in return for which he gave them his protection. They were subjectto his jurisdiction, or that of a special judge appointed by him and knownas “Judge of the Jews”. However, they were not under the jurisdiction ofthe city in which they dwelt. Criminal cases were judged by the duke inperson.Internal Jewish disputes were dealt with in Jewish Courts, but the Judgeof the Jews might intervene at the request of either of the contending parties.The Jewish Court was held in the synagogue. Jews might not be brought fortrial during their Festivals, but otherwise they had to appear in Court assoon as summoned. Any person who did not appear when summoned for thefirst or second time had to pay a fine.16THE KALISH BOOKNo Jew might be required to take oath on their Torah Scrolls save inmajor trials for sums exceeding the value of 50 marks of fine silver, or whenhe was summoned before the duke. In minor trials he had to take oath infront of the synagogue and at its doors.If a Christian brought action against a Jew, whether on a criminal or civilcharge, he had to bring a Jewish witness as well as a Christian.Any person injuring a Jew, who was the property of the duke, had to paya fine to the duke’s treasury and damages to the Jew. Any person murderinga Jew was sentenced to death, and his property was to be confiscated bythe ducal treasury. Similar punishments were provided for wounding aJewess, destroying a Jewish cemetery or taking a pledge from a Jew byforce. Any person throwing stones at a synagogue had to pay the authoritiesa fine of 2 “stones” of pepper. A person kidnapping a Jewish child by forcewas judged as a thief.In accordance with the Bull of Pope Innocent IV, which was publishedafter a blood libel charge at Fulda in Germany in 1253, it was severely pro-hibited to bring any such charge against any Jews whatsoever within theDuchy, namely that of using human blood, “since all Jews refrain by reasonof their faith from consuming blood in any fashion whatsoever”.If a Jew should be charged with the murder of a Christian child, thematter had to be proved by three Christians, and an equal number of Jews.If it should be proved, the Jew would be punished, but not by the customarypunishment for this crime. But if he should prove himself innocent by thesaid witnesses, then the Christian would not unjustly be sentenced to thepunishment which the Jew would otherwise have had to bear because ofhis malice.A Christian suspected of murdering a Jew might prove his innocencethrough trial by combat, and the court would appoint the person with whomhe would have to do battle.If the Jews transfer the bodies of the dead after their fashion from onecity to another or from one district to another or from one country toanother, the tax collectors are not authorised to levy any payment uponthem; and if they do so they will be punished as robbers.If a Jew is compelled to raise an outcry at night on account of any greaturgency, and the Christian neighbours do not give him the necessary aidand do not gather at the sound of the outcry, then each Christian neighbourshall pay thirty soldi to the judge or to the local authority.Thirteen articles deal in detail with interest charged by Jews If a Christianclaimed that he pawned an article with a Jew for an amount less thanthe latter demanded, the latter had to take oath that he was telling thetruth, Christian religious apparel and wet or blood-stained garments mightnot be accepted as pledges. Jews might accept horses as pledges only openlyand by daylight. If a Christian found a stolen horse held by a Jew, theJew would be deemed innocent if he took oath that the horse had beenpledged with him openly and in the daytime, that he lent money to itsowner and had no reason to believe that the horse was stolen.If a Jew advanced money aginst land or deeds of outstanding individualsand could prove this by the documents and the seals, the Jew would be• *». > , ■- '.. .'.,wi w .*.".Vr^.^ *> * * '**”“*'   .«»-,. ••■.■: v'-v:.:LieutantfifW & i•a;. MM|X’t •*> ^■NRMnlJewish Physicians sent by DanJoseph Nassi, Duke of Naxosand the Cyclades, GrandVizier of Sultan Suleiman theMagnificent, in order to treatBarbara Radziwil, Wife of hisSovereign Friend SigismundAugustus King of Poland.A Jew with a Petition-Writer1mua--' a-M'-a . :■a A.~.’■? ’•> A:A'’ ' ... -.V': ^^ BS' gasSi *,v^ > SKpggjgs S ^ ^ „■> 'i W&mmm x\ W■•• ■ ■■ -'.■■■■■•' ■ : . ; ,y • .:: •. .;•. '' Ma— ^ . mIliSIili:I : 'l:■' : :•. : ■■:■:. ■W"if:■■ :' : ■:S' *m.:''J0tmHi ■" i■-; dnraw]Aaaaaama- :■ .-..ilil■*s0S: #•1•I-iSllfSJpjlSS^IM fiTlBj0J%mii' L ft :' -v";pflgftiPiiNM Pjl illi It**L. Tl *  ^ aMaa:xxx •■■•■,,'■■<■. <■: -liiiS:mm■"* l-SSs.^Sa«**> . ' .J^T, .if* '-v -.:m' ■'.MB■p a TTpWii i f $■ f ■W-X.y -a A A-rA- A'"«,A M-'A■a:;: ' AAi'A-fft-MM:"VL-%V ~V^£*:■ Mg?Ill- '■-Jilla■•- -MlA A 'a‘;> ■ a'a-:'/A'' ■ '■/• ’■■';■•: !' - !aJM!!immm' :PHIa’aMaaMaa<V J w\J& ' ■-■X.'lr/'"' • . ■' “*> B vt XMM .f-. , ^ » . .t'• ^tl , l‘ li‘ " :; *■ :>v.■ . V ^ V?; t{ , vSl8iiiill^fSlisip£M■5$.■ A .. -.' a, ,. A*’ •..A'AA::'A' ;'■ i; A-■’■■••■• ':‘.-A V-' •. Wl$S§X.%*'«!fiH:'fvyfs¥^y4,?> -i: -y ^ ^ ^ - ^ ^ ^^ w » i W » « » a g s 1- - •• - ... ■ A-. . . ■•' • • • : • ■••; ■ “' -■*x-*ww**mi •«■• immmm:mm^rn > WS^. **§ ■, 1BS:.,«Sfill■m-■!&*MA"••■.■ *■■.■ - .■■' ' : *. - ■',- A ■m'"’MSB'. . ■;•^XSSssS»V '-.wnMHS|a•^4e.;.; ' '-A■.aMv/ma' a- ': >;;- 1I ^ J?BMsa- ■ .'- ,:■'■■%: a.Ba^gxr ..-.-jg>.A Funeral ProcessionStarts OutJewish Seamen Export PolishProduce through the Portof DanzigMIA Jew is AttackedRobbery in the Jews’ Quarter►These Reproductions are used byJewish Museum, New Yorkpermission of theA Christian Gives Evidencein a Case Concerning a JewA Jew takes OathA Din TorahJewish Craftsmenat WorkJewish Minters strikethe First Polish Coinsin the Reign ofMieszek IIIpiSillmmmm*':• ■ ■■:.■MBoleslaw the Great Signs the Statute in Kalish, 1264IS :IS'p. ' •i(S,6SiHHHP.^•4^-3* > . sssPsii®|§|r *Jlf^*&^**$jW' v *Aflll|4|ll>iFj■ ■■■■. ■' ••-/': . '-■■!... iv ::11®§|Slf#§fmmmami■ ' • - . ■; . '■ .:v;%KS^,, 4: - 4y- ,. . • . •: . . ..iiv-flaitisfcft I■'• ; .*■ K "; s ■>' ■£*.' *-' ;• a i : s v .• ', -* . .,.. ., ... ■ A.* -<■ • ■ ‘ .-- . ,' ; . s* . *,• ; ■’ -'; - ; ;\s •- u ' . . s vr; ,; * ’ - ■■?<•. ,%\W-: s -- r .* " ’•*< $*'-Mmmmmm gpMp > * 1 m ? ^ * 1 I v JpMi.vl:]:i:-t n.s,;iMniwwi-Jf4' |Nr£11WPIl||Bi£,3 ■ftf '■&*:i'»'.\v' k> -. ; • t* . * ^4*? <*•.•* -■:■ ymm‘ *' ' '•' '* 5® ' “ 4 'fi\ ,-'. . - .» ' - ' ,?iVi' '•’ ^ .- -4. ■ -v,**#-#^** ,' - . ?g <^j■>>-•- ,"•*.*»*•' vfl■ "..?i^i!list WffM'iw«M -s ' ' 3• ■■•;-,• ..:wm-4; ; ; ■'■:i#fi.k ‘-.V; '::v-; >v:;,4;: /ml'-''-. '■■ ■■ ■ ■..:. ..•,:;' l-'v:' ■■■?/■ v:4:*t"''WilliflriKK)-IM^■f<lwiiIf j|Mf 1 *i4Miif jjfelIP [0i£* * 1 -4fi7i H ; 4 T^p?F^ f ^ ^||^> Tt: F;|f|:|ITi|f |ffiw|'tv. ■>>v-^ . . ■"'--'^*v --.. v -*-a"mm',' >‘XT>4fr*»?!!irs' *1*? ^'■k^"'>:'V>v - : -^>"V>'', »> - v-"- vA' *-. -s^»Vv ^■ ■ 'If'1" V' -- *-' 'v 'V<-,K> ,V 0.\^\v>r^^ ^ /*«S»<S3«^Si? S-*’s-.; ' .!» ■!i-- ' .'‘s' ^4 •. . ■' ■•'4*-- ■' ' TliffiawlHb&n■hi4-l*!sf44:inKU ■■.•..v..:l!4rxSflHii•!> H4■w-.V';:£;v -4.^. -.-.' - ^4.».«bs;«I• ISfSSt" IlvSIS':;■/■; • ...|'imtSSIS■I ' '• ■,:.'. ,"■■■■ '. 4• £' :ftm,vI i■:iRS®ifSfSSISSSSSSSwKSMEJR '"';^Hg»' ' •':-■■• • -nn - .■ nnSSsffelI.Af.%rib'll.11'JPns'S'SVS4 :IWai-Ss15-lliHIiiiliiiiiiaSim.'.• V,IBBfs#s sl:#■■IIIr*- j, - -. ' ',' <v,sThe Kalish Statute : English Version■ ■: - V - :.'V^Uy-Mv: v-:■> - ,HUHm1|§‘- • :■ ■ ''. • ’ • '.: ^ ‘ - • ■MW ' ' W±v& Ajfo '&• Sj&Ski&iiK ~~•sm&L , <' v. ' ".: ;'y;*•; ' :;The Kalish Statute : Yiddish Version- -V .L s',rS IpMS •§ # ^ ■'\- .; . * : -if, -The Kalish Statute : Hebrew VersionJewish Representatives before Kasimir the GreatHISTORY17allocated the land as with any other pledges, and he would be protectedby the authorities against all duress and compulsion.Jews transporting wares were not to pay any higher customs duty oroctroi than the citizens of the city in which the Jew might be stayingat that time. Jews might buy and sell anything, might touch bread likeChristians, and any persons restraining them from so doing would be fined.A further clause reads: “Likewise we desire that no man shall be billetedin the house of a Jew.” This exemption from the duty of billeting was other-wise granted only to the clergy and the nobility, and would seem to indicatethe special status of the Jews in the eyes of the law.The Kalish Privileges were afterwards extended to all the Jews in theDuchy of Great Poland. Subsequently they were confirmed and expandedin the years 1334 and 1364/65 by Kasimir the Great and extended to thewhole of Poland. At that time the document was entrusted to a Kalish Jewnamed Falk.Similar privileges, it should be noted, had already been granted to Jewsfrom the mid-13th Century in Austria, Hungary and Bohemia. However, thePolish privileges included certain clauses that were not to be found in theothers.The original text was printed in a collection of laws prepared by JanLaski, approved by the Polish Seim (Parliament) in Radom, and publishedin 1506. Certain changes for the worse were made and the inclusion of thelaw was justified by the declaration of the then reigning King Alexander:“We, King Alexander, command that the Privileges be included in the Codeof Laws not in order to confirm them afresh but as a precautionary measureto protect the Jews.”Polish scholars sometimes describe these Privileges as the Magna Chartaof Polish Jewry. While considerable attention is paid to Jews as money-lenders (i.e., the bankers of the Middle Ages) they also seem to have playeda very significant part as merchants who maintained the flow of goodsthroughout the country and from one territory to another. The recognitionof the Jewish, i.e., Rabbinical Court as the legal authority in internal Jewishaffairs and disputes helped to secure the growth of the subsequent internalautonomy of Polish Jewry which has been a decisive factor in shaping thelives of East European Jewry and their descendants.EARLY DAYSAs frequently happens in Jewish history, the presence of Jews is knownthrough some calamity. In this case it is known that in Kalish they sufferedfrom hunger in 1282 on account of pestilence. The first step taken by thecommunity as such was to establish a cemetery which goes back to theyear 1287, and was paid for at the rate of six talents of pepper and twotalents of saffron as an annual leasehold rental.The early Jewish community was set up not in the commercial centre butnearby, apparently on the left bank of the River Prosna. To begin withJews were engaged in crafts such as tailoring, butchering, gold and silverworking; and there were also those who engaged in agriculture. Followingthe prohibition of lending money on interest by the Church, an increasing18THE KALISH BOOKnumber of Jews began to engage in finance, so that by the time of Kasimirthe Great Kalish and Posen lying further north were important Jewishbanking and credit centres.However, the Black Death, which spelt calamity throughout Central Europe,had its effect in Poland as well. The coming of the Flagellants spelled theend of the Jewish community. A lament for the massacres that took placerecords the slaying of Jews in Kalish, Cracow and Glogau. However, theGerman massacres led in turn to a Jewish migration into Poland. Manysettled in Kalish and the Jewish community began to expand once more.There was a period of relative prosperity interrupted by the campaigns ofthe Hungarian king Ludwig in 1383, while about forty years later a con-vocation of the Catholic Church led to the imposition of anti-Jewish regula-tions, including the wearing of the Jewish badge.From the middle of the 14th Century Jews begin to appear more frequentlyby name, being referred to in various legal records as claiming the paymentof debts, most of which are by no means considerable.Names found in these lists include: Michael, Abraham, Yehudya, David,Daniel, Shabdai (Sabbethai), Aaron, Shlomo and Jonah Michael. Womenmentioned include: Zelda, Zemela and Dina. Other names are Jurdan, Kavian,and Benish.By the early 15th Century Kalish Jews were engaging in partnerships inrespect of various financial transactions. At this time Jews are referred toin the courts by the names of Iko (Isaac) and Kossol.GROWTH OF THE COMMUNITYA Jewish street existed from the middle of the 14th Century. As remainedcustomary for many centuries, this was rather more of a square or quarterbuilt round the synagogue, which was burnt in the late 16th Century. TheJewish Quarter ran from the centre of the city to the walls. Before thefire of 1537 Jews were permitted to hold six houses of their own, otherhouses being presumably rented. When the city was rebuilt the number ofJewish houses was increased to eleven. By an agreement reached in 1540eleven Jewish families were permitted to deal in certain kinds of goodswithin the Christian quarter, and Jews were permitted to maintain fourtaverns for spirits. Some years later the municipality supplied the Jewswith piped water against an annual payment of four florins. By 1553 thecommunity already had nineteen houses apart from communal buildingsconsisting of the community building and offices, dwellings of the rabbi,shamash (beadle) and communal staff, and the hekdesh (communal lazar-house and hostel), the bath-house and mikveh (ritual bath). As time wenton Christian citizens including aldermen sold their houses to the Jews,particularly if they happened to lie within the Jewish Quarter.In respect of Polish law the main purpose of the organised Jewishcommunity was to facilitate the collection of taxes and other charges owingto the Government. Internally speaking the community or kehilla engaged inthe conduct and regulation of religious, economic, social and educationalaffairs and represented its members vis-a-vis Government and municipalauthorities. Until well on in the 16th Century each Jewish community wasHISTORY19an independent body and there was no territorial organisation linking them.From time to time they would associate for some ad hoc purpose, whichwas usually temporary.In the early days the community was headed by an unspecified number ofparnassim (wardens), five, four or three in number. When Kasimir the Greatconfirmed the Kalish Privileges the leaders of the Kalish community repre-sented the Jews of Great Poland. Thirty years later the revised Charterwhich had been extended to all Polish Jewry was, as already mentioned,enturusted to the Jew Falk of Kalish who presumably headed the communityat that time. Other known leaders of he community were Daniel who waschosen as arbitrator in disputes, and David Ogbut of Cracow, who builthouses in the early part of the Fourteen hundreds.Under King Wladislaw Jagiello the Jewish community of Kalish wassubjected to increasing economic pressure. In 1430 the King gave instruc-tions that Palta Joseph and Canaan, Jews of Kalish, should appear beforethe Royal Court because they had not paid taxes to the Treasury from theirprofits in financial transactions. They did not appear in Court and a fine offifteen hundred grzebni was imposed upon them. Instances of this kindalarmed the community and led them to resolve to leave the city. Theauthorities opposed this and demanded that the wealthy Jews of the com-munity should personally guarantee on pain of a financial fine of sixtygrzebni that those who departed would not take their property with themuntil they had settled their debts for taxes. Kavian, apparently as communityhead, and other wealthy Jews gave security for this, as we learn from anextant docuipent. About a generation earlier a false florin had been foundin the possession of the Kalish Jew Mark, who was flung into prison.Kavian, together with Jehuda, Smalko and Jurdan, bailed him out on aguarantee of 100 grzebni. Mark proved that he had never gone abroad andhad purchased the bad florin from the Kalish citizen Kurczak in the beliefthat it was good money. Kurczak witnessed that Mark’s claim was correctand he was acquitted. A similar incident occurred in 1441 to two Jewesses,who were also set free.”The number of Jews in Kalish increased following the expulsion fromPrague in 1542, though most of those expelled settled in Lublin and Cracow.Jews from Hungary also settled in the city.The major expansion of Polish Jewry took place in the 15th and 16thcenturies, when Kalish residents began to move to new communities whichoffered better economic opportunities. As already noted, the authorities didtheir best to prevent any mass withdrawal. In this connection various wealthyJews were charged with breaches of the law, particularly in 1448, andescaped imprisonment only by paying large sums as security. At this timethe community as such paid an annual tax of one hundred grzebni to theking's secretary, Canon Martin Swonka, who was himself heavily burdenedwith debt. The tax was paid but the Canon promised the community thathe would obtain a royal privilege exempting it from all further taxation fortwo years, together with the assistance of Government officials in collectingdebts owed by Christians to the Jews. A special agreement in this connectionwas signed in 1445. However, it is not known whether the Canon succeeded20THE KALISH BOOKin carrying out his part. In 1453 a joint delegation from seven communitiesincluding Kalish endeavoured to obtain a confirmation of their privileges atthe royal chancellory. After six years of intercession and considerable financialoutlay, a memorandum summarising all privileges was prepared and wassigned by the reigning monarch in respect of the Jews of Great Poland andSmall Poland. However, under ecclesiastical pressure the privileges werewithdrawn soon after.The first named rabbi of the Jews was Michael, who is referred to in adocument of 1427. Somewhat later reference is made to the Jewish judgeAbraham Kapust of Pesari and the Jewish assessors Michael and Palty.At about the same time there were three shammashim or beadles of thecourt and the community, Abraham, Shmuel and Israel by name, whosequarrels brought them before the civil court and are a matter of record.In 1458 there was a fire in the course of which the Jewish houses wereall burnt and their property was pillaged. During the same year they hadto pay the rector of the general school, apparently for preventing his olderpupils from engaging in anti-Jewish riots of the kind known as “schuelergeleif”. Riots broke out in the year 1542 and were participated in not onlyby the rabble but also by various notables of the city. The rioters burstinto the synagogue and profaned the Torah Scrolls. The heads of the Jewishcommunity blamed the Municipal Council. The latter in return prohibited theJews from appearing in public or even leaving their dwellings from GoodFriday to Easter Monday inclusive. At that time the Government authoritieswarned the Municipality that they would have to pay a fine of two thousandgrzebni if disturbances broke out again. However, there were more riots in1565, when three Jews were killed. The municipal authorities did not appearin court and the accused were not punished.Some years earlier the Jews of Kalish had been accused of stealing theHost from the church, and a number were sentenced to death. In 1571 legalsteps were taken by the brothers Shmuel and Moshe Mordechovitch and therabbi against the citizens of Kalish, on account of the murder of their brotherElia by a student. The matter was settled in due course by payment ofcompensation. A few years later the following brief entry is found in thePinkas (Record Book) of the Cracow community: “In the Holy Congregationof Kalish the students destroyed the synagogue and took the Torah Scrolland ripped it apart in the year 5351 (1591).”Sixty years earlier King Zygmunt had set out to protect the Jews againstthe charges of using Christian blood for religious purposes, and had publisheda declaration confirming all the long-established privileges of the Jews inthe cities of Great Poland including Kalish. Once again the citizens wereprohibited from judging the Jews in their courts.It should be noted that the beginnings of the 16th Century were markedby a struggle on the part of the Polish cities to restrict the long-establishedJewish freedom for trade. Indeed, in 1521 a delegation of burghers persuadedthe king to cancel all privileges. Some time later the merchants of Posenbroke the Jewish warehouses open in their town and destroyed the content,being followed by similar measures in various other towns including Kalish.In spite of this Jewish trade re-established itself, and between 1550 and 1570HISTORY21Jews conducted the greater part of all commercial transactions with the sea-port of Danzig, as well as in all parts of Poland.Thus in 1580/81 the Jews of Kalish transported close on 4,500 fells andskins of all kinds through the Kalish Customs Station, also 972 stones ofwool (more than 80% of the total handled), 30 stones of tallow, 295 stonesof wax and 5 stones of pepper.In 1579 the Jews of the city paid less than one-fifth of all local taxes,130 zloty. Forty Jews paid nothing on account of their poverty, meaning that30% of the Jewish community were poverty-stricken. At that period the Jewswere required to pay: 1. The Jewish poll-tax; 2. Extraordinary taxes;3. Charges and imposts in money, kind and work.By the middle of the 17th century Kalish Jews were regular visitors atthe Leipzig and Breslau Fairs. On many occasions two or three were sentas representatives of them all, but on other occasions more than thirty Jewswent from Kalish. Towards the end of the century the participation of oversix hundred Jews from Poland is recorded. Of these more than a hundredcame from Kalish. The goods they brought to these fairs included fells, furs,etc. Their purchases included textiles, silks, general merchandise and peddlar’sgoods, metals, ironware and jewelry. Asher Abraham and his sons Amsheland Moshe visited the Leipzig Fair regularly from 1686 until 1736. Otherswere Hanoch, Jacob, Marcus and Moshe, belonging to the Hertz, Marcus,Shmerelovitch and Wolf families. There were others who regularly visited theBreslau Fair. Names mentioned include: Asher, Isaac, Jacob Leibel, Michael,Moshe, and Shmuel Abraham in the final decades of the 17th Century, MarcusIsaac and his son Isaac Marcus Derar, Jacob Barbar, Koppel Goldschmidt,who belonged to the merchant family of Yuchan Alexander, Jacob Ahs,Jacob Lippman, Aaron, Jacob Lazarus, Samuel Yochan and Abraham andMarcus Kaphan. By the turn of the century a number of Polish Jews, includingseveral from Kalish, had settled in Breslau.Jews engaged in the following crafts: Tailors, bakers, weavers, furriers,cord-makers, gold and silversmiths. In the early 16th century there was aJewish painter named Beinish (Byenas). An interesting Order issued by KingZygmunt in 1513 provides that Jewish butchers might sell meat which wasnot hasher only in their own homes, i.e. to non-Jews.In the middle of the 17th Century Jews were also harness-makers, saddle-makers, blacksmiths, ovenmakers, carpenters, bagmakers, rope-makers, en-gravers and glaziers. There were severe restrictions on craftsmen who werenot members of the local guilds, who might, however, sell their wares atfairs and markets. Any journeyman joining a guild paid one zloty andeighteen groszy. The only guild from which Jews were then excluded wasthat of the Barber-surgeons, but presumably this exclusion did not applywithin the Jewish community as such. During all this time the Christianmerchants of Kalish were endeavouring to combat their Jewish fellow-townsmen and competitors in every way possible, including measures that canbe classed as Antisemitic and economic boycott.Regional Government bodies repeatedly demanded that Jews should not beallowed to farm any excise or customs duties, and that they should be requiredto pay the same war tax as others when there was danger of a Tartar invasion22THE KALTSH BOOKinto the Ukraine, Wolhynia and Podolia. Christian tax farmers who employedJewish officials and collectors were liable to fines together with the said Jews.Extortion by false charges were also part of the normal scene. In 1620 thePosen community paid various bribes, etc., in this connection on behalf ofthe Jews of Kalish, who were then undergoing a period of economic distress.During an epidemic in the year 1623 Kalish Jewry suffered from the incite-ment of a Polish physician named Sebastian Szleszkowski who declared ina work on the pestilence that it was due to “Divine retribution for the.protection and defence which the nobility and the municipalities grant tothe Jews.” He claimed that the Jewish physicians were systematically poison-ing their Christian patients. In several brochures he continued his violentattacks on Jewish physicians and on those who consulted them in spite ofthe prohibitions of Holy Church. From his writings and that of a predecessor,who wrote the first Polish antisemitie documents, it would appear that theremust have been quite a number of Jewish physicians in Poland at the time;and there must have been a certain amount of social intercourse betweenthe Jewish and Polish communities, including eating and drinking together.Szleszkowski’s solution for the Jewish problem of his time was to isolatethe Jews in special villages where they would be treated in the same wayas the serfs of the nobility.Following a false charge by a converted Jew in 1641, Christians broke intothe Kalish Synagogue and ripped two Torah Scrolls apart. However, allsuch events were minor details compared with their fate during the invasionof Poland by the Swedish forces between 1655 and 1660, in addition to thegeneral sufferings of the population. In the course of hostilities close on 1800synagogues were destroyed, Torah Scrolls were ripped to pieces and hundredsof jews were killed. Forty communities were exterminated in Great Polandalone. In Kalish itself close on 600 Jewish families were slain, according toa Hebrew record of the period entitled “Tit Hayeven” (The Nether Hell)which enumerates those slain in Polish Jewish communities from the CossackMassacres of 1648 until the end of the Swedish wars in 1660, and arrives atthe figure of 600,000 — a stupendous number for those days. However,survivors and new settlers re-established the community with the financialaid of the Posen community and thanks to loans received from Posen, Lissaand Krotoszin as well as certain clergy, totalling 28,000 zloty. In 1670 theJews of Kalish and Posen were required to pay 3,000 zloty on account ofthe poll-tax for the year 1669. During the same year a number of Jewishrefugees from Vienna settled in the town. Five years later Kalish was visitedby one of those fires which were endemic in Polish cities and their Jewishquarters. At about this time the burghers took steps to ensure that the Jewsshould be confined within the area specified in 1540. In 1676 King JanSobieski confirmed the old Kalish Privileges.AUTONOMOUS JEWISH LIFEThe Jews, who were under royal protection, were regarded as the King'sServants. This meant that in terms of the feudal system they owed directallegiance to the king alone. The internal source of Jewish life was JewishTalmudic law as it had evolved throughout the ages under the guidance ofHISTORY23the Rabbinical authorities known as the Poskim. The constitutional base ofJewish life was the Kalish Privileges of 1264 which prescribed conditionsrelating to trade, loans at interest, the functions of Jewish and general courts,oaths and general regulations governing the life of the community. Variousdetails in these Privileges might vary from one community to another. Forordinary purposes the Jewish community existed on the basis of contract;either with the local Municipal Authorities in the case of Free Cities orelse with the local Regional or Central Government Authorities.The Kahal was equivalent to the Municipality. In Kalish its affairs wereconducted by five Parnassim or Wardens, who were responsible for incomeand expenditure. They were elected by the community, which also laid downthe general lines of administration and exercised administrative, financial,judicial and educational functions besides the conduct of worship and religiousaffairs. The communal representatives represented the Jews vis-&-vis theauthorities and the Kahal was the first and in certain cases the highest legalinstance. It was organised in: a. The heads or Parnassim, numbering threeto five; b. The Worthies; c. The Congregation, or representatives of thecommunity.After the Parnassim or heads were elected they took an oath of allegianceto the king and state. Their election required official confirmation. It wasthe practice for them to hold responsibility each for a month in turn, sothat the person responsible in the community at any given time was knownas the Parnass Hahodesh. The Worthies, three to five in number, couldreplace the Parnassim or might sit in judgment with a Jewish judge onbehalf of the authorities. The number of members in the Kahal seems tohave varied from time to time.There were also the following committees; 1. Major charity wardens, 3—7in number; 2. Holders of the accounts; 3. Market wardens to superviseweights and measures, ensure that the streets were kept clean, supervisenight watchmen, the kashrut of butter, cheese and wine. (It should beremembered that the latter three food items have to be ritually kosher forobservant Jewry to this day.) Sub-committees supervised animal slaughterand the sale of meat, the hiring of menservants and maidservants, etc.4. School Wardens; 5. Synagogue Wardens; 6. Wardens collecting donationsand contributions to support the inhabitants of the Holy Land; 7. Wardensfor Pidyon Shevuyim, the redemption of captives, particularly during hostilities,revolts, etc., in the 17th Century; 8. Communal Fund Wardens; 9. Assessorsfor the allocation of communal taxes; 10. Heads of the Artisan Societies, Le.,the Jewish Guilds.Other committees were set up ad hoc to ensure the observation of sumptuarylaws (against excessive display and extravagance in clothing, etc.), to supervisemorals, etc., Lawsuits between Jews were brought before the Dayanim orsubordinate Rabbinical judges. There were two or three Batei Din or RabbinicalCourts, each composed of 3—5 Dayanim.Persons were elected to office for the period of one year. Elections wereheld in all communities including Kalish on the third day of Passover, i.e.on the first of the intermediate days. Former office holders might be re-elected.The method of election known in Posen, and apparently also used in Kalish,24THE KALISH BOOKwas as follows: The heads of the community placed 21 names of leadinghouseholders in the ballot box and withdrew seven by lot. These were thereferees who appointed the new Kahal, and also gave them general instructions.Both religious and civil functionaries were required by the community.The Rabbi headed the communal hierarchy, and was not only the leadingofficial but likewise the spiritual authority and superviser of the religiousand in general cultural life of his congregation. In the 16th Century theRabbis were usually members of well-to-do families, who were not concernedwith salary and were therefore completely independent of the heads andwardens of the congregation. This helped to secure the traditional statusof the Rabbi in Eastern Europe until the time of the Catastrophe, eventhough the status in question began to decline in the 17th and 18th centuries.Though the names of the early Kalish rabbis are not known, they are referredto in various sources in terms of very high respect. It is interesting to notethat the community never appointed one of its own members to serve as itsRabbi.From the early 17th century on, the known Rabbis of the city includedquite a number of outstanding figures, who played a prominent part bothin rabbinical and public affairs and also in the literature of their period.A leading rabbi, born in Kalish, was Jacob ben Joseph Striemer. He was afollower of Sabbethai Zvi until the latter’s apostasy, when he becameviolently anti-Sabbatian. Subsequently he conducted a Talmud Torah (Jewishday school) in Adrianople, Turkey and is recorded as one of the Ashkenazisages in Jerusalem in the year 1700.Under Polish law the Rabbi was authorised to issue decisions on allmatters brought before him in accordance with the laws of Israel. The onlyauthority to whom he was responsible was the king himself. He signed allthe resolutions of the Kahal, conducted the elections and ensured that theywere properly carried out. However, he was selected and appointed by theParnassim, and was therefore dependent upon them unless he was himselfwell-to-do.When elected the Rabbi received a certificate of appointment specifyinghis rights and duties, the fees he might charge for weddings, wills, issuinglegal judgements, and also the businesses in which members of his familywere allowed to engage. In the 17th and 18th centuries his salary in com-munities as large as Kalish varied from 3 to 10 zloty per week. He was alsopaid for the two sermons which he traditionally delivered on the Sabbathbefore Passover and the Sabbath between the New Year and the Day ofAtonement.Mention should also be made of the Head of the Yeshiva or TalmudicalAcademy, who might sometimes compete with the local Rabbi in respect ofthe precedence and authority deriving from his learning. In many casesthe two offices were combined.Other officials included: The communal scribe or secretary, who neededto be able to speak Polish at least. For public affairs a special Christianofficial, who was sometimes a nobleman, assisted him in the Civil Courts andRegional Government offices. There were Shamashim (Beadles or attendantsof various kinds) for the synagogue, the cemetery, the tax assessors, theHISTORY25Jewish and general Court. The Court Shamash developed in due course intothe Shtadlan or intermediary with the non-Jewish authorities. The first knownin Kalish was Reb Leib Shtadlan, who exercised this function for many yearsat the end of the 17th century, and from 1700 to 1709 was also Shtadlanin Posen where he received 5 gulden a week for his services.The community also maintained a physician, apothecary, barber-surgeons,a midwife, watchmen, collectors, messengers and postmen. Charitable activitieswere extensive, including charity for the local poor and wayfarers, supportfor indigent householders, supervision of young Jewish students and orphans,dowries for brides, medical aid and hospitalisation. Physicians with medicaldegrees are referred to only in the 18th century; but the physician Mosheben Benjamin Wolf of Mezeritch who was in Kalish in the second half ofthe 18th century wrote medical works including one containing extensivepassages in German.The expenses of the community included the taxes paid to the Governmenttreasury. The regular taxes required of Jews were:1. The “Stacyjne”, levied in money or goods for the upkeep of the RoyalCourt and Kitchen. This was afterwards transformed into a fixed paymentwhich each community paid either to the king himself or to his assigns.2. The Szos of the Jews: A special municipal tax levied only on propertyheld by Jews.3. The Poll-tax, which commenced in 1549 and amounted to 1 zloty perperson. This was supposed to exempt Jews from other taxes which, however,were not abolished as it was not clear whether the Poll-tax was levied onthe family or the individual. At first each community paid for itself. Sub-sequently the Jewries of each part of Poland paid through the chief com-munity. To facilitate the collection of this tax the body known as the VaadArba Aratzot (Council of the Four Lands) was established and a totalamount was fixed by agreement with the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Thisamount was afterwards distributed by the Jews themselves among the variouslands and communities. The powers vested in the Council in order to facilitatecollection of this tax enabled it to achieve a virtual national autonomy, andbrought about the spirit of group unity which has characterised East EuropeanJewry and their offspring ever since.4. A Billeting Tax which was paid by the Jews in lieu of billeting troopswith them. Sometimes the community paid the rent for barracks and officers'quarters away from the Jewish quarter; or else they paid directly toregimental funds.Extraordinary taxes included:1. Coronation fees levied when a new king was crowned.2. Special levies to pay off national debts upon royal edict.3. For the requirements of war. Charges of this kind were levied quitefrequently during the 17th century.4. Contributions to gifts sent to the Turkish Sultan and Tartar Khans (astokens of good will and to persuade them to refrain from incursions intoPolish territory).5. All kinds of gifts, presents, payments, etc. to nobles, officials, towncouncils, churches, clergymen, schools (as insurance against the student riots26THE KALISH BOOKcalled Bchuelergeleif). Certain sums are clearly recorded as bribes, and finesand amercements were paid to occupying forces.General taxes levied on all townsfolk (citizens) alike were:1. Municipal Szos, which was a property tax dating from the 17th Century.2. A Foodstuffs tax, including an excise duty on liquor paid by the com-munity and collected from the individual Jews.3. Octroi, toll fees on bridges and roads, municipal weight fees, Frontiercustoms duties.It was the function of the community to raise all these amounts, eachmember being assessed as to his share. Notice of three days was given forpayment. It a man did not pay he was declared “contumacious”, and ifthis was repeated he was excommunicated and not permitted to enter theSynagogue. If he refused to leave the Synagogue he would be imprisoneduntil he paid or made suitable arrangements for payment.Other sources of income included: Hazaka (occupation rights or permits).These included the right of residence, of possessing a house, plot, or dwelling,or engaging in trade, handicrafts or selling. One of the purposes of theHazaka fee was to prevent harmful and unfair competition or price-raising.Then came payments on weddings, burials, dowries, and the grant of certainhonorific titles. A property tax was also levied on occasion. If direct taxeswere insufficient, taxes were levied on meat, milk, wine, honey and otherstaple foodstuffs. The community farmed the taxes out, and on occasion anincome tax was also levied.After the vicissitudes of the mid-17th century, however, all these sourcesproved inadequate and the Kalish community had to borrow loans repeatedlyin the early part of the 18th century. Many of these loans were raised fromChristians in Breslau.A Kalish Jew named Gad Uziel is named as one of the first assessors whenthe forerunner of the Council of the Four Lands was set up for the com-munities of Great Poland in 1519.Special courts dealing with disputes in Fairs and Markets were established,and by the early 16th century had led to the establishment of a Jewish HighCourt for the whole of Poland. This too helped to lead to the establishmentof the Vaad Arba Aratzot which comprised Great Poland, Little Poland.Reissen (White Russia), and Lithuania. Kalish played a leading part at thisCouncil and on the Council of Great Poland itself. It was the practice of thecommunity to send persons who exercised no other communal functions whatsoever to these Councils. By the middle of the 17th century Kalish held thehegemony over fhe Council of Great Poland, which met once and sometimestwice a year.The internal economic functions of the latter can be judged by the fact thatin 1684 it passed a Takana (Regulation) against monopolisation of Jewishtrade and imposed a tax on wool purchases, to ensure that there shouldbe no unfair competition betwen purchasers of wool from the big estateowners and nobles. This Regulation reads as follows:“No visitor is permitted to purchase any goods in communities other thanhis own save specifically from Jews; and he is not permitted to stay inthem more than three days, and no longer. Likewise those who live outsideHISTORY27the State have no permission to purchase any goods in the vicinity of anycommunity in accordance with the ancient regulation, and Jewish villagers areprohibited from taking them on the waggon and carrying them to makethe rounds in the small towns in order to purchase any goods whatsoever;and even if they have already purchased goods from Jews who dwell inthe villages, then whenever the members of the community come there, itwill be first come first served in respect of those goods.” Similar regulationsare repeated in more stringent terms from time to time.The Wardens of the Council of Great Poland from Kalish included: RabbiSamuel ben Yaakov in the 1670s, who was also the Parnass of the Councilof the Four Lands. He also took steps to redeem a certain Rabbi YekutielKaufman Katz from captivity. Others were: Reb Yitshak Isaac ben AzrielZelig, son-in-law of Reb Mendel of Kalish, also known as Reb Isaac RebMendel's; Shlomo ben Hayyim and Reb Yehuda ben Yosef; Yosef ben AriehYehuda Leib Halevi; Shmuel ben Yonah Katz; Shmuel Feivish ben YehudaLeib Preger, referred to as a scholar; Joseph Halevi of Kalish; Hirsch benAsher; Meyer ben Yaakov; Michael Pak, a merchant of Kalish, who repre-sented Jewry at the Council of the Four Lands in 1602 and was followed indue course by Rabbi Israel ben Nathan Shapiro; Shmuel ben Yaakov;Yehuda Leib Obornik; Meir ben Dov Joseph; Joseph ben Eliahu Venczinek;Mordechai Joseph; Jacob ben Zelig, who was imprisoned together with otherdelegates on account of claims from Breslau against them and Polish Jewryin general; Leibel Feivish; Yitshak known as Isaac ben Azriel; Joseph benArieh Yehuda.In 1685 the Council of Great Poland borrowed loans from the Order ofJesuits in Posen, and also owed considerable sums to the Jesuits in Kalish.They paid an annual interest of 7%—10%, and in 1694 the Council becamebankrupt. Creditors, whose numbers were by no means few, attacked Jewson the roads, seized their goods in the fairs and markets, imprisoned themin fortresses and citadels. King Jan Sobieski appointed special commissionersto investigate the debts and spread the period of their repayment over severalyears. The total debt was then assessed at 400,000 zloty, to be paid offduring the three years following. However, the communities were not in aposition to meet these commitments.The matter was dealt with by the Council of the Four Lands in 1699, butdragged on for years, and commitments could not be met in 1713. Isaac Zeligof Kalish, Warden of the Council, tried to obtain a consolidating loan butwas unsuccessful. The creditors then began to demand that the Kalish com-munity should pay the debt, but the community declared that it was notin a position to do so. In 1714 the Lissa community took over part of theKalish debts, including interest of more than 12,000 zloty per year, and thenbecame the head community of Great Poland.THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURYIn the course of the war between Sweden and Poland in 1706 Kalish wascaptured and the greater part of the city burnt. A contemporary report bythe Municipality reads as follows: “In the city of Kalish all our Jewishhouses were completely burnt to ashes together with the Synagogue, except28THE KALISH BOOKfor two houses by the wall; all the buildings and the wares. On Sundayevening before the Festival of the Birth of the Holy Virgin this tremendousfire burst out in the square of Kalish. It spread so far and wide that onlythe plots were left instead of the houses. In this conflagration forty-fivewere burnt, since it was impossible to escape from the terrible flames.”Two years later an epidemic broke out during Passover on such a scalethat the Lissa community prohibited all visits to Kalish. The inhabitantsfled to the fields and forests. The neighbouring communities came to theiraid. It is reported that 450 persons died. The community of Posen wasasked to aid and gave 1,000 zloty. In the year 1727 the communities ofPosen, Lissa and Krotoszyn made a grant of 28,000 zloty to the impoverishedcommunity of Kalish.The fire of 1706 was followed by fresh conflagrations in 1710, 1712 and1713, while epidemics spread in 1708 and 1712. At this time there wereabout 100 Jews in a total population of 700, the lowest known populationin the history of the city.In 1754 the townsfolk charged the Jews with endangering their lives andexistence. Large fines were paid and the Jews escaped from the danger, butno details are known.The first authentic figures on the population date from 1765, when therewere 809 Jews and 52 babies aged less than a year. There were 408 men and401 women. Of these 197 were married, 175 of them being independentand 22 being sons and sons-in-laws living with parents; 188 unmarried sons;23 servants, apprentices and orphans. There were 175 married women, 22married daughters and brides, 18 widows, 15 independent, 3 divorced, 174unmarried girls, 12 servants and orphans. There were 215 families in all,190 being independent and 25 living with the parents.Since Jews used to evade censuses for religious and other reasons, it hasbeen estimated that the total number in Kalish at the time way have beenover 1,000.More than another thousand lived in 8 hamlets and 8 villages in the vicinity,while the total number of Jews in the Kalish Government District was 6,465in 29 cities, which constituted 23 communities. (Certain small congregationscame under the authority of the larger neighbouring communities.)Ten years later there were 670 Jews, not including infants, liable to thepoll-tax. It may be assumed that the Jewish population was still about 900.For the year 1789 we have reliable figures showing that there were then 880Jews, 334 being men, 318 women, 126 boys of whom 75 were more thana year old, 102 girls of whom 53 were more than a year old. It wouldappear that the entry of poor and sick Jews to the city was prohibited.When the Prussian authorities conducted a census in 1793 there were1,706 Jews. Some doubt is cast on the latter figure by a Palish historian, whocalculates that there must have been a total of 1,300 Jews in 1789. In 1792another fire burst out and not a single house was left standing in the JewishQuarter, which was a separate part of the city. Special municipal regulationsof 1755 required the Jews to keep the Quarter clean and clear gutters anddrainpipes, on pain of fine and imprisonment.Throughout the century the Jewish merchants faced the fierce competitionHISTORY29of the townsfolk and citizens. The Christian Guilds did their best to reducethe opportunities and possibilities of the Jewish traders in every way possible.Countless municipal regulations attest to this.Jewish liquor merchants met with serious competition from a group ofGreek merchants who settled in Kalish in the middle of the 18th century,coming from Macedonia where they had been persecuted by the Turks. Ingeneral Jewish liquor traders had to struggle very severely against therepressive measures of the families of hereditary brewers in the city.In the course of time Jews also dealt in cattle, horses, oxen, grain andagricultural produce. There was a constant coming and going of agents whovisited large estates and villages to purchase these wares; and the Christianwholesalers combatted this trade continuously. In the year 1778, for instance,the community spent 6,000 zloty exclusively on trials with the municipalauthorities in this connection. Shopkeepers and storekeepers who rentedplaces in the Market Square were subjected to all kinds of restrictions andprohibitions by the municipal authorities and Christian associations in respectof kinds of goods to be sold, weight, prices, hours of sale. They facedconstant threats of confiscation and expulsion.In spite of this, the census of 1765 gives the following figures about theemployment of heads of families: Trade, 18, 13 of whom were merchants,2 shopkeepers, 2 hawkers and 1 agent; Crafts 79, 30 in free professions;and 63 heads of families without any profession.Of 443 families recorded in 1786, 141 were householders and permanentresidents, 99 not permanent. Forty-two engaged in trade, 50 were agents,5 had inns. As against 21% of the Jewish population engaged in trade, only9% of the Poles were so engaged.In 1789 the figures were as follows: Householders 69, or 153 with wivesand children; merchants 70, or 174 with wives and children; craftsmen100, or 234 with wives and children; innkeepers 4, or 17 with wives andchildren; shopkeepers 40, or 122 with wives and children; agents 30, or 107with wives and children; apprentices and assistants, 21, or 33 with wivesand children. At this time 43% of Jewish families made their livings bytrade, liquor and as agents. The corresponding percentage for Christianfamilies was 10%.The Jews traded in horses, cattle, grain and agricultural produce. In thatcentury the Jews also engaged in wholesale textile trade, having wool wovenfor them by individual weavers or Polish workshops. They exported toMoravia, Bohemia, Silesia and Saxony. There were some Jews who leasedflocks of sheep. Jews opened soap factories.When the Polish Treasury took over the manufacture of tobacco a workshopwas opened in Kalish and Jews engaged in the sale of the product. Monetaryand credit activities were also carried on. Loans were granted to Christianand Greek merchants and others at an annual interest of 7% or more, oftenagainst pledges of silver, gold and jewelry. At the same time Jewish merchantsborrowed from wealthy citizens, nobles, etc. including clergymen, who chargeda high rate of interest. There were constant relations with Silesia, particularlywith Breslau, where the Jewish merchants of Kalish established a synagogueof their own in 1698, maintaining a trustee and shtadlan to safeguard their30THE KALISH BOOKinterests. By the beginning of the 18th Century there were 6 such repre-sentatives in Breslau from Poland. In 1722 there were 8 and at one timethere were even 12. The Breslau authorities authorised only 3 in 1738.A report dated 1779 on the Customs offices in the Kalish District andKalish itself gives an account of the local and other Jewish merchants whoreturned from Frankfurt. A representative of the Kalish Jews was requiredto take oath that cattle imported were healthy. Agents made the roundsof the city and environs purchasing clothes, gold, silver and jewels, alsoagricultural produce, horses, cattle, liquor, etc. The Municipality took specialsteps to ensure that Jewish shopkeepers should not sell goods on the roadsand in the streets. All trade had to be conducted in the market-place.Jewish craftsmen listed in the 1765 census were: 27 tailors, 2 hat-makers,16 furriers, 4 embroiderers, 10 cord-makers, 2 glaziers, 1 bookbinder, 8craftsmen of various kinds and 9 butchers. These Jewish craftsmen sufferedfrom the persecution of the various Christian craft guilds, which insistedthat according to the privileges awarded to them the Jews were not permittedto engage in various trades, particularly tailoring. In 1713 an agreementwas reached between the Tailors’ Guild and the Jewish tailors wherebyJewish residents of Kalish might engage in tailoring in return for an annualpayment of 14 zloty to the Guild. In 1774 another agreement was reachedwhereby Shlomo the Women’s Tailor was the only Jew authorised to engagein this calling, against an annual payment of 3 zloty to the Guild. In theearlier part of the 17th Century, indeed, the Jewish butchers had beenauthorised to maintain 12 butcher shops against an annual payment of 300zloty, while the Jewish furriers paid 16 zloty annually to the Furriers Guild.By the second half of the 18th century there were also Jewish shoemakers,saddlemakers and buttonmakers. In 1786 there were 101 Jewish craftsmenin Kalish as against 106 Christians. In 1789 there were 100 Jewish craftsmenwith 98 wives, 16 boys, and 20 girls or 234 persons in all, constituting 26.6%of the Jewish population. They were organised in societies which had aguild character, and charged the same rates as the Christian guilds.Although there was no Hebrew printing press in Kalish itself, men fromKalish are referred to throughout this period as printers, typesetters, proof-readers and publishers. Thus in 1589 Abraham ben Yitshak Kera Ashkenaziof Kalish printed books in Salonica, and afterwards in Venice and Mantua.In 1690 there was a typesetter in Amsterdam named, Leib ben NaphtaliHirsch Fass of Kalish. Others at that time were Shneur Zalman ben YehonatanKatz and Yehoshua ben Avigdor, both of Kalish, in Berlin. The 18th centuryrecords Benjamin Sabbethai Bass, a printer, Zvi Hirsch ben Kalonymos inDuehrenfuerth, Kalonymos Baltzabon, Yitshak ben Eliahu in Frankfurt-on-the-Main, Benjamin ben Yehiel, Ezekiel ben Yaakov, Kalonymos ben YehudaLeib, typesetter in Salonica, and Zvi ben Reb Kalonymos Katz in Frankfurt-on-the-Main.Mention should also be made of religious and communal functionariesincluding: Rabbis and Dayanim, cantors, sextons, slaughterers, beadles, shtad-lanim, Torah scribes, barber-surgeons and barbers.In 1778 a municipal committee for good order was set up. Among otherduties its task was to end the disputes and trials between Jews and townsfolkHISTORY31and restore peace between them. The committee achieved this purpose, andan agreement was reached and signed between the Jewish community andthe municipal authorities. The Jewish community undertook to pay 1,100zloty for the billeting of troops, also for the water-pipe, the cemetery,synagogue, hospital and butcher shops, at a monthly rate of 100 zloty. Itwas agreed that the billeting tax should cease if the troops left the town,and payment should be made pro rata to the number remaining. However,if so many soldiers arrived that the Christians could not billet them alone,the Jews would also have to do their share.Jewish merchants might trade in accordance with their ancient privileges,but were not permitted to import liquor from Poland or abroad for blendingand sale; with the exception of kosher wine for their own requirements.They might sell stockfish and honey. They must take precautions not toharm Christian merchants. The community might maintain 4 drinking housesfor beer and spirits, but each might consist only of one room and be in thehands of one keeper. They had to buy their spirits and beer from Kalishcitizens, on pain of a fine to the municipality. However, in case of a shortagein Kalish the municipality had to permit purchase elsewhere.The Jews were guaranteed a fixed price of 6 zloty per barrel of liquor,and any attempt by Kalish citizens to raise the price and/or lower thequality would be punishable by a fine. Jews might not set up beer breweriesor distilleries, they might not manufacture spirits in private houses or keeptaverns or stables.The tailoring and butchering agreements already established were con-firmed, though the annual fee for the butcher shops was afterwards raisedto 400 zloty. An agreement of the Butcher’s Guild required them to pay alevy of almost 1,100 zloty to the general of Great Poland, and the Jewishbutchers were charged with half this amount. Jewish furriers were requiredto pay 16 zloty to the Furrier’s Guild as before, though there had neverbeen any specific agreement. Two Jews only were permitted to sell saltin two houses of the Jewish Quarter to Jews and Christians alike, providedthat weights were accurate and the price was the same as among theChristian merchants. In return the community had to pay the Salt-sellers’Guild 2 pounds of wax every three months. If a tannery were set up inKalish the Jews would not be permitted to purchase skins and export themfrom the city. Jews were forbidden to import medicines and poisons.Additional regulations prohibited Jews from abroad and residing temporarilyin Kalish from engaging in any trade. No Jewish resident might serve ashost to a Jew from abroad without the knowledge of the municipality.The gatekeepers were required to check suspect alien Jews at the gates ofthe city, and bring them to the Mayor or Chief of Police. Jews had to sharein tne expenses of the water conduit leading to their own well and speciallyconstructed for them. Jews were prohibited forever from purchasing, leasingand requisitioning houses, plots, shops in the centre of the city and allits streets and suburbs which had hitherto been inhabited by Christians,save for those buildings which they already held on some legal basis. Aspecial resolution was adopted regarding Jewish beggars, on the assumptionthat the latter spread contagious diseases and engaged in thievery. Th€32THE KALISH BOOKcommittee recommended that they should not be admitted to the city butdetained at the gates, given communal charity and sent away. The com-munity might maintain only crippled poor who were resident in theirhospital. The Police Chief was to ensure several times a year that theJeWs were obeying this resolution, otherwise the communal heads would befined. Those beggars caught must clean the streets for a month and wouldthen be expelled, but not by vehicles.The Municipality and community were required to completely prohibit theJews from admitting wayfarers into their homes without municipal per-mission and without the careful investigation of each one. The Jews werespecially enjoined to keep their streets clean and in good repair. They hadto maintain fire-extinguishing equipment at their own expense.The implementation of this agreement was entrusted to the municipalauthorities, and was thenceforth used systematically in order to restrict theactivities of the Jewish community and individuals for a full century tocome, until the Sixties of the following century.Towards the end of the 18th century liberal and enlightened circles inPoland discussed the social, economic and political reorganisation of theircountry and devoted much thought to the Jewish question. At the Greatand Final Seim of Sovereign Poland (1788—1792) the cities, including Kalish,put forward a plan for setting up special Jewish craft and merchant societiessubject to the supervision of the Christian associations. This ran counter tomost of the plans, which aimed to eliminate Jewish distinctiveness.Throughout the century the amount paid in Poll-tax varied very considerably.Most of the figures are for the entire Posen-Kalish region and vary fromalmost 18,600 zloty in 1717 to over 35,000 zloty in 1734. In 1714 the cityitself seems to have paid over 7,000 zloty, in 1756 the sum was 1,363;eight years later 39 zloty more, and 2,147 zloty in 1790. Whether thisreflects difficulties in collection, or changes in the Jewish population, isno longer clear. In addition a number of special payments were made tothe Municipality for the cemetery, the water conduit, in lieu of billetingsoldiers, etc. When there were no troops in Kalish the Municipality usedthis amount to support the poor, orphans, widows and cripples. Jewishworkshops made special payments to the guilds, as already reported.Between the years 1778 and 1792 the community paid a total of over100.000 zloty for gifts and occasional outlay (presumably bribery and dougeurs)for various high officials and as the cost of legal proceedings. Total debtsof the community to nobles, clergymen and the Committee of NationalEducation, as recorded under a law of 1792, amounted to over 306,000 zlotyon which an interest of more than 200,000 zloty was owed. Of this totalthe Committee had paid almost 23,000 zloty principal and almost 54,000zloty interest, leaving a debt of over 293,000 zloty principal and close on147.000 zloty iinterest. Creditors among the clergy included the Jesuits, Fran-ciscans, Bernardines, Lateran Canons, Hospital Canons and the Collegiatein Kalish.It seems that there must have been repeated disputes between the com-munity heads and the rabbis, as can be judged by the fact that many rabbisstayed only for short periods. Between 1714 and 1763 at least five rabbisHISTORY33left the city on this account. When the Polish authorities set about liquidatingthe Jewish regional autonomous institutions in 1764 the representatives ofKalish were appointed liquidators.In the middle of the century the Church controlled the country and Kalish,together with many other communities, suffered from anti-Jewish incite-ment and Blood Libel cases. In 1763 seven Jews, five men and two women,were charged with murdering a Christian girl for ritual purposes. Detailsof the trial are not known, but two Jews were sentenced to having theirhands and heads cut off, (After conversion they were merely beheaded.)A third Jew was flung into a lime-pit and afterwards beheaded. OneJewess was sentenced to decapitation, but after converting only her handwas cut off. A fourth Jew refused to convert and was strangled, the guardsmutilating his corpse, dragging it the whole length of the Jewish street tothe crossroads, where they flung it to the dogs. The sixth and seventhvictims, a man and a woman, refused to convert and were sentenced tobeheading and the cutting-off of their hands. The steps taken by the com-munity are not known.Towards the end of the 18th century the Redlich Family began to emerge,and to move towards the prominent part they played in developing localindustry during the 19th century. The first special privilege was issued toSamuel Joseph Redlich in 1793, during the final days of independent Poland.King Stanislaw Augustus Poniatowski took him under his special protectionand gave him permission to trade and store goods freely. He, his wifeand heirs were exempt from all mistreatment and were entitled to displaysilks, textiles and wool of all kinds during fairs in Kalish and any othercity in the region, in shops and any public places. They might sell andexchange goods, brew beer and distill spirits, and enjoy all the legal rightsand privileges of the citizens of Kalish.UNDER PRUSSIA, 1793—1806When Poland was partitioned for the second time in 1793, Prussia receivedthe entire Western part of the country including the district in whichKalish lies. The territory contained 1,200,000 inhabitants and was calledSouth Prussia. A Treasury official was promptly given the task of ascertainingthe rights of all communities and their institutions, as well as the incomesof the Jews. In his report he stated that he found appreciable numbersof Jewish craftsmen such as bookbinders, butchers, shopkeepers, gold andsilversmiths, tinkers, cordmakers, furriers, tailors, and mechanics. There were1159 Jewish merchants and 1739 non-Jewish merchants in the whole ofSouth Prussia, who were required to keep accounts.The King of Prussia visited Kalish in October 1793 and was received ata league’s distance from the town by two groups of young Jews, one ingreen and the other in red Turkish garb. The heads of the community,led by the Jewish physician Dr. Mayer and his eight-year-old son, gatheredat the Triumphal Arch erected to welcome the monarch. The Jews whorode out to greet him arranged themselves in a circle round the arch,and the physician’s son presented a poem which was received with thanksby the king.34THE KALISH BOOKIn 1800 there were 16,230 Jews in the Department of Kalish. In Kalishitself the Jews were 41% of the population and were chiefly engaged incommerce, the whole textile trade being in their hands. The weavers com-plained that the Jews paid them badly and lent them money at highinterest. Trade in wool was also in Jewish hands, and the weavers complainedat the high cost of the raw material. At the same time the Jews weremore than 50% of all craftsmen in the city. They included tailors, shoemakers,bookbinders, glaziers, gold and silversmiths, buttonmakers, furriers, hatmakers,cordmakers, musicians and weavers. The authorities refer to the high qualityof the work done by the Jewish craftsmen and their satisfactory earnings.Dr. Jonah Mayer was the head of the community.The communal heads at the time included: Yehuda Leib Baruch; Naphtaliben Moshe Shimon; Yehuda Leib Crystal; Jacob Traube, Shimon Levy andZalman Rosenbloom.The Prussian Government wished to take steps to bring the Jewish com-munity into line, more or less, with the Western world. A special decreewas issued prohibiting marriage without Government permision. The ageof the bridegroom was fixed at 25 and he was required to prove that hepossessed property worth 3,000 thaler in ready money or property, or thathe was a craftsman who could make a living for a family. Such weddinglicenses were issued only to those who could prove that their parents andgrandparents had been regular inhabitants of South Prussia. Bridegroom andbride were required to undertake not to settle In any village or set up afactory. The Jewish communities decided to take joint steps against thismeasure.A debate ensued among the higher Prussian officials. A circular was sentto them asking their opinions about the transfer of Jews from villages tocities, even those having the ancient privilege of not permitting Jewishresidents; what were the most desirable conditions of their employment;whether they might be allowed to engage in all their crafts or the lattershould be restricted; and finally what the education of the children wasto be.It was generally agreed that Jewish residence should be permitted every-where, in order to promote urban development. Some rcommended the transferof Jews to agriculture. Many wished Jewish craftsmen to be given thesame rights as Christian and objected to restrictions on craft occupationsand wholesale trade, but wished to leave the monopoly in the hands of theChristians and to restrict peddling. The official language of Jewish institutionswas to be German, which was also to become the language of instructionin their schools.A Ministerial Memorandum of 1795 sent to the King of Prussia expressedopposition to the marriage restrictions proposed in 1793 and suggested thatmarriage be permitted without restriction against a registration fee of 1—5thalers. Jews should likewise be granted freedom of religion and chargedthe same tax as Christians, with the exception of a Recruits’ Tax. ThePoll-tax should be replaced by a Billeting Tax.These proposals were confirmed and became law in June 1795. The PrussianGovernment then planned to introduce a reform in Jewish affairs andHISTORY35demanded copies of all documents granting privileges as well as attestedinformation on: Cities where Jews might not settle, the source of privilegesand whether they had been abolished expressly or tacitly; the attitudes ofthe charters given to the guilds regarding Jews, and the Jewish privilegesregarding Christians, and how far the latter were still valid.A general list of mutual privileges of Jews, Municipalities and Guilds wasthen drawn up. The Jewish communities including Kalish had alreadytried to obtain confirmation of their Polish charters, but the Government hadadopted the political attitude of “restricting the Jews in respect of the formerlegislation.” They were permitted to renounce their autonomous organisationin communities. The latter, it was true, had already begun to decline inthe 18th century, with the resultant partial collapse of Jewish autonomy.While the Jews wished to preserve the legal basis of the communities andhence the legislation from which they derived in order to retain a certainmeasure of autonomy, the Prussian authorities, in line with the generalattitude of Western Europe at the time, wished to eliminate autonomy, toadapt Jewish life to that of Jews in Prussia and Silesia and expedite theprocess of their adaptation to and assimilation in German culture. It shouldbe remembered that Prussia had annexed territories containing more than150,000 Jews. While they were well aware of their economic importance,they wished to adapt them to their own style of life.In 1797 the General Regulations for the Jews granted rights of domicilein the new areas only to those who had already lived there at the timeof the occupation, and to professional men. Others were required to leavethe territory within a fixed time. The remainder were to be registered andwould receive “letters of protection” (Schutzbriefe). Taxation was increased.The Polish Poll-tax was raised from 3 to 10 zloty and the Jews wererequired to pay the following:Tolerance tax of 2.5 thalers once a fortnight for any Jew who cameto a place where he was not a permanent resident. A foreign Jew wascharged 3.5 thalers.An individually-assessed Protection Tax for the right to live in the stateand engage in a profession.Marriage licences from 2 to 150 thaler by individual assessment; ArmyTax to bd paid by every Jew between 14 ^and 60, to the sum of 1 thalerand a number of groschen each year. Volunteers to the forces were exempt.Stamp duty on Hebrew books, rabbinical documents, building synagogues,foundation of cemeteries, etc.Communal and rabbinical authority were restricted to religious affairs.Rabbis were required to write and speak either German or Polish, and theirjudicial authority was abolished. All claims were to be heard in general courts.A special clause specified the number of communal officials. The communitiesmight not select their officials. The authorities would lay down principles inthis connection as in non-Jewish institutions, and would appoint the rabbisand officials. German and Polish became the languages of instruction mJewish schools. The communities were forbidden to use the Herem or ban,to impose sanctions or take any steps requiring the Jew to submit to theirorders. Slaughterers were permitted to slaughter and sell meat, in this way36THE KALISH BOOKdepriving the community of what had hithero been its right. Thus thePrussians abolished the Jewish community or Kehilla, which they regardedas the principal obstacle in carying out their fiscal and economic policy.While the Jews were promised improvements as their cultural situationimproved in the Polish provinces, prohibitions were there from the beginning.Jews might not engage in interest transactions, and all loans had to bearranged in court. Spirits might not be sold to peasants on credit, nor mightJews sell them any goods except for agricultural requirements. All peddlingwas prohibited. The number of merchants was restricted. Crafts were permittedonly in the towns, and were prohibited in villages. It was hinted that theoccupations in which the Jews engaged could not ensure them a living, andthey were therefore to be permitted to engage in agriculture and obtainuncultivated land sufficient for the upkeep of a village family. Anybodyundertaking to purchase land on his own account might profit from all ad-vantages, being exempt from taxes for a number of years, and could employChristians for the first three years. Jews were to be encouraged to engagein agriculture, lease estates and breweries and engage in industrial enterprises.The Government would maintain schools where the youngsters would studyunder Government supervision and in accordance with Government instruc-tions.These regulations were received with fear and mistrust by the Jews. InKalish they meant the destruction of Jewish trade. At the time almost allthe merchants were Jews and many were engaged in crafts too. The entireretail trade in the surrounding villages was in Jewish hands.The leaders of the communities and a number of outstanding rabbis helda meeting at the end of August 1797 to determine the attitude to be adoptedtowards these regulations. The conference was attended by 31 representativesof communities, of whom Yehuda Leib Barash and Moshe Shimon representedKalish. After careful deliberations they resolved to request the King toconduct a thorough-going investigation into the state of the Jews. They wroteas follows:“Some months ago there appeared in print a Reglement by our pious lordand King and Glorious Majesty regarding the special position of Israel underthe rule of his Government in the state of South Prussia and New EastPrussia, and in each district and region of the said states. Indeed trueutterances cannot be denied, for the eyes of the Hebrew have been openedto see therein, with the aid of His Blessed Name, the kindheartedness ofHis Excellent Majesty and the ministers. However, in respect of the matterof the residence of the congregation of Israel in the said states since ancienttimes and the ways of their livelihood, coming and going, and that hencefor-ward matters of conduct are to be innovated in accordance with what iswritten at certain points in the said Reglement, there may Heaven forbidcome about a destruction of faith and, Heaven forbid, a deficiency maybe brought about in our livelihoods so that the hands may be enfeebled,Heaven forbid.“Therefore the men of the said states have set their hearts to gathertogether, several men from the communities in the districts of the saidstates to discuss counsel and seek, His Name aiding, to find an opportunityHISTORY37whereby to appear before the King and entreat him to grant his grace andgive instructions for matters to be investigated by his ministers and coun-sellors, and to inquire thoroughly into the real state of Israel by greaterenquiry and investigation as far as possible. We then hope that with HisName's aid they will extend the wings of their lovingkindness and indeedestablish the pillars of faith on their firm pedestals .. and the sources oflivelihood and food will not be dammed up if the desirable approach isfollowed. To this purpose we have gathered together and come hither tothe Holy Congregation of Kleczow, men from the near and distant citiesof the aforesaid states, with adequate power and authorisation from theleaders and heads of the congregations, to take wise counsel togetherregarding the efforts to be made on behalf of Israel with the Name's aid."The communal representatives were required to select a delegation to proceedto Berlin and act as a Committee of Ways and Means about raising fundsfor the cost of the journey; to which each community was required tocontribute. A levy consisting of a third of the Polish poll-tax was imposedon each individual, and the money was to be sent to certain specified trustees.Discussions were suspended as the representatives had to return home withoutgoing into full details. The participants agreed to meet at the Fair to beheld in Frankfurt-on-the-Oder some months later where they would devoteone or two days to this matter and choose representatives. Those presentin Frankfurt would constitute a quorum for the purpose, but might co-optanother eleven suitable persons.A delegation of three proceeded to Berlin in October 1797 and the followingmonth received a reply from the Government. This was moderate andincluded a number of ameliorations in favour of the Jews. In the course oftime the higher officials had come to realise that many of the clauses oftheir Reglement could not be implemented under the circumstances. Theyceased to expel Jews from the villages, permitted them to settle in alltowns and join guilds, and facilitated the issue of peddling permits, notonly for villagers but also for town-dwellers. In 1800, however, only villagerswere permitted to be peddlars once again.In the Department of Kalish there were six Jewish families who engagedin agriculture. Some were subject to the Polish "squires" while the otherscultivated their land well and remained in agriculture. However, the smalltotal number of Jewish farmers led to the abolition of all the special benefitson their behalf at the end of 1803. Various restrictions were then introducedinto Jewish trade, peddling in villages and the purchase of agriculturalproduce.In the cities the authorities took steps to ensure that the number ofJewish should not exceed the number of Christian merchants. They werealso ejected from breweries and inns and were no longer permitted tomanufacture liquor and spirits, being required to hand their inns over tothh Government and Christian nobles. However, by dint of intercessionthis order was deferred for five years, until 1808. The new restrictions wouldhave had a very severe effect on the existence of the Jews of Kalish.By 1804 there were 2,111 Jews in Kalish out of a total population of 7,085.Some of the merchants were gradually acquiring real estate, and the autho-38THE KALISH BOOKrities tended to disregard the fact that they were spreading beyond theJewish Quarter which in any case they wished to expand. However, thelocal citizens registered a complant with the Prussian King objecting tothe increase of the Jews and their growing connection with the liquor trade.They demanded that the Jews should be restricted to a special quarter onceagain.A Counsellor for Taxation was given the task of investigating the situation.He decided that the privileges of 1540 were to be retained. Jews might dwelloutside the Jewish Quarter as sub-tenants, and in general the authoritieswould continue their policy of trying to ensure that Jews lived under thesame conditions as non-Jews. At the same time, dwellings in Christianhouses might be rented to Jews only with the special permission of theauthorities and the Counsellor assured the citizens that the latter wouldprevent any change for the worse on either side. All this time the struggleof Kalish Jewry for the right of making a living and residing in Christianstreets continued at the day-to-day level.Meanwhile there were political developments elsewhere. In Autumn 1806Prussia was defeated at the Battle of Jena and Napoleon began a triumphalEastern march, the French entering Warsaw at the end of October 1806.The Jews joihed the Poles in welcoming the French forces with food, drinkand songs of praise, in Kalish as elsewhere.THE DUCHY OF POLAND, 1807—1815In Summer 1807 the Treaty of Tilsit, signed by Napoleon I and theRussian Tsar Alexander I, provided for the establishment of the Duchy ofWarsaw within the areas occupied by Prussia after the Second and ThirdPartitions of Poland. The Duchy was divided into six Departments, of whichKalish was one. In 1808 there were 2,535 Jews in the city, or 41% of thepopulation. Of the family heads 161 engaged in commerce, 16 in the saleof liquors, 3 sold salt. Others were wholesalers like Joseph Samuel Redlichalready mentioned, Samuel Sachs, Isaiah Mamlok, Philip Sachs, and SimeonPeretz. In 1814 Getz Isser Loewe of Hamburg, afterwards known as GustavAdolph, settled in Kalish and became one of the first local Jewish indus-trialists. Redlich engaged in extensive transactions in liquor and textiles,and also exported grain and cattle.In 1813 there were changes in the Russian-German frontier. A CustomsStation was opened near Kalish and the new Jewish occupation of CustomsAgent began. There were 115 family heads who were tailors, as well asmany under very difficult conditions, and the community as such was morepoverty-stricken than ever, although some of the richer Jews did well.Under the constitution introduced by Napoleon all citizens were grantedequal rights. This included the Jews. However, the officials charged withimplementing this constitution did their best to prevent any true equalityof rights in practice. In addition the Jews did not want complete equality.What they desired was religious freedom and the abolition of such disabilitiesas prohibition of residence in various cities and streets, the prohibition toengage in certain branches of livelihood, and the abolition of the specialJewish taxes and levies. Full equality would have imposed the same dutiesHISTORY39upon them as on other citizens, such as conscription to the army whichwould have involved the desecration of the Sabbath, the eating of trefa(ritually unfit) food, shaving the beard and earlocks, etc.The following year the implementation of the Equal Rights Clause wasdeferred for a period of 10 years. It was pointed out that the differenceswhich isolated the Jews from the rest of the population prevented themfrom benefitting from civil liberties and made them unsuitable for militaryservice. At the same time the authorities began to whittle their civil rightsaway. They were forbidden to acquire land but merchants were permittedto dwell in cities, purchase and sell houses and land and leave these totheir heirs. Jews might build houses in vacant plots not desired by Christians,provided that the latter agreed to this.The Polish Minister of Justice masked anti-Jewish principles in a dressof liberalism, claiming that constitutional equality did not of itself transformall residents into citizens with equal rights. The citizen was a man who wasfaithful to the king and regarded Poland as his homeland. Since the Jewsregarded themselves as a separate nation and longed to return to the landof their fathers, they could not be regarded as sons of the homeland.In the Duchy of Warsaw the following taxes were levied on the Jews:Food tax, Kosher meat tax, Tolerance tax of 2.5 — 10 thaler per familyaccording to economic condition; a Marriage tax; and all the general economictaxes and levies.The heaviest burden was the Kosher meat tax. It was estimated that theaverage Jewish family in the Duchy ate 8 pounds of meat a week and thetax was 6 groszy per pound; 8 for ducks; 1 for chicken; 8 for goose; 1 zlotyfor turkey. On an average every family paid 84 zloty meat tax per year.When this tax was increased in 1809 from 2,650,000 zloty to almost3,343 000 zloty, it meant that the 4,346 Jewish families in the departmentof Kalish (3,309 in the cities and 1,037 in the villages) found that theyhad to pay almost 440,000 zloty per year.The Kosher meat tax was farmed out at public auction. The farmer waspermitted to collect the tax, which was fixed by the number of Jewishfamilies. This tax was four times as high as in Austria, and the amountfixed by the auction was not collected in any department. The law hadprovided that if the amount calculated according to the consumption ofmeat was not reached at the auction, the tax would be imposed on andcollected directly from the Jewish population.This transformed the indirect consumption tax into a direct one. Collectionwas imposed on the communities and responsibility on their heads. Thecommunities were authorised to impose a ban on those who opposed thetax or refused to pay it. In this way the Government increased the powersof the community for formal reasons, and gave the Pcvrnassim the possibilityof misusing those powers. At the same time this right vis-k-vis the centralauthorities helped to increased local self-government in some measure.Meetings between sub-prefects and communal representatives to arrange thedistribution of the tax among families were transformed in the course oftime into Committees which when necessary sent delegations to the CentralGovernment in Warsaw or the Grand Duke (the King of Saxony, who resided40THE KALISH BOOKin Dresden) in order to reduce the taxes or diminish the joint responsibilityof the Parnassim. However, their efforts proved fruitless. It was thenproposed to hold a meeting of Parnassim which would elect a delegationrepresenting the entire Jewish population, as had been done in 1797.The initiative in this connection was taken by the community of Posen,which proposed that the meeting should be deferred for a month as thepolitical situation was not clear and the outcome of the war then beingfought between Austria and the Duchy was not certain. In the end noconference was held, and the distress of the Jews grew worse and worse.The taxes were collected mercilessly and the economic impoverishment ofthe masses compelled the Parnassim in Warsaw to take certain steps.A meeting was finally held in July 1810 and presented a memorandumto the Minister of Finance. Memorandums were afterwards presented tothe King, the Ducal Council and the Minister of Finance, declaring thatthe terrible poverty of the Jewish population made it impossible to paythe amount of meat tax demanded. (The best sign of the situation is thefact that in the years 1809—1810 the Government succeeded in collectingonly 44.3% of the calculated amount, and in 1810—1811 only 43.4%.)The Minister of Finance accordingly had to take thought regarding Jewishaffairs.After the failure of the internal attempts of the Jews to hold a con-ference, it became clear that the Minister of Finance would have to summona gathering at which the Jewish representatives could offer their ownproposals. This was done early in 1811. The Jews of Kalish elected theirrepresentatives within a fortnight. These were Simon Levy and JosephMoshe, a Shtadlan or mediator from Dzialoszyn.The Jewish representatives speaking on behalf of all the Jews in theDuchy expressed their opposition to the kosher meat tax, and particularlyto the imposition of group responsibility on the communal heads, which wasboth immoral and not the practice in respect of other taxes. They proposedthat the Jewish tax be calculated on a consumption of 3 kilograms perfamily per week, i.e., 6 groszy tax per pound. They also worked to achieveJewish exemption from military service. They pointed out that it was unfairto demand this of a community which was burdened by discriminatorytaxation, had no equal rights and was persecuted. At the end of 1811 Jewishrepresentatives submitted a memorandum to the State Council and proposedthat a tax of 3 million zloty should be levied on the Jewish population,80% as meat tax and the rest as a recruiting tax.In a debate at the Polish Seim a few days later one delegate rejectedspecial Jewish taxes as being against the Constitution. A few days laterthe Minister submitted a law providing that the kosher meat tax should bea consumption tax and not a direct tax. The Seim approved of this. A weeklater it was agreed that the distribution of this tax of 3 million zlotyshould be handled by the Jewish representatives themselves. It was notapproved by the Minister. The amount seemed too small to him, and allocationamong the communities and the families appeared illegal in his eyes. Hedemanded 800,000 zloty a year for exemption from military service.The Jewish representatives declared that the Jewish population was unableHISTORY41to pay more than they had offered, and undertook to take charge of allocationby Departments. They were prepared to pay the amount of tax for fivemonths, i.e. till the end of May 1812, but could not guarantee paymentbeyond then. The Minister rejected these proposals and began to negotiatewith three partners, to whom he wished to farm out the kosher meat tax ofthe entire Duchy.The representatives then proposed their own nominee as tax-farmer inchief, but were too late. The three partners undertook to pay 2,650,000 zlotya year. The representatives continued their negotiations about the exemptiontax. The Minister demanded 800,000 zloty, they offered 600,000, and finallycompromised on 700,000. Payment was to be made quarterly and the agreementwas to run until the Jews were finally granted equal rights in the spiritof the Decree of 1808. Under the resultant law the Jews of the KalishDepartment were required to pay 55,088 zloty every year as exemption tax.Their representative had taken an active part in the entire negotiations.By this agreement the representatives of the Jews constituted a permanentJewish representation in the Department. If one of the delegates died orwas suspended another was to be appointed by the Prefect. This StandingCommittee met as a Government body representing the Jewish populationin the Duchy of Warsaw vis-a-vis its Government. It met once in 1809,twice in 1810, twice in 1811 and thereafter in Spring 1814.All this while there had been no change in the relations between the Jewsand the organised burghers. The latter demanded that the number of Jewsin the city and their trade in spirituous liquors be reduced. At the sametime the Municipality made a practice of levying more than half of themunicipal taxes on the Jewish community, though they were at most barelya third.With the preparations for Napoleon’s Russian Campaign of 1812, a systemof runners was established to expedite transmission of orders and post.The Kalish Municipality required the Jewish community to maintain runnerswho cost it 6,000 zloty a year. In addition they had to provide candlesto a value of more than 1,000 zloty for all army officials and officers inthe city. At that time there were 2,276 Jews in a total population of 7,256,but the former were called on to pay twice as much as the remainder.When an explanation was demanded, the local Prefect explained that thecharges were levied not per capita but according to income. Candles weresupplied only to General Staff officers, it was claimed. It should be remem-bered, declared the Prefect, that the Christians were required to supplywood without payment while the Jews demanded payment for the lights.There was therefore no reason to exempt them from this supply. He claimedthat trade as well as the crafts of tailoring, furriery, cordmaking, etc. werealmost entirely in Jewish hands. Meanwhile the Municipality explained thatthe Jews did not have to pay 10,000 zloty as demanded but rather lessthan two-thirds of that amount.The Ministry of the Interior informed the Prefect in reply that it wasnot his duty to require the Jews to supply runners for the carriage ofletters from Kalish to Czenstoehowa, since the post was at his disposal.The system of runners was therefore to be abolished at once. Nor were42THE KALISH BOOKthere any orders permitting the Prefect to order the Jews to supply candlesto army officers instead of billeting. The Jews were required to billet soldierslike other residents. It was necessary to insist that they should provide cleanfurnished rooms for the officers; but if any of the latter refused to accepta room in a Jewish home, the Prefect was entitled to fix a certain paymentinstead on a basis of negotiations. As far as individual taxes were concernedthe Municipality must first consult the community, for it had actuallyimposed far too high a sum on the Jews.The reply was received and the authorities in charge of the city went onbehaving as the saw fit.When Jews could not pay the individual tax the local constables brokeinto their homes, seized the family heads, took craftsmen and hired menfrom their work and sent them out of town. After the community had paidseveral thousand zloty on account of contributions, more than 9,000 zloty morewere demanded from them. This could not be paid, so the Prefect orderedthat the Synagogue should be closed and prohibited the Jews from prayingthere. Troops were stationed in front of the Synagogue and the communitywas required to pay for their upkeep.Leizer Koppel and Hyman Stem, then the heads of the community, had toappeal first to the Ministry of the Interior and then to the State Council inWarsaw. They requested that these persecutions should cease, and the fineillegally imposed by the Municipality should be cancelled. Furthermore,they requested that the Municipality when allocating taxes and public pay-ments should consult the community which knew the situation of each andevery one of its members; and that the allocation of taxes should be basedon the number and financial capacities of the Jews, not in arbitrary fashion.In any case, though they were faithful citizens with the same freedom asother residents, they had to contribute more than the Christians on accountof all kinds of extraordinary taxes like that on kosher meat. All the incomeof the community had been requisitioned by the Courts to cover old debtswhich amounted to 400,000 zloty. A tax was paid to the Municipality onevery funeral and wedding, also for every civil permit and documentaryfee and as a water rate. Finally they pointed ouf that all classes had beengiven equal rights by Napoleon, and also by the legislation of the Duchy.They appended the demand of the Municipality for immediate payments,with notice of fines in case of non-payment and the order of the Mayor,dated 7th May 1812, for closing the Synagogue, etc.After sending their memorandum to Warsaw the heads of the communityinformed the Prefect of what they had done, in accordance with variousclauses of the Constitution which he had contravened. They also requestedthat any steps against merchants and Parnassim should be deferred untilafter the impending Feast of Weeks, and until the arrival of the decisionof the Ministry of the Interior.In his reply the Prefect reiterated that almost all trade and handicraftswere in the hands of the Jews, that there were only 6 Christian merchantsout of 167 and only 17 Christian tailors out of 145. The Christians had 3apothecaries, 8 dealers in wine and spirits, 98 sellers of beer and spiritsand salt, and were required to pay the same tax as the Jews. “With regardHISTORY43to the Synagogue”, the Prefect explained “that since the Jews refused topay the sum demanded the Mayor had insisted on permision to close theSynagogue which contained many valuables.” Finally he stated that theMunicipality had withdrawn the notice to the congregation. In his opinion thelatter had no right to complain about the tax burden and persecution. TheJews were supplying all the consumption of the Royal Kitchen to theGenerals and the General Staff at high prices, and had actually receivedthe amount of the impost back already.In the absence of any reply from the Minister a deputation was sent toWarsaw and submitted a memorandum in which they appealed to “a senseof justice and pity” in order to draw his attention to the unhappy positionof the Jewish inhabitants of Kalish. Factual evidence was given in thismemorandum regarding the conditions under which the Jews lived. TheJewish merchants were poverty-stricken and most could not even make aliving from their trade. The non-Jewish wine merchants had far moreproperty than all the trade of Kalish Jews. There were 100 Christian distillery-owners and only 4 Jews, who were actually merely lease-holders and hadto pay 1,000 thaler a year, a payment from which the Christian innkeeperswere entirely exempt. The townsfolk had houses that brought in an income,as well as Municipal privileges which the Jews lacked.Yet in spite of all the fixed taxes, the burden of billeting, the providingof 100 Jews for service as runners, 20 of them regularly each day, theMunicipality had not hesitated to impose a payment of 400 thalers on theJews and now demanded an additional 1,000 thalers.A fortnight later the Minister of the Interior replied to the Prefectstating that his behaviour towards the Jews was not in accordance withthe law. He disapproved particularly of his forcible intervention in respectof religious ceremonies by such steps as closing the Synagogue.The Minister informed the Kalish representatives that they could safelygo home and tranquilly wait for justice to take its course. When theyreturned home they were summoned to the Mayor for an inquiry, and thelatter wished to know whether they had a full authorisation from the com-munity. “The Jews Flamm and Warta had an authorisation in the Yiddishlanguage written by the Jew Shlomo Zelig Krumm, and drafted andsigned by us as heads of the community.”In response to demands for receipts, a number were produced. The twocommunity heads signed the minutes of this investigation, which waspromptly transferred to the Prefect. The latter in his reply to the Ministrydrew attention to the impudence of the Jews in bothering him and tryingto mislead him in one form or another. The promised reply from the Ministerdid not come and the community heads appealed once again, stating thatthe Prefect had no intention of changing his behaviour. On the contrary,he had imposed a new levy of 240 thalers after the General Staff had leftKalish, and the Municipality had taken it by force from Leizer Mamlock.Nothing is known regarding the end of all this dispute.The failure of Napoleon’s Russian campaign led to the collapse of theDuchy of Warsaw. In March 1813 the Russian army entered and TzarAlexander I set up a new Government. Meanwhile the latter continued to44THE KALISH BOOKcollect the kosher meat tax and the recruits' exemption tax. In 1814 twoleading Jews from each Department were invited to Warsaw in order toadvise the Government how to ensure the receipt of the taxes of the Jews.Wolf Traube and Zalman Rosenbloom attended for the Kalish Department,while Simon Levy came from the Kalish community itself.At the meeting they declared that the Jewish population had never offered2,400,000 zloty per year, and proposed that the amount should be negotiatedfor each Department separately. The Minister of Finance agreed in principle,and the Departmental representatives afterwards stated the amount that theycould pay. The Kalish delegates proposed 52,000 zloty without Governmentsupervision. This amount would be divided between the communities, whowould give satisfactory securities for payment. After protracted negotiationsthe Higher Council of State rejected the proposals and decided to take chargeof the tax itself. The special exemption tax of the days of Napoleon's warwas now replaced by a special war tax of 700,000 zloty.Following the end of hostilities this was not abolished, but twice theamount continued to be collected from the Jewish population. A Governmentdecree of October 1812 prohibiting the manufacture and sale of spirits toJews was deferred till April 1815, thanks to the efforts of the heads ofthe community and some judicious bribery. Meanwhile a circular of theMinister of the Interior and Police issued under the Duchy of Warsaw inJanuary 1812 remained in force. This required Jews residing in the housesof Christians to approach “a degree of civilisation" and shave their beards.The Prefect of the Kalish Department tried to carry out this instructionand informed his superiors that he had given the Jews of the Departmentwho resided in the houses of Christians in the city of Kalish until Septemberto carry out the conditions required for them to approach a civilised wayof living, including the shaving of their beards, in order not to be compelledto vacate their dwellings.The heads of the community appealed to the Prefect not to compel themto shave because according to the passage submitted and certified by theauthorities as from the Book of Leviticus, this practice was against theirreligion which was protected by the Government like all other faiths.Furthermore the constitution promised the Jews easier regulations thanhitherto.In the opinion of the Prefect the Government decrees applied only toWarsaw and Plock. He therefore had the honour to ask the Ministry ofthe Interior whether in spite of the above facts the Jews must be compelledto shave their beards.The Minister rebuked the Prefect of Kalish in his reply for making sucha strange demand of the Jews, and advised him to read Ministerial instructionsmore carefully in the future.CONGRESS POLAND, 1815—1831General SituationAfter the fal of Napoleon the Vienna Congress set up a Kingdom of Polandunder Russian suzerainty with a Constitution including the following clause:HISTORY45“The Israelite People shall continue to enjoy those civil rights whichare assured to them by the present laws and provisions. Special regulationsshall outline the conditions that shall facilitate the obtaining by the Jewsof greater satisfaction from social standing.”The entire Constitution was approved by Tsar Alexander I, to whomseveral Memorials were presented by representatives of Polish Jewry during1814/15 in Paris and Berlin. However, the above clause remained a deadletter and the state of the Jews was unchanged. The Jews were 10% in apopulation of 3,300,000 and their affairs were being dealt with by theAutonomous Polish Government in Warsaw.In 1808 there were 6,712 inhabitants in Kalish, of whom 2,535 were Jews.In 1827 the numbers were 12,107 and 3,463. This was a decline from 37.8%to 28.5%.It was decided to defer all change in the status of the Jews on accountof the absence of Jewish general education and the prejudices of the Polishpopulation. General education was to be introduced and the Kehilla structureabolished. Meanwhile the Russian Governor opposed emancipation becausethe Jews increased disproportionately and harmed the position of the Christianworkers. The Polish political elite held that the Jews were not ripe foremancipation, and imposed new restrictions. In 1820 enlightened Jews pro-posed: Abolition of the Kehilla, regulation of activities of rabbis, etc.,prohibition of Hebrew printing presses and the import of Hebrew books fromabroad, and the establishment of a Rabbinical Seminary under Universityauspices.In 1821 the Kehillot were replaced under Government decree by SynagogueCouncils with limited authority, that were responsible to the GovernmentCouncil for Interior Affairs, Religion and Education in Warsaw. The SynagogueCouncil had to prepare an Annual Synagogue etc. Budget, for approvalby the District Authorities.Following this decree the Kalish Kehilla was abolished, and was replacedby a Synagogue Council of three members. Election of the rabbi by allcongregation members also required District approval. From 1825 the Rabbiacted as Communal Registrar of Births, Marriages and Deaths. The HevraKadisha (Burial Societies) were abolished in 1822. In 1827 the CommunalFunds were administered by the Municipal Treasurer, who received 5%of the Budgetary Income. From 1860 the Treasurer took two-thirds of thiswhile the Auditor took one third. Throughout this period the Jews wereheavily taxed in general. Communal taxes fell into 4 groups, the highestbeing above 50 Gulden and the lowest 3—8 gulden. Until 1843 the Jewspaid a Recruits' Tax. From 1843 on they were conscripted for militaryservice. These and many similar regulations remained in force until 1916,when the German Occupation Authorities issued a more suitable Order forthe Organisation of Jewish Religious Societies.Until 1840 some 42 rural Jewish communities were under the control ofthe Kalish Community.Reb Abraham Abele ben Yehiel Mechel Hacohen died in 1809, but a newrabbi was appointed only in 1821. This was Reb Moshe Ephraim Ashkenazi,46THE KALISH BOOKa descendant of the renowned scholar Hacham Zvi Ashkenazi. After variousdisputes on competence a special committee formulated “Perpetual Regula-tions” in 1823.These regulations provided inter alia that new community members, whetherfrom the city or elsewhere, might be admitted only by majority approval.New tailors might be admitted only with the approval of the Tailors' Guild.Engagement Contracts, etc., might be prepared only for accredited residents,and only by specified communal functionaries.An attempt to open a Jewish school in 1822 was bitterly opposed by therabbi, on the grounds that it would injure or even destroy Jewish faith.In 1822 and 1825 the Community was called upon to repay debts out-standing from the days of Independent Poland, together with the interest.The Struggle for Rights of Residence and WorkIn the years 1815—1826 the Jews suffered from the introduction andexpansion of Government monopolies which deprived thousands of theirlivelihoods, in Kalish and elsewhere. This in turn caused many to engagein smuggling, etc., with a corresponding outcry in the press, political literatureand the Seim. Some began to engage in home textile manufacture. VillageJews swarmed to Kalish. A Jewish proletariat began to appear, and thecharacter of Jewish commerce changed.A handful of Kalish Jews had grown wealthy during the 1807—1815 Wars.These were wholesalers or spirit-vendors. The majority of Jewish shopkeepers,etc., however, were impoverished and suffered from countless municipalby-laws and the constant outcry of the non-Jewish shopkeepers.Trade between Kalish and Russia began to increase. Jews played a partin the sheep fairs of the city and began to develop spinning and weavingmills, supplying raw materials and disposing of the finished product. In1820 Joseph son of Samuel Joseph Redlich was a leading importer of woollenyarns, spirit manufacturer, general agent, wool buyer and wholesale merchant.He prospered after his daughter married Ludwig Mamroth, who had settledin Kalish and opened a successful bank with M. Landau.In 1825 Redlich and his son-in-law contracted to open storehouses forwoollen yams throughout the Kalish District, under District Governmentguarantee which enabled them to allow three months credit to the weavers.By 1830 Redlich's property was assessed at 2 million guldens and Mamroth'sat 130,000 gulden. Indeed, the sale of woollen yarns was their virtual mono-poly, and they themselves also began dealing in woollens. By 1832 theywere dealing in land and investing in the new factories at Lodz. Duringthe First Polish Revolt of 1830—31 they continued to supply weavers withraw materials, whether they could pay or not. Indeed, Redlich undertookto keep them employed provided he was allowed to import 30 hundredweightof yarn duty-free. The condition was approved because he was the onlycontractor in the Kalish District who was concerned for the livelihood ofweavers and poor manufacturers. The exemption was afterwards repeatedin spite of opposition.At this time Jews were still primarily merchants. Their entry into industrycame only during the following decades.HISTORY47Jews in non-Jewish Residential QuartersAs from 1799 there were 30 Jews who traded or worked in Christianhouses. They included 19 merchants, 8 craftsmen and 1 tenant withoutoccupation. Residents included 11 merchants, 8 craftsmen and the one withoutoccupation. The local Christian craftsmen in particular were opposed tothis, and in 1822 petitioned the Warsaw Ministry of the Interior to takesteps as the number of Jews in their quarters was increasing daily and theJews were stealing their livelihoods. In their Historical Survey they claimedthat from 11 families in 1540 the Jews were now more than 100 families,with dozens of houses in the centre of the town. They demanded that theJews be restricted to the 11 families of the 1540 Privileges, that they beexcluded from connerce engaged in by Christians and that they live intheir own special quarters.The real issue, as before, seems to have been the monopoly of the manu-facture of spirits and beer-brewing held by certain old-established Christianfamilies of Kalish who fought tooth and nail, by fair means and foul,against Jewish competition. In Warsaw they found little support, but theKalish municipal authorities supported them by various administrative mea-sures. Prolonged negotiations with the Warsaw authorities resulted in re-cognition of the status quo, but no new Jewish wine or spirit dealers werepermitted.A Special Jewish QuarterA new Town Plan submitted to the Government Commission of the Interiorand Police in June 1827 provided for a special Jewish Quarter in accordancewith an Order issued six years earlier. The Jews might reside and keepshops in 11 streets only, including those of their earlier Quarter. Their formerwooden houses, which were a fire and health hazard, must be demolishedand replaced by properly built houses. All Jews living elsewhere mustremove to the Jewish Quarter by October 1833, and must sell their propertyoutside the latter Quarter, by December 1832. All rental agreements, lease-holds, etc., would be invalid as from October 1833, except for Jewishphysicians, artists, etc., who submitted recognised attestations, wore thesame clothes as the Christian residents and sent their children to generalschools from the age of 7. To prevent congestion, apartments of 2—3rooms might be let only to a single family, and those of 4—5 rooms to 2families. Not more than 5 families might live in any one house. Thecomposition of the family was specified: Husband, wife, unmarried children,servant and one parent over 60 if not gainfully employed.The old prohibtion of residence by Jews from other places was to beupheld. Jews might trade outside the Quarter only on Market days and atFairs.The Central Authorities pointed out that the proposals might mean thecreation of a Jewish town, which would draw all the trade away from theChristian town. The proposals were accordingly amended to provide for pro-longation of sevral streets, and no more.However, the wealthier Jewish merchants, wine dealers, etc., began to48THE RAL1SH BOOKbombard the District and Central Governments with petitions and applicationsto live outside the proposed Jewish Quarters. Most of these were approved.Christian merchants then drew attention to the risk of epidemics resultingfrom the congestion of the Jewish inhabitants, even in originally non-Jewishhouses. Following inquiry the Municipality described all this as unauthorised,exaggerated and rancorous, and explained the ulterior motives of the signa-tories.Attempts on the part of the land-owning Polish nobility to attract Jewsto agriculture were rendered nugatory by the attitude of the implementingofficials.THE POLISH REVOLT, 1830—31, AND AFTERThe Polish Revolt of 1830 was supported by certain Westernized Jewsin Warsaw, where Jews were recruited for the Civic Guard and a Jewishunit was set up. However, the new Polish National Government preventedJews from joining in the Revolt, but required them to pay a double Recruits'Tax instead. Many communal leaders told the new authorities that theyobjected. Elsewhere it was proposed that Jews should be attracted to theforces by temporary economic privileges. Nothing came of this.In Kalish the Jewish Community contributed to the cost of the Revolt,and were also called upon to serve in the Forces, though they demandedto be exempted either from military service or the payment of the Recruits'Tax. A demand for contributions to the Jewish Unit under Joseph Berkowitz(son of the Jewish warrior Berek Yosselowitz) found little support. A JewishCommittee set up in Warsaw recommended that the special tax be abolishedand Jews be drafted to the Forces. This followed a petition to the sameeffect by a certain Joseph Golochowski of Kalish.Though these and parallel viewpoints were adjudged correct, the financialrequirements of the Revolt were held to make it necessary to double thetax and refrain from recruiting the Jews for the time being, though thismight change later. (At the time, early 1831, the Jewish population in Polandwas assessed at 380,000.)Accordingly the Jews of Kalish were called upon to pay the double tax.In June 1831 the Polish Seim levied almost 250,000 zloty on them. As aresult of this purely fiscal approach, the Jews of the city refrained fromvolunteering or joining the Civic Guard. The only known Jewish participantwas Alexander Morgenstern, son of the Kalish physician Dr. Michael Morgen-stern, a Polish Nationalist who in due course became a physician himself.The citizens meanwhile retained their animosity and demanded a returnto the 1788 restrictions. Jews ought not to enjoy any civic liberties andhad no civic rights. The central authorities received repeated memorandumsfrom the Municipality to this effect, but no steps were taken. Indeed, severalWesternized Jews were granted licences on the basis of pre-Revolt permits,and were allowed to live outside the Jewish Quarter. This trend was tocontinue throughout the 1830s.However, a Permit for a Jewish school obtained by Ludwig Mamroth in1822 could not be used because of the opposition of Rabbi M. E. Ashkenazi,HISTORY49as already mentioned; and the wealthy merchants sent their children toschool in Breslau or Berlin.Following the Revolt the status of the rich Jews gradually improved.The claim that though they were taxed they had no civic rights began tofall on attentive ears in Warsaw. At the same time citizens with Jewishtenants demanded that the latter should not be expelled, as that wouldlead to financial loss for their landlords.Between 1832 and 1860 Jews established workshops which developed intofactories. Almost all of them manufactured textiles of various kinds. Theyand their companions demanded domiciliary and similar rights in the non-Jewish quarters, appealing all the way to the King of Poland, i.e., theRussian Tsar.An Eviction Order against about 20 Jewish families was issued by theMunicipality in April, 1834. The leaders of the Community appealed to theDistrict Council and were sharply rebuffed. Thereupon the Communityappealed to the Governor, General Paskiewicz; and the right of domicile inpreviously non-Jewish streets was approved for those who had resided inthem before 1833. Howevr, correspondence between the municipal authoritiesand the central authorities in Warsaw continued for some time. MeanwhileJews holding mortgages on property began to foreclose and demand possession.In addition the Municipality complained in 1839 that Kalish Jews weremarrying Jewesses from elsewhere and demanding their registration as per-manent residents of the city, though this was against local and nationalregulations. Warsaw drily replied that according to Article 181 of the CivilCode the wife must follow the husband, and hence should be registeredaccordingly in the Municipal Registers.In 1844 the Governorate of Kalish was abolished and transferred toWarsaw. Many dwellings previously occupied by officials were vacated andJews rented them. Municipal and Ministerial correspondence continued asbefore. In general the Jews were subject to a constant fear of eviction.There was a fairly clear line of demarcation between “cultured” and otherJews. The former were not precisely discouraged, and the District authoritiespermitted them to live and do business in the Christian areas. By 1854there were 23 Jews with houses outside the Jewish Quarter.A Secret Report of 1854 records 4,012 Jews in Kalish the previous year,as against 7,120 Christians. In 1852 some 70 houses had been burnt down inthe Jewish Quarters and their owners could not afford to rebuild them.Hence Jews must be allowed to live elsewhere, said the Report. A laterfire in 1855 strengthened this consideration.During the 1830s a Russian Governmental fiscal decison led to a large-scale increase in the brewing and liquor industry and trade. The old-standing feud of the Kalish liquor manufacturers and dealers was renewedagainst their Jewish competitors.There were cholera epidemics in 1831, 1848 and 1852 respectively. TheJewish Quarter caught fire in July 1852 when 78 houses were burnt, includingthe 16th Century synagogue. The Torah Scrolls were then saved with theaid of Franciscans and other clergy.50THE KALI3H BOOKRabbi Solomon Eger, who was rabbi from 1834, adopted a liberal policyand approach in many respects. He approved of a knowledge of Polish andGerman, supervised Jewish education and did not object to Jewish childrenattending general schools. However, he was summoned to Posen followingthe death of his father the renowned Rabbi Akiba Eger, who was rabbithere. His departure was followed by internal disputes between the “En-lightened” and Orthodox.While in Kalish, however, he helped to establish the principle whereby non-Jewish weavers might work for Jewish factory-owners on the Sabbatha matter of much economic consequence. His successor, Rabbi Elijah Roselaar,served for a decade until his death in 1850. Rabbi Solomon Eger agreed toreturn to Kalish, but died in 1852 before he could do so.Rabbi Zvi Hirsch Chayyes, who was a graduate of the Lemberg University,then served as rabbi until his death in 1856. He in turn was followed byRaboi Meir Auerbach, until the latter’s departure for Eretz Israel in 1860.In 1841 a serious dispute broke out between the established Communityand a certain David Landa, who refused to pay communal taxes on thegrounds of being a tax-payer in a Christian quarter. Several others alsorefused to pay. The Commission for the Interior decided that as Jews theyhad to pay communal taxes. After appeals by both sides this test case wasdecided in favour of the Community.In 1854 a total of 9 Jewish boys were taken for the Russian Army, theoldest aged 14, in place of older draftees who did not appear before theRecruiting Committees. (These measures were wide-spread at the timethroughout the Jewish Pale of Settlement. The children were known as“Kantonists” and were compelled to serve 25 years in the Russian Army,without any Jewish contacts.)In 1843 there were almost 52,000 Jews in the Kalish Governorate, of whomclose on 46,000 lived in towns. Non-Jews were almost 663,000, of whomover 95,000 were town-dwellers. Economically productive Jews were 10,614in all, of whom 1,575 had no regular occupation.In 1832 the Jewish population of Poland numbered over 380,000, withmore than 3,500,000 non-Jews. In 1843 there were almost 525,000 Jews andalmost 4,200,000 non-Jews. Leaders of the community decided to encourageJewish settlement on the land. When Jews became liable to military conscrip-tion the authorities announced that land workers would be exempt, as inRussia. At the time there were 19 Jewish settlements, including Boleslawowin the Kalish district, which had been established in 1814 and consisted of6 families with 18 males.Three representatives of communities near Kalish were elected to proceedto Warsaw in order to participate in the activities of a Committee set upto encourage the settlement of poor Jews on the land. Some 7,500 roubleswere to be collected annually for the purpose during 3 years, from wealthylocal Jews. The Jews of the Kalish District were followed by Jews fromother Governorates, in spite of high-level disapproval of their unauthorisedsteps. In 1859 there were almost 28,000 Jewish land-workers in Poland.The Kalish District had 15 Jewish farmers with 79 dependants in 1854.In 1855 there were 15, with 98 dependants. In 1856 they numbered 35, withHISTORY51322 dependants. The numbers remained almost identical in 1857 and 1859.In 1860 there were 16 farmers with 133 dependants, and in 1861 — 15 with126 dependants. Most of them also engaged in trade and handicrafts. Theirnumbers remained virtually unchanged until 1865.When the Polish peasants were liberated, the Jewish farmers were alsogranted land in perpetuity.THE HOSPITAL, 1835—1914An old-style “Hekdesh” (alms-house) to which the sick poor were sentexisted until the end of the 18th century, and the sick were attended by aJewish physician. In 1788 it was laid down that only Kalish-born Jewsmight be admitted, and if any beggars from elsewhere were found therethe Community would be fined.Under the pressure of Dr. Michael Morgenstern the “Hospital” was expandedfrom 1 small room without proper equipment to a hall in the synagoguecontaining 5 beds. With the help of Ludwig Mamroth government interventionand interest was secured in 1830. The Revolt of 1830, however, led to thecessation of activities, which were renewed by Mamroth in 1833.In 1835 Dr. Morgenstern wrote a disturbing report on medical and epidemio-logical conditions in the congested Jewish Quarter. From 1829 Mamrothhad been collecting for a new hospital, and had well over 30,000 zloty inSpring 1835. In May 1835 it was decided to set up a District Hospital asproposed by the Government. Temporary premises were obtained on 1.1.1836,and patients were also treated at home. The Hospital proper was openedin February 1837, with 20 beds.A clergyman claimed the Hospital Funds on the grounds of a loan obtainedby the Community in 1701 from the Lateran Order of Priests. However, theCourts decided that the Hospital did not owe any of this money. TheHospital was also exempted from taxes and imposts.In 1870 the Hospital Committee was abolished, and the Hospital wasplaced under Government supervision.The founder and first physician Dr. M. Morgenstern died during theCholera epidemic of 1848. Dr. B. Redlich succeeded him until his death in1860. The Polish Dr. Stopczynski officiated devotedly until his death in 1873,and was replaced by Dr. Rymarkiewicz who died in 1898. Dr. EduardReatus, who had been his assistant from 1887, remained in charge till 1914.Though the poorer Jews, and particularly those who were observant, viewedthe Hospital with suspicion at first, they gradually came to use it freely.The number of patients rose from 25 in 1837 to 382 in 1854, 578 in 1872,and 1552 in 1914.A new building was added at the end of the century and the old buildingwith 43 beds was practically transformed into an Old Age Home. Otherchanges followed the First World War.THE 1863 REVOLTIn 1859 the Estate-Owners Association set up Agencies in Kalish andelsewhere for the purpose of eliminating Jewish merchants, etc., from tradein agricultural produce and implements. By 1861, however, tension declined52THE KALISH BOOKunder the influence of the Polish National Movement, which called forPolish-Jewish fraternity. Participants in a Warsaw demonstration were killedin February 1861 and were mourned in Kalish by all sections of the populationincluding the Jews, who attended church commemorations while Poles attendedsynagogue services. Jews were admitted to the Merchants' Club, and inOctober 1861 a Memorial Service for Archbishop Piatkowski was held inthe synagogue.Jews were granted equal rights in 1862, and were entitled to elect and beelected to Municipal and Regional Councils. Three Jews and one Jewishproxy were elected to the Kalish Regional Council. In Kalish proper oneJew was elected among 12 Councillors, and 5 Jewish proxies out of 12.There were then 4,423 Jews in Kalish, who were more than one-third ofthe population.Simultaneously Jewish intellectuals began to play a more active part incommunal life, trying to improve the traditional education methods, the stateof the poor and the forms of relief. But they changed nothing. Apart fromthe conflict with the Orthodox, there was a split between the Germanophilsand the Polonophils, who demanded virtual assimilation.They objected in particular to the (subsequently) Hovev-Zion Rabbi HayyimEliezer Wachs who refused to follow in the footsteps of his enlightenedpredecessors. Rabbi Wachs saw no reason for establishing a school, whichhe held to be the task of the Government. However a school with 3 classeswas opened in July 1862 thanks to Ludwig Mamroth, who died the followingyear.Meanwhile various members of his Polonophil group had been the objectsof police observation and questioning on suspicion of complicity in the Polishpreparations. All Jewish groups were contributing considerable sums to thePolish National Movement by this time.The Revolt broke out in January 1863. The Russians attributed considerablestrategic importance to Kalish and stationed artillery in the New Market.They arrested both Jews and non-Jews, who were exiled to Siberia later.Kalish Jews fought in the Polish ranks, and a special Jewish Women'sCommittee supplied the rebels with uniforms, food, and medicines, andhelped to recruit Jews. Some 40 Jews of Kalish and district are on recordas joining the Revolutionary Units. A few of them were still alive whenPoland became independent in 1918, and subsequently received militaryhonours.1864—1914The suppression of the 1863 Revolt was followed by a period of repressionof the Jews in Kalish as elsewhere. There was an economic crisis. However,it became the Governmental city again in 1866, and the resultant economicimprovement was enhanced in 1871, when the railway was laid. The generaleconomic expansion of the Sixties, and the transition to capitalist developmentthat marked the Seventies, helped to change the economic structure ofJewish life from market-town and village self-sufficiency to modern industry.At the same time the Jews were steadily eliminated from various crafts andHISTORY53economic activities which had formerly been their own preserve, so that aprocess of pauperisation set in. The Jewish authorities did not engage inany economic policy, but the people themselves largely succeeded in sur-mounting the difficulties and finding or creating new economic positions.Thus they transformed Kalish into a Textiles centre.When Polish Jews were given rights of urban domicile, the number inKalish rose from 4,423 in 1862 to 6,706 in 1875.In 1867 Jews of the Kalish District owned 37 factories, of which 29 weretextile plants. Some 760 Jews worked in textile factories. Jews also hadtricotage factories, cart and carriage works, china works, liquor breweriesand oil presses. They owned tobacco workshops, paper mills, glass and woodWorks and windmills. Kalish itself had 19 Jewish-owned industrial plants,employing 285 Jewish workers, in 1875. A Polish journalist reports that thecity was losing its German aspect and becoming Polish thanks to the Polesand Jewish intellectuals.In 1884 a Commission to investigate the conditions of Polish Jewry, setup by Jan Bloch, made it clear that in the Kalish Governorate as elsewherethe Jews were a productive and effective economic force. Their functionsexpanded in the Eighties and the Nineties. Kalish textiles were in greatdemand both in Poland and abroad. By 1908 there were 14,318 Jews inthe city.During this half-century German began to be replaced by Polish amongthe wealthier Jews, who at the same time combatted the traditionalistattiude of he majority. However, by the early 20th century Kalish hadvirtually become a Hassidic city. A separate synagogue for the “enlightened”group, which had been planned from 1871, was opened only in 1911.The Hassidic Movement had been growing stronger in and around thecity from the end of the 18th century, and indeed several Hassidic rabbissettled in Kalish after 1918.The Jewish School established in 1862 had Russian as its language ofinstruction. In 1875 there were 150 pupils and 4 teachers. The Orthodoxschool system had 7 Hadarim with 317 pupils. By 1903 there were 50 boysand 80 girls at the school. A women’s trade school and a kindergarten wereopened early in the century.The “enlightened” group were largely in charge of the community duringthe late Seventies and the Eighties. Rabbi Wachs left the community ontheir acount in 1881, and proceeded to Piotrkow. He was followed until1902 by Rabbi Shimshon Arnstein. In 1906 Rabbi Ezekiel Liebschitz wasappointed rabbi and served until 1932.Various Loan Funds and other institutions of a social and economiccharacter were established from 1871 onwards.As time went on Kalish became a transit centre for Jewish emigrants,and in 1909 a special committee was set up to provide food, shelter andfurther funds for the journey if necessary.Anti-Jewish riots took place on 26 June 1876 following clerical incitement,the peasants of the surrounding districts taking advantage of the absenceof the Russian garrison on manoeuvres. It was reported that 13 Jews werekilled and many wounded, and much damage was done to Jewish personal54THE KALISH BOOKand communal property. The anniversary of the pogrom was observed asa fast for many years.In 1881 Jews who were not citizens of Russia or Poland were expelledfrom Kalish under a law prohibiting the residence of such Jews in frontierareas. Similar expulsions took place in 1887, 1900 and 1902. The cityunderwent a severe economic crisis in 1904—1907, which began under severeclimatic conditions but continued owing to the Russian revolutionary situation.As elsewhere in the Russian Empire, the year 1905 was marked by widespreadstrikes, disturbances and demonstrations.1914—1939Upon the outbreak of hostilities the Russian troops left the city, but abattle began and streets were demolished by arillery. Kalish was virtuallyemptied and all life there came to a standstill. In the early days of thefighting, 33 Jews were killed by German soldiers.During 1916 life began to return to normal and the communal institutionsbegan to function once more. In 1917 the Mizrahi (Religious Zionist) Organi-sation opened a seven-class school for Jewish and general subjects; and akindergarten, commercial school and religious national school for girls werealso opened. Polish nationalist groups did their best to extrude the Jews fromeconomic life and the Antisemitic Endek (National Democratic) Party grewstronger.In Autumn 1918 with renewed independence Poland began sytematic anti-Jewish propaganda which led to conflict, onslaughts and pogroms.Throughout Winter 1918/19 the excesses gradualy spread, reaching Kalishon 13th March 1919. A Labour Demonstration was used as an occasion forplundering Jewish shops and beating Jewish passersby. Jewish butchersdefended themselves with cleavers; but one was killed while a merchant diedof his injuries. Nine Jews were seriously injured. The pogrom lasted all daylong, and the authorities took no serious steps to end it.A similar attempt on 1st. May 1920 was prevented thanks to vigorousJewish resistance.The resurgence of independent Poland gave rise to Jewish hopes of equalityand national autonomy as provided in the Versailles Peace Treaty. After theearly disturbances died down the situation seemed to improve graduallyuntil 1930. After that the Jews lost whatever they had gained. There wasan economic reecession and the authorities began to close Jewish schools andimpose taxes directed against the Jews. The aim was to force them outof their economic and social positions by any measures possible. Large-scaleemigration to Eretz Israel and elsewhere began.After the Nazis came to power in Germany they set out to create anatmosphere suiting them in Poland by mass incitement against the Jews.Kalish on the Polish-German frontier provided then with a satisfactory base.In 1937 Jewish representatives at the Municipality protested vigorously, andwere savagely attacked in the Polish press.During the Twenties, to be sure, Kalish Jewry had recovered much ofits lost ground. A joint Jewish list obtained 5 seats on the Municipality in1927, while other Jewish lists obtained another 6—11 seats in all out of 34.HISTORY55A new, largely Orthodox, Community Council was elected in 1931. Thefollowing year there was a crisis after the discovery of defalcations inShehita (Slaughtering) funds, and the communal opposition brought Shohatim(slaughterers) of their own to the city. This gravely affected communalincome.A move to close the Jewish Hospital and amalgamate it with the PolishHospital roused vigorous opposition and was defeated.Economically speaking Kalish Jewry succeeded in holding its own. In1921 there were 15,566 Jews, while 547 industrial enterprises were in Jewishhands. Of these 65 were weaving factories, 340 manufactured clothing, whilethe others engaged in brick-making, metal work, machinery, joinery, leather,paper, foodstuffs, chemicals, building materials, graphics and cleaning. Morethan half of these employed hired labour. Jewish workers numbered 775.Kalish had become a centre for Lace Manufacture and by 1937 there were24 factories with 500 machines. Workshops with hand-machines had vanished.New economic branches such as tricotage, brush-making, soap manufacture,iron wire, batteries and elctrie-bulb manufacture were added in the Twentiesand the Thirties. Twelve flour mills found an extensive market in Silesiaand the Posen District. Other manufactures included dolls, velvet, linoleumand by-products, carriages and buses, bakeries, sweets and confectionery.The number of members of the free professions also grew. Wholesaleand retail trade continued to be largely dependent on the size of the crops.Market-men, who took goods to the markets and fairs all over Poland,helped to dispose of the goods manufactured. However, they began to besubject to attack by the Polish Endeks in the early Thirties, under thegrowing influence of the Nazis.POLITICAL PARTIESA Hovevei Zion Society was established in 1884 with 20 members and itsnumbers rose to 150. As the Hovevei Zion Movement was illegal in Russiauntil 1890, the members were liable to arrest from time to time. A newepoch began in 1897 with the founding of a Zionist Society, which provedvery active. After the First World War all Zionist parties had branches oftheir own, and maintained training farms to prepare their younger membersfor Eretz Israel, There was a general Jewish Sports Society as well as abranch of the Maccabi, while the Revisionists had their own Nordia SportsClub.After 1918 a number of Religious Societies were organised, all centred onthe Agudat Israel.The Bund began activities in 1900 and was successful among lace-makers.It also organised tailors, carpenters, shoe-makers, pastry-makers, shop-assistants and apprentices, and tried to win over intellectual and high-schoolpupils. In 1905 it organised demonstrations and strikes. After the First WorldWar the party took an active part in Municipal and Communal politics,setting up Yiddish schools; but otherwise it was concerned exclusively withits own interests.56THE KALISH BOOKThe Polish Socialist Party (1895), the Bund (1897) and the Poalei Zion(1905), all tried to establish Trade Unions. After the War a joint unionincluding all Jewish and non-Jewish groups and sections was establishedand functioned until 1930. In addition there were about 500 Jewish workersin separate Unions for clothing workers, leather workers, shop-assistants,cooks, porters and barbers. Craft groups in which there were only a fewJews belonged to Polish unions*Kalish had a very wide-spread Hebrew educational system, from thetraditional Heder and Talmud Torah to kindergartens, elementary and second-ary schools. A Zionist weekly “Die Kalisher Woch” appeared in 1919. A non-party “Kalisher Leben” weekly appeared in 1927, was afterwards called“Dos Neie Leben” and appeared until 1938. The Agudat Israel published“Die Kalisher Woch” between 1929 and 1937, and a daily called “KalisherExpress’ was also published for a short time. In 1934 “Unzer Zeitung”, areligious by-weekly, was also published for a while.All this vital and intensive Jewish life was brought to an end by theNazi Occupation. After 1943 Kalish Jewry no longer existed. A History ofalmost seven hundred years had been brought to a cruel and savage end.THE CITY OF BLESSED MEMORYDr. S. ZalndIn the Middle Ages most cities were built according to a regular design. Thestreets were laid out like a chessboard, a number of squares were placed at afew crossings and the whole city was surrounded by a defensive wall. It wasnot possible to build like this in every area. The river Prosna and its littletributaries on whose banks Kalish was built made it possible to build only partof the city in the chessboard style. The Jewish Street, which began at the OldMarked Square, went straight for more than a kilometre and a half acrossthe Jewish Bridge to the Malkow Field. If you stood at the upper end of thestreet on a bright day you could see the other end as well.In this street and the many side-streets to right and left lived the cream ofthe Jewish Community as well as the rank and file. Coming back from theMaikow Field I would reach Nowa Street with two-storey or three-storey houseson either side, and vacant lots here and there. These were the dwelling-housesof families with many children, various factories surrounded by timber shedsbelonging to well-known merchants, stores for all kinds of lumber, the Shtieblech(Hassidic prayer-rooms) of various groups of Hassidim and the Hadarim (He-brew classes) of Hebrew teachers at various levels.The first street cutting across Nowa Street is Chopin Street, part runningdown to the river and the other to the New Market. At the corner, either bychance or purpose, is a large building separated from the others. It has factorywindows and a large chimney stack rises high above it. Here a factory hootersounds four times a day, and the whole neighbourhood set their clocks by it.This is one of the first and finest piano factories in Poland. Chopin and pianosgo well together. Beyond are Shtieblech again, more dwelling houses and stores.As the street approaches the market we come to the shops: Retail, very retailand most exceedingly retail. By the river are factories and dwelling houses.The Russian Cavalry ground is followed by the Polish one. At the end of thestreet is the velvet fabric factory, which is also one of the first and best inPoland.We are back at the corner of Nowa and Chopin Street and continue along asmall stretch of Nowa Street to the next comer, Ciasna (Narrow) Street. Thissection is brighter and gayer. The sky above seems loftier because the housesare low and there are no high trees or orchards. In the evening the street lampsare brighter here. When you were a child you were never so frightened in thisstretch. Here is the Bakery, the scent of whose fresh bread accompanied youin the morning on the way to Heder. Here is your shoemaker, here is a newperfumery shop. On the comer is an old low house with a huge rusty key onthe roof, telling everybody that in the cellar you will find a locksmith in aroom four metres by four. On the same comer is a shop that sells cheeses ofall kinds. Their smells spread far and wide...THE MEN OF THE CITY59Ciasna Street also runs in both directions. Towards the market there areever so many little shops, then once again a Heder and a Shtiebel. On holidaynights and particularly on Simhat Torah harmonious and fervent Hassidic melo-dies burst from here, sung by mingled young and old voices. You can hearthe echoing dances and hand-clapping even when the street is fast asleep.At No. 4 is the “Arbeiter Heim” of the Left-Wing Poalei Zion, up on the thirdfloor. It is reached by ancient wooden stairs that are hard to climb. In theentrance is a preserved fish shop, whose scents mingle with the others thatreach the top floors. Here Zerubabel with his black beard used to speak whenhe came to town to put heart into his Party. Here the various election strategemswere carefully plotted. Here as well fervent song resounded, though of a differentkind.Across the river you suddenly reach an orchard. Beyond the slaughterer’shome is a tannery, with a huge iron gateway and its own distinctive fragrance.The villa of the Doctor is on the corner facing the bridge. Across the street isa one-time factory which in due course became the “Stilowy” Cinema. Thenext house, No. 19, is very varied. Here you find a modem mechanical workshop,a private House of Prayer, then another mechanical workshop and a HassidicShtiebel in the courtyard, as well as the Shomer Hatzair Quarters. From thevarious storeys round the courtyard come music and melody which reach theirpeak on Friday and festival nights. We had to close the windows even in summerin order to escape the music. That did not always help either, and the eveningsusually finished with lively arguments between the interested parties on thestairs or in the courtyard. Here the dreams were woven, here the resolutionswere framed. And from here many started out on their own way in life.Now we are back again at the comer of Nowa and Ciasna Streets. Here isa “general store” for odds-and-ends, fenced with boards, trading in the minutestcoin of the realm. Next to it is a spacious lace factory. Nearby, in the heart ofthe Jewish street, is a tavern where things are very lively on Saturday nightand Sunday.Take another twenty paces. On the comer of Babina Street is the JewishPharmacy, which swiftly obtained many customers from all over town, includingChristians, when it was established after the liberation of Poland. The owneralso set up a medical laboratory and did well.Opposite is a large and spacious comer house with an extensive internal court-yard. Here we find a weaving factory and the City Bookbinder, the owner of alace factory, a well-known surgeon, the District Judge and the Hostel forSecondary Students. Here lived the Community’s Cantor and many others. Inthis house I was bom.Beyond Babina Street, the first broad street running across, is a spur of theProsna. It is shallow here because of the numerous little weirs and dams. Oneither side of the street are acacia trees. You can smell their blossoms faraway. We used to use them for learning our fate when we were in love. Sheloves me, she loves me not...And now comes the Jewish Bridge, which seems to be very high because thewater here runs shallow. It is built of seasoned oak. Don’t be afraid, it won’tcollapse. So far no heavy lorries cross it, only light carts or carriages harnessed60THE KALISH BOOKto one horse, two or sometimes three (if the Squire of Winiari or of Bezhaziniis passing). Or maybe the cart of a carrier or a farmer pass here. It is keptup and looked after. A Russian cavalry unit camps in the neighbourhood andpasses here together with a band on horseback when they make their way tothe centre of the city.The opposite bank is called Nadwodna Street. It is the Jewish butchers'quarter. The doors are all of red iron. These butchers are all kasher and oneday... but we shall come back to them. As for the bridge, there is not theslightest trace now left of all the generations who used to cross it.I see Jews in groups and bands leaning against the parapets; and not onlyat the Tashlikh ceremony on New Year's Day but all the year round. Somediscuss high policy while others argue which Rabbi to elect, and others againquarrel about party control in the Community. And some are just passers-by.On clear winter nights, and particularly at the close of the Sabbath, you wouldfind crowds from the various synagogues hallowing the new moon with theold formula: Peace be with you, peace be with you, with you be peace.Amid a large group of Jews of all kinds, young and old, densely beardedor shaven, pious or secular, well-dressed or in rags — in the middle of themall and towering head and shoulders above them you were bound to find Enzelyoung and Enzel old. A Jewish cap with a peak is set a trifle slanted on hishead, sometimes less slanted sometimes more, but never straight not evenon Sabbaths or festivals.Enzel always feels hot, he sweats even in winter. The barber attends tohis little beard once a week or once a fortnight, without using a razor of course;and sometimes he cuts it a little too short. Then Enzel goes round without hislittle beard for quite a time, joking about it of course. Enzel jokes in the streetlike an ever-flowing fountain. He serves as the Badhan or jester at marriages,and a fine chief jester he is, mingling his speech with wise words of Torahand fine phrases, with laughter and tears, accompanied by the Klezmerim, thelocal musicians who have learnt to suit their melody to his fine and accomplishedstyle. Enzel is an accepted and successful match-maker. But his successes donot get him anywhere. His children are hungry, but they have also learnt tosmile and even to laugh. His wife is the only one who has not learnt how tolaugh, except on the days when Enzel returns from a circumcision or a weddingin a wealthy home and brings all kinds of good things with him. He sells theWarsaw Yiddish dailies “Haint" and “Moment". He knows all that is writtenin them and mocks them and adds his own jokes. In the course of conversationhe starts on a deep and difficult Talmudic discussion, forgets all about makinga living and comes home in the evening carrying his papers with him. And thenhis wife... He also sells fringes and prayer shawls. If you meet Enzel late inthe evening by himself and he does not notice you, you see the deep sorrowon his face. I have also seen Enzel the jester weeping.Two houses face one another at the beginning of Zlota Street, the “Street ofGold". In former times the gold dealers and goldsmiths were all to be foundhere. Now it is a neglected and filthy turning. There is a shop at each step,one just like the other, all tiny in the wooden buildings. They sell every kindof trifle, Jewish ritual requirements and the tools and utensils of craftsmen,THE MEN OP THE CITY61things needed by small tailors, cobblers, linen seamstresses and shroud-sewersand makers of iron-ware. There are grocery shops above all. In most of thema piece of herring is sold for the smallest coin in circulation. Before your eyesthey will cut a piece from the entire little fish. Some people will come andbuy several heads for one farthing: Little cook-houses, and beer-houses. Well,then come two big houses facing one another on the river bank; the LustigHouse the first and the Shmerkovitz House the second.In the corner facing the bridge are wooden stairs of middling width, whichover the years have developed the habit of creaking at every step. Thereare iron railings on both sides. These steps lead to the General Store for literature,newspapers, writing utensils and everything of that kind. Here you obtain every-thing that has arrived in town, except the Yiddish dailies “Haint” and “Moment”and the Hebrew “Hazefira”. Here you can order any periodical, say “Hashahar”or “Hashahar Lanoar” (for Youth) at your convenience and pleasure. Whenyou enter the shop your eyes grew bright, even after sunset. All the heads hereare reddish, including those of the grandchildren; and they all have a Jewishgrace and charm. In 1913, during the Beilis Trial, my late father would waitimpatiently for the paper to arrive from this shop. At the entrance of a smallshop opposite stand an elderly couple. What do they sell? They have no window,but every cultured person in town knows that you can find anything here: The“Tze-ena Ure-ena” or Women's Yiddish Pentateuch, from the oldest editions tothe most recent. The whole of Jewish and Hebrew literature, scholarly, sacredand profane, rare editions and everyday publications, can be found here. Eversince I can remember the old couple are aged, bespectacled, with white hair.But their eyebrows are black and thick. Through the simple lenses and thesilver frames gaze bright and lively eyes that grow weary towards evening.It is a strange shop, two metres by six. The colour of the ceiling is hard tojudge, so old it is; but it is lofty and to my eyes towers almost to the skies.All the walls are set with cases crammed with books arranged in order or piledhiggledy-piggledy; some bright with gold lettering and others worn with age.The bookseller is not interested in modern technology. The shop is lightedwith an oil-lamp although the city has long had gas and more recently electricity.If ever he has to fetch a book from the top shelves he clambers up and downa ladder at tremendous speed, a lamp or candle in one hand and the bookrequired in the other. More than once I used to think of the Ladder of Jacobin the Bible.When the school year began hundreds of pupils came to buy and sell school-books. A table stood outside with heaps of books upon it, and the booksellerused to buy and sell at astonishing speed. Whether he earned or lost didn'tmatter. Schoolchildren got a book. You could see that this gave him pleasure.The children used to line up as far as the bridge; but this market only usedto last a few days.In the Square opposite is the large Synagogue which has been standing, itwould seem, ever since the Creation. It has been burnt down and rebuilt severaltimes, so history tells. The windows are longish and are of coloured glass.Lower down, with normal windows and mesh curtains, are the women's sections.High above the roof is a round tower whose colour changes according to the62THE KALISH BOOKcolour of the sky from blue to greenish to grey. Surrounding it is a roundbalcony with a parapet, but I never saw anybody on it, although the tower hasa small door. The old folk tell that ever so many years ago the communalShamash (beadle) used to mount the tower and summon the Congregation torise and serve the Creator, shouting “In Shul arein.” (Come to Synagogue!)I myself can remember a Shamash who engaged in this holy task, but in adifferent fashion. He used to walk along the Jewish Street, and with a specialwooden mallet dedicated to the purpose he would knock at the doors of thehouses, shouting “Come to the Synagogue!” That was why he was known asSimha Klapper or Banger. Nobody knew his real family name. Hhe also usedto knock on the table of the Bema in the Synagogue and shout “Sha sha sha”before the Rabbi's sermon and before prayers.The interior of the Great Synagogue was awe-inspiring even when it wasempty, with its spaciousness, its height and its magnificence. Here was aspiritual centre, a centre of joy, and of sorrow in days of stress and calamity.Memorials were held here for the Kishinev Pogrom and the Pogrom in Lemberg,with thousands of Jews within and thousands outside. And who will ever forgetthe prayers?The Synagogue had a custom of its own: Between the afternoon and eveningprayers on the Sabbath the ample congregation waited for the stars to appear.The sun sank. It grew darker and darker, and through the windows could beseen the swaying shadows of the trees as though they had already begun topray without waiting. Then suddenly the Assistant Cantor would begin singing,first in a whisper then with his voice growing louder and louder, and all theCongregation would respond. The echoes spread afar, and the whole JewishStreet knew that this was the accompanying of the Sabbath on her departure;until the prayers began.Before the first Penitential Prayers that began a month before the NewYear and commenced with the evening prayer at the close of the Sabbath aspecial prayer was said. This was the Psalm “To the Chief Musician withNeginot, a psalm and song.” The Cantor, Reb Noah Lider, had prepared aspecial melody for the choir, and the whole Congregation sang with them infour voices. This was a great experiemce. The melody has passed to manyCongregations all the world over, and is still widely sung.The Synagogue had a garden of old ornamental trees which surrounded thebuilding. But it was unprotected and neglected. So the Synagogue wardensdecided to preserve it. But where was the money to come from? The Brokmanand Mamrot families erected a fine iron fence, with two main gates and lessergateways hung on concrete pillars. It was all painted properly, and in thegateway was a memorial tablet for the benefactors. Now they are all one:Synagogue, fence, congregation and the Brokman and Mamrot families...In Zlota Street opposite the Synagogue was a Jewish tavern. Its owner wasa short solid Jew whose cheeks were always red. He had the short dense beardof a young man, and a pencil behind his white ear. The gentiles of the vicinitywho came to the Market on Tuesdays and Fridays used to prefer his Vodkaand the salt and pickled herrings of his wife as well as the stuffed fish. Theplace was always full to overflowing after Morning Prayers, when all thoseTHE MEN OP THE CITY63who had said the annual Kaddish (Memorial Prayer for kinsfolk) used to comeout of the Synagogue and treat the Congregation to a glass of something,in accordance with established practice. Since there was no lack of death an-niversaries, things were always lively and cheerful here.A panting dishevelled housewife suddenly comes dashing in. Guests havearrived unexpectidly. The wife of the inkeeper delivers her from her distress.A meal flavoured with plenty of onions is ready in a moment.Next to the synagogue is the Talmud Torah. The House of Study always haspeople praying there from before dawn until late at night. You will find quorumsfor prayer, groups studying a daily page of Talmud or Ein Yaakov (thelegendary and homiletic sections of the Talmud). Others are reciting Psalms.The voices resound with their singular melodies, fresh young voices. Many manyyears ago I came to the House of Study in the middle of the day in order torecite Psalms for my older brother who was about to undergo an operation.I recited the whole book aloud, from Psalm 1 to Psalm 150; and hundreds ofvoices responded. To this day I can hear those wonderful voices echoing in myears. Their faces I see as in a dream, for that is what it has all become. Onlylegends remain.From here to the Old Market Square there are shops on either side, tinyand middling. Here as well herring is sold by the slice next to a shop whichsells everything from drapery to ironware. And why is a crowd suddenly collect-ing at the street corner next to Nagurski House? Let us come over and see.The barber surgeon is standing there with a curious crowd all round him,listening to his stories about his real and imaginary sick patients, and his jokes.This fellow is a solid little Jew, fat and round as a barrel, with a big headthat is almost round as well, and a face that has been cropped of its beard.Nobody has ever seen him really clean-shaven, but his beard is like a fine brush.The hair never changes its length. His glasses hang on a silk thread hiddenbehind the collar of his smoking jacket. He used to put them on to inspectsomeone’s throat or startle somebody or, particularly, when he was going togive a portion to someone who had insulted him. Before speaking he wouldput on his spectacles, angrily look the other fellow in the face, take them offagain and only then commence. And then the party concerned would have donebetter to let the earth swallow him up, rather than hear all the pinpricks andstabs and stings and insults that the barber surgeon let him have before hewent his way. He was always prepared to examine people in the street free ofcharge. All that was necessary for the man was to open his mouth wide, pokeout his tongue and yell “ A a a a h ” with all his strength. He had a fine practiceand was a serious fellow, but went his way with joy and laughter.Here is the large Square and in the centre of it the large Town Hall, builtin Italian style on pillars, with the finest shops of the town behind them. Thisis a square three-storey building with a lofty tower on the roof, which alsohas several floors in it. At the top is the ever-correct town clock with its fourfaces, one for each of the cardinal points. The clock stopped once and once only.That was when the Germans shelled the town before occupying it in 1914. WhenI was a child we used to play hide-and-seek round these pillars, particularly inthe evenings after the shops were closed. But when the Square was rebuilt with64THE KALISH BOOKnew and modern-style houses and shops it was no longer worth much as amemory. All the romance departed from the Old Market Square (the StaryRynek) and its name was also changed.From the Square the streets run off in various directions. Two are mainthoroughfares. One, four kilometres long, runs to the railway station and isnamed Wroclawska. Facing it, rather shorter and running towards a hugeRussian Orthodox Church Square, is the Warsaw Street and beyond is theSukienice Browarna. In Warsaw Street before the Church Square there used tobe another little Square with tremendous oak trees. Underneath them weremany seats for the pleasure of those who lived there, namely higher officialsand such like, as well as passersby. In the middle of the Square was a monumentin the form of a little obelisk on which various names and dates inscribed:Friedrich Wilhelm; Maria Theresa; Czar Alexander; the three heroes or villainsin the drama of the Partition of Poland; then the Emperor's Conference of1814. Next to the monument is a big water-pump. Here is the deepest andtastiest water of the whole city. The municipal water pumpers used to deliverthis pure water to the outlying inhabitants at high prices, all depending on thedistance. Jews used to draw this water for baking matzot or “Matza Wasser”.In the course of time, however, a pump was fixed in the courtyard of everyself-respecting house, while an internal water supply was laid on in a fewbuildings. In spite of this there were long queues lining up at the “Pomenik”pump until quite recently.Beyond this point Warsaw Street grows narrower and quieter, almost withoutshops. Here is the Asnik Municipal Gymnasium (Secondary School), and beyondcomes the gigantic Square of the Russian Orthodox Church which was dismantledin 1921 after “the Miracle on the Vistula", when the invading Russian Com-munists were defeated and withdrew. On the other side of the Square was theEvangelical Church. All the District Offices are found in the House of theJesuit Order, and on the corner is the wellknown Municipal Church with thebig tower and giant clock which insisted on its existence every quarter of anhour. At midnight the twelve strokes could be heard in each comer of the townand the vicinity. A trumpeter used to appear every morning on the balcony ofthe Tower, ever since the time of its foundation, so ran the tale, and playedthe wellknown old song KIEDY RANNE WSTAJA ZORZE...And here is a bridge with a more handsome appearance: the Iron Bridge.The big house on the corner belongs to one of the local industrialists. Oppositein Niecala Street is the Doll Facotry and the handsome dwelling of its owner.Then again a wooden bridge crosses the Bernardinka next to the Church, and apath leads to Stawiszyn. Here is the Jewish Old Age Home, a fine building bythe standards of times gone by.Here lived the Hebrew teacher Zwik who had a “Reformed Heder”. It wasthe largest Heder in the City, and was supported by both the Community andprivate funds. During recent years the Heder had not been held in his home.He had gone up in the world. At one time the pupils studied in his dwelling,even on washing days. This teacher Zwik raised whole generations in town.All the outstanding folk, and they in particular, sent him their sons. My elderbrother, who was about twenty years older than me, was his pupil; and so: : : ^: .-V"-:- i■■ ;y;:;.■ it  _    ... .  - -   - . - - - — - ^  —    —j|■ .-." , '..:•. ....... - ■- -SsSi*iililiiiiiiaHi*isr4»v IN*/*}^5Sfc*3.■Cooperative Workshopsj||s®§tSS§!■* "iti■ :; .. .:|SBH|I*...1 . ■/;■SB;- ■■l'Wv. ■ ■-AA ■ ':., .-v :A* ■ ' J&v. gjgfefc.W' Hi 1%* *'**VAM:/.f«.,■: : :: • ■ ' ■ ; ••• , •. -■ ■9 4p•wd^lIIPlasliiliilillli.• .Vf *’*'** ,: A-lilifllAfeiAAvatSHIS^ Aadf#A ■••• 'MWWl-r'E^v-. -.v;.;.<- ., • '■ •• ;■ ■ ■ E A? 1IP&. • v „%■ VJS|R■ '•V.'’' .- m1%dI naa. • ^:«|P^ve: v: vv-e -• a;-':.: .s,v, r~r: ;.a«MI 4X^ - /js|Jewish Soldiers in the Polish ArmyCraftsmen and the Technical SchoolBlind GabrielSocieties and OrganizationsWide-Branching Families«sr• ■' •: -Great Synagogue ChoirA FamilyillI1I . •'■ - / > ■ . • ..-:. I-. ■ ■ ■ammmvr -mmpmm&II■■■■ ^ 7v/ -v • *\!im$*<-!i1m">:•■wS'I'-Sliastatsfisiisisiiii■-;, ; J ...>,•■:: : ■ ;-■:■■■;■, -v -.■" - -> ■n%■•vi:■ImWmIII11||-MSS-,v.S...|•S - ' SS-lv-S:/' rV:11,-'?. .;:•' ;S v.7.^S:S|;:: . I..' I"-r;l -V ' •■• •••. I •:■' .? •.•':-:' 'S./ ■■'' S.VSS.Sl:>l;’S. :•.■■•.■ ■■• ;■ . , ■ ■• •■.-;.■• ..■.'■ . .■ -.: - ■ .■ . \ ;• ■ - . ....i * H -■ i • .'H 111 H® a w-‘-*•■ -/VSI-SJews in and out of Processionj1The First Athletics Display03!«■ '.- - . . ' ' ■ ■ ■ ■ \ . ' . — ;Sportsmen and AthletesThe Passover Seder at the Jewish HospitalGoing to the SukkahDistributing Breadat the Kehilla OfficesIn the Fish MarketKALISH JEWRY®1 ay dayTHE MEN OF THE CITY65was I; and so was my sister’s little boy. He went to join his children in Americawhen he was about eighty years old.Teacher Zwik was an outstanding example of the enlightened Lithuanian in-tellectual. He had extensive familiarity with all the humanities, and was afervent advocate of Modern Hebrew. His Bible lessons more than fifty yearsago were of a very high standard. Even in his old age he scarcely needed toglance at the Bible text or commentaries, for he knew them all by heart.His lessons in the Ethics of the Fathers and Psalms were of a remarkablecharacter. He used to conduct them free of charge according to season in hisHeder every Sabbath after the afternoon prayers. On these occasions he gaveus some idea of the world and the fullness thereof, and told us about thelatest research and discoveries in the world of Nature. At his funeral in NewYork large numbers of Kalish townfolk attended, and many of his pupils carriedhis coffin.Leizer Moshe Cohen and his sons were the grocery wholesalers of the Cityand had a large spice shop with five opaque windows and excellent wares withinfrom every part of the world: You would find tea, sugar, coffee of the best,and dried fruits. I can remember the fragrance that was wafted from there intothe street. Business went on by itself. Leizer Moshe was entirely dedicated tocommunal affairs, gratis. He was a member of all the charitable and gooddeeds societies.Sometimes you would see Benjamin Hayyim Wolkowicz, a most worthy Jew,hurrying out of his home in Babina Street, his well-combed beard waving in thebreeze, his coat unbuttoned, his stick in hand and a worried look in his face.Sometimes he would emerge together with a roly-poly Jew with a big beardand gold-framed glasses, who was always smiling and friendly. Where was hegoing? They would be going to an important discussion with their comradeLeizer Moshe Cohen. In the shop they would sit down to a glass of tea, andafter a brief discussion of current affairs would get to the point.The conversation might last for hours, until they set out for the Afternonsynagogue Prayers together. Zlota Street has narrow pavements, so the threeof them walked in the middle of the road. In front of the Synagogue or theHouse of Study they would run into Tsalel Halter as though by appointment;and they rejoiced that God had brought them together, since Tsalel Halter wasa supreme giver of good counsel. A tall Jew with a friendly shrewd face andeyes, his beard straight and well-tended, he was the lawman of Jewish Kalish,lawyer, judge, defending counsel and prosecutor. He always knew in advance,and with absolute certainty, all the paragraphs of the law and the judgmentsthat would be handed down. Officially he was a petition writer and in secreta lawyer. Everybody honoured his ample knowledge. If judgment was givenagainst his client and not as prophesied by him, then Fate was to blame...Tsalel Halter would hear out the problem as stated by the friends, would expresshis views and then turn with slow and assured paces, his hands clasped behindhis back, to say the Afternoon Prayers in his Hassidic Shtiebel.After Evening Prayers Tsalel Halter could not go straight home. Deep inthought he went down Zlota Street, entered the Synagogue Garden by thegate at the corner next to the House of Study, crossed the Garden and came out66THE KALISH BOOKby the main gate, crossed the street, dropped into the bookshop to riffle the pagesof a book, went out, crossed the bridge, stood still a moment and returned.Beyond the Lustig House he vanished in the narrow street turning left, lookedin on the Jewish Hospital, crossed the street, glanced at the Garden of theJewish Girls' Orphanage and came out on Kanonicka Street. Now he turnedleft, passed the Jewish Community Building next to the Ritual Bath on the riverbank, crossed the bridge and gazed at the Fire Brigade Building as you enterthe large Square of the New Market.A man was lighting the gas lamps in the streets and round the Square witha long stick. Lights came on in the houses. The Fire Brigade Band was meetingfor a rehearsal. A gentle tune could be heard. Tsalel Halter leaned againstthe Bridge parapet, glanced for a moment at the shallow water of the Prosnaand retraced his steps across the Bridge to Kanonicka Street where he lived ina dwelling that occupied a whole floor. A light goes on in his study facing theChurch of Holy Mikolai, from which can be heard the tinkle of the little bellsthat summon to Vespers.In Rzeznicza Street at the corner of Sukienice Street stands the house of oneof the veteran heads of the community, an industrialist who is one of the firstWardens of the Synagogue. Few people have seen him laughing. He is a seriousman of affairs, always active, with hard lines to his face which shows un-flinching resolution. His eyes are dark-grey and deepset, with dense eye-browsabove them. He has a thick moustache and a little pointed beard. He walkswith a valuable stick that has been artistically carved. On it he leans wher-ever he goes. He buys his hats when he goes abroad to the Baths every summer.Down below in his house is the barbershop of the Barber-surgeon who is anexpert in setting leeches. The barber stands in the doorway enjoying a pleasantchat with passers-by. The shop is attended to by the young assistants whoknow nothing of “medicine". Only the better-class clients enjoy the personalattentions of the master himself...★Anybody who arrived in Kalish by train in the days before the buses orthe diligence used to come to town by carriage. A row of carriages was linedup in the Station Square, which lay several kilometres from the heart of thecity. Not far from the Station on the way to Skalmierzyce, the frontier postbetween Russia and Germany before 1914, stands the big building of the newflour mill.Among the first houses to be seen at the entrance to the city were the largebuildings of the Boraks Brothers in Wroclawska (Gornoszlonska) Street. TheBoraks family came from Stawiszyn towards the end of the First World Warand settled in Kalish. They were horse dealers on an international scale. Thehome of Leon Boraks swiftly became an open house, particularly for the youngfriends of his sons and daughters. He often placed his summer home at thedisposal of the youth movements in summer for holidays and leisure. Adek, theyoungest of the Boraks family, was one of the heads of the Halutz undergroundin Poland, and fell fighting in the Bialystok Ghetto.The carriage passes the spot where the city gate once used to stand accordingto tradition. To the right is the Saint Trojca Hospital. To the left is the NazareneTHE MEN OP THE CITY67Church and the Nazarene Girls School. Further on, near the handsome buildingof the Trade Bank just opposite another bridge over the Prosna, we reachthe Josephine Allee, the Venus Cinema, the Europa Hotel on the right. On theleft is the Electric Power Station operated by the river current with the aidof a dam. Beyond is an up-to-date Bathhouse with showers for the public —modern times.There is a spacious building in the middle of a little Square halfway alongthe Josephine Allee, facing the bridge beyond the dam. This building marksthe end of Sukienice Street. It is the old District Court, Its large halls servethe lawmen, and as offices for the public notaries. Under the sloping little roofis painted a pair of scales with a gilded text in Latin, “Suum Cuiquae”. Nearbyis a handsome residential building with a spacious courtyard. Within and oneither side is a dwelling house, with the “Oasis” Cinema, the first in Kalish,at the far end. For the opening of the Cinema the owner had a documentaryfilm brought, recording Eretz Israel in 1912-14. All the fine folk of the City,the orthodox leaders, the heads of the synagogue, the wardens and the otherswere invited to this opening.From the Oasis Cinema begins the broad Avenue. In the middle is the walkwith trees on either side, chiefly fragrant acacia. In the flower-beds are theflowers of the season. Beyond the trees on either side are one-way streets, withpavements in front of the houses. The Allee leads to a park. The houses to theleft of the Avenue lie in the “Polish Venice”. The description is justified. TheProsna flows behind the houses and almost every home has its own rowing-boat.People here often held garden parties in the evenings. The garden would belit up, with the “gondolas” floating on the river. Not that there was muchroom for boating; only as far as the next dam, about a hundred metres in all.But they could boat and fish.On the right was the new Polish Bank, followed by the Municipal Theatre,which was always under construction and so represented all kinds of queerarchitectural styles. From the Theatre Balcony towards the Park there was amagnificent view. Bands played here on Saturdays and Sundays. In winter theyplayed for the skaters on the ice, in summer for the boats floating on the river.And then there was the Boat Race of the Boat Club.Before entering the Park let us glance for a moment into the Wiejska Street(whose name was afterwards changed to Pulaski Street) lying behind the right-hand side of the Josephine Allee. It was here, at the end of this street, thatthe lace factories were to be found.I remember that after the San Remo Conference in 1920, when Great Britainaccepted the Mandate for Palestine, it was decided to celebrate the occasionwith a big public affair in the fields on the way to Meikow Village. A greatplatform was constructed, composed partly of flat waggons for goods carriage.All the work was done on a voluntary basis. Planks were supplied by well-knowntimber merchants whose yards ran the length of Third of May Street. A hugecrowd of almost ten thousand people filled the whole Square. The programmewas rich and colorful. A large Choir was organised and was accompanied bythe Orchestra. Townsfolk and visitors from elsewhere delivered speeches, andfinally the public made their contributions for the Redemption of the Land.68THE KALISH BOOKIt was an unforgettable scene. Women brought silver candelabra, they took therings off their fingers, men contributed gold and silver coins and watches.The enthusiasm was boundless.In Kalish there was a very happy scene one year on the 33rd Day of theOmer, when members of Hashomer Hatzair in their hundreds marched throughthe streets with their banners, accompanied by the Band of the Jewish SportsAssociation as they made their way back from a hike.There were also occasions of mass grief and sorrow. One of these was roundabout Purim 1921. Anti-Semitism was running riot in Poland, under the leader-ship of General Haller. Jews were flung from railway carriages of trains inmotion. In the streets soldiers cut off their beards. Jews became toys in thehands of rioters and murderers, and were virtually put beyond the law. Theywere tortured and tormented, and nobody said a word. To be sure, the Jewishcarters and butchers of Warsaw displayed their bravery and showed the rioterswhat they could do, but the reports from all parts of Poland were very grave.Kalish was quiet and there were no signs of anything wrong. But one dayI went to school and the streets seemed different somehow. The shops wereopen and Jews were coming back from the morning prayers. But Christianyoungsters were standing on the street corners, which was not customary, withsticks in their hands.During the third lesson the Headmaster instructed the Jewish pupils to gohome. In the interval we gathered together by order of our older companionsfrom the upper classes, and each one set out on his way. The streets wereempty and all the shutters were down. There was a pogrom raging in thecentre of the city, and it lasted for twenty-four hours.The butchers opposed the rioters with organised force. A crowd of riotersgathered round the Jewish butcher shops in Nadwodna Street. When the Jewsoffered resistance the rioters attacked one of the butchers, pulled an iron doorout of its frame and crushed him with it until they killed him.After the dreadful pogrom in Lemberg a Memorial Meeting for the victimswas held in the Great Synagogue. Reb Noah was the Master of Ceremonies.The service was conducted within the building which, however, was not largeenough to contain the thousands of people who came to mourn. There wasabsolute silence inside and outside. Reb Noah went up to the Holy Ark andbegan to weep, first quietly, and afterwards roaring “Alas, what has befallenus!” following the Lamentations of Jeremiah. The silence inside and outsidethe building was so complete that the prayers could be heard at a distance.This was a day of great grief for the Jews of Kalish.★The landscape made a unique contribution to the romantic spirit of theCity, which was beautified by the river and its tributaries. The many bridges,the greenery, the trees, and last of all the extensive old Park with all itsdelightful nooks and comers did their share. Much came from Nature, but thehands of men had no small share in it. Kalish folk walked about in the Parkfrom babyhood in prams under the shadow of the trees; then in childhood,youth, maturity and old age. For the youngsters this was the place of theirTHE MEN OF THE CITY69dreams. For adults it was a spot to rest and forget the troubles of the day.Everybody who comes from Kalish remembers this part of his childhood homewith love.There were many entries to the Park. The main way led from the JosephineAllee, with the Municipal Theatre to the right, the Avenue to the left and theBridge .. a Bridge again in front of you. But no Bridge resembled any of theothers. Then came the Boat Societies.You will find yourself standing at a meeting-place of three road-ways,all leading into the park. Turn right with the Prosna. Walk on for a hundredmetres and again you find a bridge and a big dam. Continue. The river is onyour right and a green valley on your left, but you cannot see it, for everythingis a dense forest here. Only between the branches can you see paths, trails,benches, and maybe statues in the distance.The river grows wider. Now you reach the ancient oak where the roadwayruns down into the little valley, in the centre of which is a Lake. In the middleof the Lake is an island with a statue upon it. The spot is called “Kogutek”.The ancient oak is thick and lofty. They reckon that it is two hundred yearsold. It takes three men with outstretched arms to encircle the trunk. We know,for we have tried it.From the street of the Square — from the statue in the Island — there isa circus with a diameter of a hundred metres. All round are ornamental plantswith benches beside them. During the mornings of summer weekdays, whenthe Park was not crowded, you could really enjoy sitting here, taking pleasurein the quiet, the singing of the birds and the beauty of Nature all around you.Here Adam Asnik wrote his poems and musicians composed melodies.In the early hours of the beautiful spring morning you can see special kindsof persons walking here, sometimes alone, sometimes in groups. Those wearinggreen caps were called “frogs”, those in red caps were known as “beetroots”.These were the pupils of the Government Gymnasiums. Somewhat later othercaps were also to appear: The pupils of the Jewish Gymnasium.The Jewish Gymnasium was actually set up by a public Committee of parentswho for national or religious reasons preferred an institution of this kind. Theteaching staff was an effective combination, and the Gymnasium swiftly achievedan excellent level. This was the first Jewish Gymnasium to last. Several earlierattempts had been made to establish a school of the kind in Kalish, but withoutsuccess.For some time there had been a Secondary School for Girls. In Spring 1914,while the Russians were still there, a Jewish pre-Gymnasium was set up as areaction against the numerus clausus exercised in Russian Secondary Schools.A vast number of young Jews registered to study there, but the onset of theFirst World War put an end to their good hopes.You will see pupils walking about in the Park. Now and again you may comeacross a group headed by a teacher, all talking pure Hebrew.A little further along and to the right is the Orangery, a beautiful, well-tended spot, a greenhouse with lofty windows where plants from all the world70THE KALISH BOOKover are grown. Here I saw my first Orange Tree, together with other specimensof exotic sub-tropical flora. The whole area is full of beautiful flowers whosefragrance spreads far and wide. Opposite the Orangery is a typical Swiss Chaletbult entirely of wood, with stairs, balconies and characteristic ornaments. Thisis where the gardeners live and the Central Nursery is tended. Between thetwo buildings in the centre of the Square amid the thousands of flowers is asun-dial erected in the Nineteenth Century, as well as beautiful statues. Thereis no shadow here, so people come to stroll only towards evening.The Park is large and has many lovely nooks. Here is a little artificial brookwith a tiny flour mill on the bank. The water hurries by. There are benches onthe hill. A romantic spot this, and yonder are 4‘the Mills”. Here is the spaciousProsna. On the hill is a space with a parapet: It offers a panorama facingthe boat jetty. And here is the Prosna, racing towards the “Waterfall" whichcreates the Bernardinka Stream. Far far beyond is the “Red” Bridge (yetanother!).There is no end to all these lovely spots. But here is the “Ruin”; maybe theremains of an ancient Palace or maybe an artificial structure. It is all of stone,with numerous winding old stone stairs, one open space adorned with domes-ticated wild flowers. Steps lead to a second level. Here as well is a space witha concrete surface, surrounded by an artistic stone parapet and a magnificentview. The “Ruin” has a tunnel, and from it a path leads to a modem “hydro-pathic” building: an Institute for Medical Treatment by means of artificialmineral waters. Here the first medical examinations for Gymnasia pupils wereconducted.The “new” Park lies beyond the waterfall and the Sports Stadium. Groupsof the various Youth Movements, particularly Shomer Hatzair, engage in theirmeetings at the Ruin, by the waterfall or in the wood. You will hear songsbursting out. The words are Hebrew; still corrupt, but Hebrew just the same.The songs resound afar. Then come the notes of the Okarina beautifully playedby one of our friends, while another begins to lead them all in singing.★There are many entrances to the Park. One of the nicest is from NiecalaStreet. On the left of the Red Bridge a roadway constructed of great roughstone blocks leads to the hill, on top of which is a building resembling a fortressof the Middle Ages. It has four towers at its four comers and the windowsare barred. This is the District Prison on the Turek Road. The Red Bridgeused to be a regular starting point for many hikes and rambles outside the city.But let us forget the Bridge. Here is an entry to the Park through an Avenuewith a hill above it. In the Avenue there is a roadway for the carriages ofthose who come to rest and recuperate in the Park air. Here you will alsosee the carriage of the Russian Governor, driving with his family. This Avenueis more than half a kilometre long, with giant chestnut trees on either side.The branches meet overhead and make a natural roof. On sunny days the bluesky gleams through the gloom, while in the evening the stars appear. Thereis cool shade on hot days and darkness in the evenings.THE MEN OF THE CITY71My late father used to spend much time here, and gained inspiration formany of his musical compositions and melodies. It was here that the melodyfor the once popular song “Seu Ziona Ness va-degel” (Bear flag and banner toZion) was composed more than seventy years ago. More than one of his com-positions was based on the Song of Nature in the Kalish Park. Almost everyday, for many years, he used to meet with Rabbi Ezekiel Libshitz, the Rabbiof the City, at this spot.When the two friends reached the Red Bridge, they were often joined bya third man: A short tubby little fellow with a big head, fine blue eyes, acarefully tended beard. He did not shave not because he was orthodox butbecause tradition is a fine thing. Day by day he used to walk on foot to thecity and back in order to attend to his affairs in the various institutions andbanks. It was his habit to meet various worthies and citizens for friendlyconversation or to discuss Zionist affairs. This was Reb Moshe Krakowski, whoused to cross the Red Bridge at least twice a day. Whenever he met the Rabbitogether with my father in the Park he would pause, and then the conversationwould indeed become lively. After such a conversation he would “hurry” home.Once again he would cross the Red Bridge slowly, his back slightly bent, hishands clasped behind him. He would mount the hill on which stands the“Mediaeval Fortress” which was the District Prison. Reaching the hill, hewould turn to the right and vanish.That is the end of our Ramble.A dream Ramble through something that once existed and has vanished.Deep in the soul remain the memories of a distant past which is near the heart.Those we met on the road rest in Paradise. They have passed away. The citystands with all its beauty and charm, but the Jews are no longer there. Theirbirthplace has betrayed them. It has forgotten them.But we remember. Let us hold them dear in our memory.STEFAN FRENKELJEWS IN THE COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY OF KALISHTo deal with the development of economic life in Kalish it is necessary tosurvey the beginnings of the city's industry at the time of the Russian Occupa-tion. At the beginning of the Nineteenth Century the Minister Lubelsky didhis best to improve the economic condition of Poland, and it was he whosupported the establishment of industrial enterprises. To this end specialprivileges were given to industrialists and craftsmen from other countries whowished to settle in Poland. These included exemption from taxes for a numberof years and exemption of the sons of the settlers from military service.The success of these measures was helped by the industrial crisis that ensuedin Prussia following the Napoleonic Wars, which resulted from the CustomsWar and industrial competition of Great Britain. Several tens of thousandsof new settlers, chiefly Germans, came to Poland. There were also Czechswho settled in the vicinity of Lodz. At first these newcomers were permittedto choose the domiciles they desired, and for the greater part they preferredto settle down on Government land. Similar industrial colonies were developedon private estates in Tomaszow, Ozorkow and Konstantinow.At the same time industrial workers were recruited in Germany, France,Belgium and England. These included the wellknown technicians PhilippeGerard as well as Fragette.From 1821 onwards, the Customs policy of the country protected the localindustry against Prussian competition, while the Customs Agreement withRussia opened satisfactory opportunities for exports to Russia and China.The steam engine also played its part in developments. By the Twenties ofthe Nineteenth Century its influence could be felt not only in heavy industrybut also in flour mills and textile factories.After the November Revolt, i.e. after 1832, Russia abolished the CustomsAgreement, and the decline in exports led to a decline in manufacture. Manyweavers moved over to Russian territory. Industrialists moved largely to Bialy-stok where they continued to manufacture. This state of affairs continued forclose on twenty years because it suited Russian interests. In 1860 the Russiansdid away with the Tariff wall in order to facilitate the unification of Polandand Russia. Favourable conditions for the establishment and growth of industrywere thus restored.These conditions account for the commencement of industry in Kalish; butthiry years had to pass before the right entrepreneurs were found. Kalish wasnot the proper place for heavy industry because it was too far from thenecessary raw materials. Beside this there was a high rate of profit in lightindustry. Less investment was required and the turnover was more rapid.Another important consideration was the presence of skilled man-power.THE MEN OF THE CITY73There was a shortage of the necessary experts in the town. Only two settlersof this type reached the city. These were Repphahn, who established theKalish weaving industry, and Mueller, who set up a similar industry in theneighbouring Turek. These two undertakings belonged to the type that pre-ceded the Industrial Revolution. Repphahn’s factory was rapidly liquidated,whereas Mueller’s enterprise continued to function for many years in Turek.The embroidery and lace-making industries which were characteristic ofKalish before the War were established in the Eighteen Eighties. Theirdevelopment was conditioned by two factors: The plentiful supply of waterthat was suitable for bleaching the fabrics and the close vicinity of theRussian-German frontier, which facilitated contact with the west and thepurchase of the raw material for embroidery (i.e., cambric) from England.Threads were purchased in England and Switzerland, while washing andfinishing materials came from Germany.It was then the fashion to use embroiidery on sheets and women’s under-wear. This fashion was widespread in Switzerland and Saxony. In 1886 thefirst factory for embroidery was founded in Kalish by Felix (Fishel) Frankel,a local Jew who had made money in France. He purchased the machinery inSaxony, and brought embroiderers from there as well. These used hand-machines operating on the principle of the pantograph. The operator conductedan instrument over the design and the machine carried out the movementthat the instrument indicated.All this was done without the use of mechanical power, but the embroiderydiffered in no way from hand-work though the labour invested was far less;for 4.5 metres of material could be embroidered simultaneously. The em-broiderer was assisted by several men who put the threads in place andfixed the needles in the frame. After the embroidery was finished the materialwas sent for bleaching, and was washed and bleached in primitive vessels.Aiter drying, the various embroideries were cut from the roll, ironed, packedand prepared for dispatch. All operations, naturally, were performed by hand.At that time Meizner opened a similar factory in Kalish, and Danziger didthe same a few years later. Before long this industry was invaded by themachine. The washing was the first section to be mechanised. A steam boilerwas built at the Frankel factory to operate the primitive laundering machines.Somewhat later a direct-current generator was installed and operated by thesame steam engine, while the factory was illuminated by electricity insteadof kerosene. The dwelling-house was also illuminated, as were the courtyardand the street.At the beginning of the Nineties there was electric light in the JosephineAllee where the factory was situated, and it caused a sensation. Mechanisationwent no further in the Frankel factory, where embroidering continued by hand.After Felix Frankel died in 1909 his son Raphael wished to bring in newmachines but did not succeed in doing so before 1914.Frankel and Meizner were large-scale industrialists who employed hundredsof workers. Their factories were professional schools. The men learnt theirwork from German experts who were first brought for the purpose. But thenew workers were local Poles and Jews,74THE KALISH BOOKThe wages paid were relatively good. In the course of time the moreambitious among them wished to become manufacturers themselves. Thelarger industrialists helped them. In particular Raphael Frenkel helped manyof his workers to open workshops of their own, which grew and expandedas the years went by. His assistance took the form of selling them buildingplots on reasonable terms, granting credits and providing securities for thepurchase of machinery.The machinery brought at the beginning of the century was no longerhand-operated but mechanised, and wove a roll of 9 metres. Production costsfell. In addition a cheaper kind of stuff was used, and the number of stitcheswas decreased. The workers were employed on piece work. As a result itproved possible not only to lower the price but also to expand the market.Naturally hand-embroidery remained more expensive and was still in demand.In addition there were now automatic machines in operation which produceda width of 13.5 metres. Meizner among others brought these automats. Bothquality and prices declined. The Russian market absorbed the new type ofgoods very well. By the time the First World War broke out Kalish stood forthe embroidery industry. However, the outbreak of the war interrupted itsgrowth completely. Still it was not the burning of the city that stopped this,for it so happened that the embroidery factories were left untouched. Thereal reason was the loss of the Russian market; not only because the frontierwas closed but also because of the change in the character of Russian con-sumption after the October Revolution and the course of development takenby the Russian economy. None but vital commodities were supplied to thepopulation there; and those did not include either embroidery or lacework.The Polish market was unable to absorb the entire production of Kalish, andKALISH WITHOUT JEWS (Antisemitic poster)THE MEN OF THE CITY75meanwhile the embroidery and lace fashions changed. The manufacturersbegan to adapt themselves to the market and produced new articles such asValenciennes. Many machines were sold for scrap. Towelling was made inthe large Flakovitch factory, curtaining, etc., were introduced. Little by littlethe embroidery industry began to flourish again.In 1928, i.e., at the period before the major economic crisis in Poland,there were close on fifty large or small factories for embroidery and lacemaking in Kalish. Apart from this major industry Jews were also engaged inother fields. Thus a stocking factory belonging to Marcus Holz was establishedin the 19th Century and developed well. Jews were also active in the foodindustry. The agricultural surroundings maintained the flour mills. In 1928there were more than 10 power-driven mills, most of which were in Jewishhands.Naturally the developing industry required commercial and transport ser-vices. There were many business men, including Jews, who supplied theembroiderers with raw materials, not to mention a considerable team ofagents and travelling salesmen.Many Jews were also active in the field of credit. Before the War the StateBank, the Commercial Bank and the Riga Trade Bank were all operative inthe city. The two Jewish banks which engaged in all commercial operationswere those of Landau and Mamrot. However, these could not withstand thecompetition of the large institutions and were liquidated before 1914. On theother hand Polish commercial circles established a Bank called “The KalishMutual Credit Society”, which in due course became the “Kalish District Bank”and existed for many years.The Jewish merchants felt the absence of a Credit Institution of their own,and early in the Twentieth Century they set up a Bank which they called“The Second Mutual Credit Society of Kalish”. This Bank achieved a greatdeal for Kalish merchants but did not renew its activities after the FirstWorld War, and was liquidated.During the Twenties two Jewish Cooperative Banks were set up under theJewish Audit Society for the whole of Poland. These were the CooperativeBank set up by the Jewish craftsmen, and the Merchants Bank set up by theJewish Merchant Society. Both institutions supplied considerable credits toJewish businessmen. One should not ignore the activities of the Societies men-tioed above, nor that of the Society of Embroiderers and Lace Manufacturers,all of which looked after the interests of their members. Special mentionshould be made of Tsalel Halter, the Adviser of all the Jewish Merchants andIndustrialists in matters relating to the law.The economic activity of Kalish Jewry developed well, but the economiccrisis which began in 1929 and continued for several years checked thisdevelopment. A general non-payment of debts set in, followed by bankruptcies,receiverships of factories, etc. The Banks also suspended their activities andcaused losses to the Jewish depositors. Shortly before the Second World WarJewih industry began to flourish again, but only for a little while. When theGermans came they took most of the Jewish machines to Germany. TheJewish industrialists and the workers alike lost their lives in the Holocaust.76THE KALISH BOOKK. C.THE LACE INDUSTRYThe products of the Lace-making Industry of Kalish achieved a world-widereputation. They gained a wide clientele, particularly in the former RussianEmpire which included Poland, Great Russia, White Russia, Ukrainia, Georgia,Siberia, Central Asia, the Far East and Vladivostok. Lace reached the largeand small towns, and these markets were relatively soon opened up.A number of other cities in Russia and Poland, such as Moscow, Warsaw,Lodz and Wileika also tried to establish their own lace industries but werenot succesful. Kalish remained the only one which achieved this.The Lace Industry actually came into existence in the following fashion:Kalish was near the one-time Russian and Prussian frontier. After threemonths of residence in the city any inhabitant of Kalish could receive a permitto cross the frontier to Skalmierzyce, Ostrow, Wielkopolski and Pornan, andmight visit Germany as well. There were also family ties between the in-habitants of Kalish and German residents. People visiting Germany wouldreturn, bringing all kinds of goods. This led to the development of a flourishingsmuggling trade.Lace goods were also smuggled into Poland from Germany. The leadingdealer in lace-wear was Etta Winter. She was apprehensive about putting herlace goods on the market, for she was afraid that the Customs officialswould pay special attention to this and fine her, so she found a method ofdeceiving them. She brought two hand-machines for lace embroidery fromGermany; and after that the goods smuggled from Germany were put onthe market as her own manufacture. Other dealers learnt from her and alsobrought machines, but for the purpose of manufacture proper. Together withthe machines, lace-makers were brought and taught the Jewish embroiderershow to make use of these machines.In those times there were two kinds of machine in use, double and triple.The double manufactured quality goods, while the triple ones produced simplerwares. The machines were built with cast-iron frames, and were four metreslong and three metres broad. They were divided by two “waggons” which metand received the little needles in which the silk or cotton threads had beenplaced. In the front part of the machine was the model piece. The embroidererfollowed the design with the aid of a pantograph and transferred it to themachine.In the machine there were also special drills for making holes wherenecessary; and the needles would embroider the edges of the hole. Eachmachine required three or four attendants: The embroiderer himself, hisassistant, and two needle-threaders. The machines were very expensive forthose times, costing 1900 roubles. Special mechanics looked after the machines,and a seamstress was also required to make repairs in pieces spoilt by themachine.The following raw materials and auxiliaries were necessary for manufacture:Silk or cotton thread, material, needles, wax for waxing the threads so thatthey should not fray, and large frames. Quite a large room was necessaryfor setting up a machine. All this required considerable investment, but theTHE MEN OF THE CITY77merchants felt that this was a good business and enthusiastically engaged inbuilding suitable premises, buying machines and producing the raw materialsfor lace manufacture. Although the manufacture of the lace was a complexand intricate operation, the finished products proved to be cheaper than thegoods that were smuggled from Germany.The city grew rapidly. Within a short time dozens of three-storey buildingshad been built in all the streets, containing hundreds of workshops. TheChopin, Ciasna, Nowa, Zlota, Wodna, Majkowska and Babina streets, as wellas others, were transformed into an industrial district. The Frankel familybuilt large factories in the Avenues.The inhabitants of the neighbouring towns and villages began to move toKalish. They all made their way into the lace industry. Within a little timethe goods had so improved that they drove the German product right off theRussian market. As the industry developed some of the embroiderers beganto work at home. In the course of time they also became major industrialists.All this led to the transition of hitherto unproductive elements to the lifeof workers. In addition there appeared a new class of intellectual worker:Clerks, bookkeepers, designers and travelling salesmen who went from end toend of Russia, booking orders. The industrialists established ties with thousandsof merchants, and for thirty years there was no crisis. On the contrary, theindustry expanded, developed and absorbed young and old. When Germanybegan to manufacture embroidery machines that were mechanically operatedand the lace-making industry of Kalish seemed to face severe competition, thelocal manufacturers promptly brought the new machines to their factories.This industrial revolution came about in the years 1909-1910, and thewhole industry swiftly moved over to mechanical operation. The old hand-machines had done their share and were thrown away, being replaced by thelong new machines. The distribution of work did not change. The smallmachines manufactured the most delicate materials and silk products forblouses and costumes, while the eight-metre long machines manufacturedcotton embroidery for the mass trade.The number of workers employed did not decrease. The machines wereoperated by motors brought from abroad. However, the manufacturers hadto introduce a labour code and labour discipline in their factories. The workershad to become accustomed to this. The skilled hand-workers swiftly adaptedthemselves to the new machines. They even paid large sums of money tobe given rapid courses in the methods of operating them.Operating the power machines did not cause any unemployment butdemanded more workers. Wages were attractive. A first-class embroidererearned 25 roubles or more a week. A threader earned 6—10 roubles a weekor more. The working day lasted for ten hours. The new factories werespecially built for the power machines and their operation. Some of thesewere actually driven by electricity.In 1913—1914, on the eve of the First World War, the technical innovationof the Automat was introduced and reduced the number of workers servingthe machine. It replaced the embroiderer and only threaders remained. One78THE KALISH BOOKmechanic could serve dozens of machines at the same time. But the benefitsof this new technological advance were not felt, for when the industry wasat the peak of its development the First World War commenced in August,1914. The Germans took the city, destroyed it, burnt houses and smashed upmany factories. The Russian market, the main customer, was cut off. Andthe German Occupation itself brought about entirely new conditions.The industry adapted itself and worked only to orders. Many workers becameunemployed and engaged in other occupations and trade. Some of the manu-facturers liquidated the factories and turned their buildings into dwellingquarters, since Kalish had been largely destroyed and there was a shortage ofapartments.In independent Poland the Lace Industry continued to produce for the localmarket only. The Russian market had vanished. The prewar period wasforgotten. The hand machines had vanished entirely, for they had been soldas junk. The small machines were also out of use, leaving only the longmachines and part of the Automats. Little by little the Lace Industry wasreplaced by the Velvet Industry, which was initiated by the manufacturerSolomonowicz, while the curtain industry was established by Flakovitch.Jews had worked for more than sixty years wisely and energetically andhad spread the name of Kalish abroad throughout the world. Kalish lace wasknown in U.S.A., England, France and Germany. The city grew on lace,together with the Jewish and Christian population. Here are some figures:When the Lace Industry was established there were less than 5,000 Jews inKalish. In 1914 there were 15,000, and in 1939 more than 26,000. TheChristian population grew in the same proportion. But in 1939 both the Jewsand their industry were brought to a sudden end./. KLECHEV8K1THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENTThe Trade Union Movement in Kalish came into being during the GermanOccupation of the First World War. Later on, under Independent Polandbetween 1918 and 1939, this Movement set its stamp on the life of the localworkers.To be sure, the beginnings of the Movement go back to the turn of theCentury. The rapid growth of the Lace Industry which began at the end ofthe 19th Century attracted thousands of Jewish and Christian workers to thecity and brought them together under the same roof. Under Czarist rule workingconditions were very miserable indeed. The working day lasted 14—16 hours.The workers had no insurance whatever. The Authorities did not permitunions to be established. Any attempt to organise was cruelly suppressedby them.In 1895 the P.P.S. was established followed by the Bund in 1897, the P.S.D.in 1899 and the Poalei Zion in 1905. All these were political parties, butTHE MEN GP THE CITY79they gave some shape to the union life of the workers. Conditions began tobe established for union activity, naturally suited to the conditions of thosedays.Between 1901 and 1903 these parties established circles of workers whoaimed at changing the harsh working conditions. Worker exchanges werefounded to settle disputes between the workers and the employers, thoughthis was not in any way an easy task. But in due course a large-scale move-ment came about, and attracted large sections of the workers in the lace-making and other industries.Attempts were made to obtain the introduction of a ten-hour working day.When the Authorities learnt of this they conducted a series of arrests andthese first attempts were nipped in the bud. The industrialists who had theircontacts with the Authorities helped the Government in these measures.In 1904—1905, during the Russian-Japanese War, Russian political life cameto the surface and the first signs of approaching Revolution were felt. Theworkers of Kalish also began to awaken. The spontaneous demonstrations ofPolish and Jewish workers demanding political rights were also exploited fortrade union organisations, and were accompanied by steps to introduce a ten-hour working day and raise wages. The manufacturers fought the workerswith the aid of the Authorities. This in turn led to conflict, but after a bitterstruggle the employers submitted to the pressure of the workers. A ten-hourworking day was introduced and wages were raised considerably.These changes were very daring for that period. A hand embroidererearned between six and eight roubles a week in a working day of 14—16hours, while a helper and threader earned 3—5 roubles a week. After theRevolution the embroiderers earned 8—10 roubles weekly for a ten-hourworking day, while the helpers and threaders received 3—6 roubles a weekor even more. The tremendous improvements were also made possible thanksto the feverish expansion of the Lace-making Industry at this period. Newfactories were being built almost every day. Scores of new machines arrivedweekly. The Industry required an increasing number of embroiderers, threaders,finishers, designers, clerks and travelling salesmen. The Kalish product spreadfar and wide through the Russian Empire, reaching thousands of towns andvillages over a stretch of 12,000 kilometres and more, and reaching China,Shanghai and other cities.Kalish was lucky, for the Lace-making Industry took firm root therealone. Attempts were made to establish lace-making factories in otherRussian cities such as Wilieka near Vilna, Moscow and Lodz, Warsaw, etc.,but none of these attempts reached the dimensions achieved in Kalish. Allthe pioneers of the industry in that city were Jews, and even when theindustry was fully established 75—80% of the manufacturers remainedJewish.After the 1905 Revolution many active trade unionists of Kalish werearrested and transported to Siberia and other cities in all parts of Russia.Many of them escaped to Germany, England, France and U.S.A.The tempo of growth in the industry continued to increase, and Kalishbegan to attract more and more workers and clerks from the towns andTHE KALISH BOOKBOvillages of the vicinity. The city grew and there was a constant shortage ofskilled workers. This also caused wages to improve, and there was no un-employment. Unil 1910 lace-making was a hand industry, but thereafter itbecame mechanical and power-driven. This transition also brought about arevolution, for it required additional workers. The hand embroiderers learnthow to handle the machines. While the number of workers did not decline,output rose fourfold and fivefold.The shortage of skilled workers again led to a rise in wages. The machineembroiderer received 15—25 roubles a week for a ten-hour day, while thethreader and helper received 8—12 roubles a week. The improvement ledindirectly to higher wages for workers in other occupations such as tailors,shoemakers, bakers, carpenters, house painters, mechanics, etc. This situationcontinued until the outbreak of the War in August 1914, when the Germansconquered Kalish.Within a few days the Germans engaged in large-scale provocation andbegan to destroy the city. The centre of the town was destroyed includingmany factories, and several hundred persons were killed. The inhabitantsbegan to flee for their lives and scattered over the whole of Poland andRussia. The manufacturers abandoned their factories and fled. It took ayear before part of the population returned, chiefly the homeless, and beganto rebuild the ruins.It was impossible even to imagine the restoration of the Industry. Themanufacturers did not return, there were no raw materials, and above all,the Russian market had vanished. The Germans were not interested inreviving lace manufacture, since that was a well-developed industry in theirown country. So those who returned tried to go over to other occupationspromising a living. Some of the industrial workers began to exploit thestocks of raw materials and began manufacturing on a small scale byprimitive methods. Some engaged in smuggling and peddling, which werevery widespread during the War. Some became builders. Part of themproceeded to clothing industries such as shoemaking, tailoring, textile manu-facture and related occupations.The class-conscious workers exploited the relatively democratic regime ofthe Germans and started establishing various institutions and unions. How-ever, the German Occupation Authorities viewed these activities unfavourablyand did not permit Trade Unions to be established. Only with the outbreakof the German Revolution towards the end of 1918 did the workers beginto establish legal Trade Unions and cultural institutions. Labour Councilswere set up whose strength derived from the participation of all politicalparties and all professions and industries. The parties that participated werethe P.P.S., S.D., Bund, and Poalei Zion. The Council established legal TradeUnions for the workers in Lace-making, clothing, leather, transport, domesticservice, clerks, building, public works, railway workers and teachers* in-dustries and services. The members of the Council were elected by the politicalparties, the large factories and the Unions.When Independent Poland was established in 1919, things began to im-prove. People came home and a period of prosperity began. The Kalish folkTHE MEN OF THE CITY81displayed their great ambition to restore their city. Large-scale buildingactivities began which employed many workers and officials and the factoriesrevived with a few exceptions. The majority of the lace-manufacturers settheir machines in operation again. The embroiderers, threaders, finishers andclerks returned to the factories. The embroiderers set up their “international”union, which was participated in by Jewish, Polish and German workers whoshowed much solidarity. At the same time there were other exclusivelyJewish Unions in the town. Thus the clothing industry workers, consistingof tailors, etc., had about 150 members but did not include all the clothingworkers as a great deal of work was done at home. The union set out tosettle disputes between workers and employers and supported the wage de-mands of the workers.Between 1925 and 1935 Kalish won over the Poznan clothing market, andthe branch became prosperous. Factory workers and home workers earnedwell. The city became a centre of clothing manufacture. The Polish tailoringworkers belonged to the Polish Craftsmen’s Society, which was essentiallyreactionary. With rare exceptions they refused to join the Jewish Union.The second Jewish Trade Union was that of the leather workers. This wasset up as international, with Polish and Jewish members alike, but afterwardsbecame exclusively Jewish. About 100 workers were organised. They included:Shoesewers, shoemakers and harness-makers. The union dealt with professionalmatters. This was not one of the occupations that gave a good income.Everybody who learnt something about the work opened a little shop ofhis own.The third was the Clerks’ Union, which had about 150 members in itsfinal years. Those active in it included members of Hashomer Hatzair, Right-wing Poalei Zion, Left-wing Poalei Zion, the Bund and the Communists.The Union engaged in independent cultural activities, such as evenings fordebates and literary activities. Most of the members spoke Polish. Extensiveunion activities were engaged in, such as fixing working hours, raising wagesand proper behaviour on the part of the employers.The fourth Jewish Union was that of domestic helps and cooks, and themembership was exclusively female. To begin with it consisted of 70—80girls who came from the small towns on account of economic distress. Theyhad special working conditions. These were very bad, and they had nocontact with their environment and found themselves entirely subject to thewhims of their mistresses, many of whom were uncultured and treated themharshly. The Union did some important work. It helped to raise wages,insisted on fair behaviour to the workers, and one day’s rest in the week.The Sabbath day belonged to the worker. Some of these domestic workersafterwards moved on to other occupations and took a hand in public affairs.The Porters also set up a Union with the aid of the Left-wing Poalei Zionand the participation of the Bund. The members were not professionalporters, and many of them engaged in this work only after the War. TheUnion numbered 40—50 members. The efforts of the porters and the carterswere directed towards obtaining fair pay for their hard work, and they didtheir best to get the Authorities to permit them to move freely through the82THE KALISH BOOKCity in order to do their work properly. These efforts were an essential partof the Union’s activities.During the final years a Barbers’ Union was also established, with 20—30members. There were workers in other occupations who only had a fewmembers, such as printing, woodwork, building, public works and baking.Some of them joined the Polish Unions. The disputes of the members whodid not belong to any trade union were dealt with by the political parties towhich they belonged.All the Kalish Trade Unions set up a joint Concil known as the “Central”,the seat of which was in Lipowa Street. This Council was attached to theCentral Committee of Polish Trade Unions which represented several millionorganised workers.Apart from the Labour Trade Unions there were also other professionalassociations in the City such as the Artisans’ Society, the Socialist Artisans’Society (domestic workers), Poalei Emunei Israel (Orthodox Jewish Workers),Agudat Israel, Small Merchants’ Society, Travellers to Fairs, Market Vendors,the Merchants’ Society. All these Institutions engaged in professional activitiesonly, and represented large numbers of persons gainfully employed.Until 1914, Kalish had more than 50,000 inhabitants, of whom about 15,000were Jews. Some 9,000 of the Jews were employed in lace manufacture andthe remainder in various other branches and occupations. More than three-quarters of the lace industry was in Jewish hands, and more than half ofthe whole population made their living from it. To be sure, there were anumber of other large enterprises in the city, such as Mold’s Meat Industry,Rephahn’s Textiles, Fibiger’s Pianos and Fulda’s Tannery, but about 3,000families or more made their living from lace manufacture.After the First World War large flour mills were set up and many Jewishworkers were employed there. Both the owners and the workers were or-ganised.The middle-class Artisans' Society was well organised and included almostall crafts. It had between 800 and 1,000 members and a representative of itsown on the Municipal Council. It engaged in settling disputes between membersand regulating labour rates, it helped to reach agreements and make contracts.It dealt with negotiations with Trade Unions regarding wages and wagedisputes, and fixed the rates for those who worked at home. It providedmembers with legal and material help and also advanced loans. The Artisans’Society was the most important position in Jewish Kalish. It was moreprogressive and also more respected than the corresponding Polish Society.In addition there was the Socialist Artisans’ Society known as the Societyof Home Workers, consisting of independent experts who engaged in work athome and also employed workers, mostly apprentices. This Society had morethan 300 members belonging to all professions. The Market Vendors, Travellersto Fairs and Street Hawkers belonged to the Small Merchants’ Society whichhad several hundred members. The Society obtained loans for those of itsmembers who were in distress (on account of thefts, robbery or othermisfortunes), persuaded the Authorities to treat peddlars more gently, se-THE MEN OP THE CITY83cured the cancellation of fines and punishments, provided legal aid and socialassistance in cases of illness, misfortune, marriage of children and births.Apart from the large Unions there were dozens of small Societies in theCity which were connected with professional activities such as Loan Funds,or Credit Societies which engaged in discounting Bills of Exchange, etc. TheseSocieties helped wage-earners considerably in overcoming difficult periods.The Unions also engaged in such economic welfare work on a large scale.The Jewish population of Kalish was proud of its professional organisations,which were regarded as a model on a countrywide scale too. They were thefruit of the toil of workers and craftsmen for a full century, yet were wipedout as though they had never existed in the general extermination of PolishJewry by the Nazis.LEON SOLNIKOUR CITYThe city of Kalish spreads around fresh green islands linked by ancientbridges, and has grown round old avenues, spacious parks and gardens.The deep river breaks the urban area up into islands. The water dominatesthe spot, together with the sun which tans the crowds at the bathing places,and the breezes that cool them off so caressingly.The young people develop their bodies in the large stadium and the footballfields, and on the river. The boat jetties run out into the water and serveas a refuge for boats and weary rowers. In winter the main channel of theProsna, the Kogutek and the Little Lake are blocked by ice and summonthe younger generation to winter sports, skating and sleigh-riding.As the day turns to evening the younger generation crowd the hugeMunicipal Park which still remembers the days of Kasimir the Great. Theyfill the wood and the Avenues and the lawns, not only along the Banks ofthe Prosna but also in the centre of the city.At the heart of Kalish, in the Old Market, rises the handsome and agedTown Hall, with the shops all round it except for the main entrance at thefront, shaded as it is by a large portico supported on pillars. After the FirstWorld War the building was restored in Renaissance style, and it is the prideof the city.Kanonicka Street runs to the ancient Church of St. Nikolai, which linksthe vaults of the former walled city with the cellars of the one-time AsnikGymnasium. This underground connection branches off to the gigantic buildingin the Old Market and to the Church of St. Mikolai, and has an outlet toRipinek from the Old Market. The Jewish Quarter begins parallel to KanonickaStreet.Zlota Street, known as the Jews* Street, is constructed of narrow two-storey houses. Here on the left can be seen the Great Synagogue with theByzantine domes, separated from the street proper by a large dean lawndivided by gravelled walks and benches on either side. The lawn was84THE KALISH BOOKseparated from the street by a handsome stone fence on a low base-wallpresented by Tikociner.Next to the Synagogue rose the Thirteenth Century House of Study at theentry to which was an ancient stone laver. Over the generations this agedcentre of learning sent forth Rabbis and Jewish legal authorities whose namespread far and wide. A little to one side rises the new two-storey House ofStudy, the only one that has survived.To the right in front of the Bridge are the old butcher shops. In NadwordnaStreet, next to the arm of the Prosna, are the other butcher shops. All theseside streets together with Rosmark constituted the centre of the Quarter.Beyond the Bridge opens Nowa Street, which is crossed by Babina Street,Ciasna Street and Chopin Street and continues to Majakowska.How close are the days when the Jewish population lived happily andtranquilly, not imprisoned in its own Quarter but mingling freely with allthe population on good-neighbourly relations. The Jews had not only religiousschools but also secular ones where the languages of instruction were Polishand Yiddish. These were headed by the Jewish Gymnasium.Various Societies maintained reading rooms and libraries. The Sports As-sociation had a library and reading room and played an important part ineducating the younger generation. It also had a Band of its own. There werealso worker libraries and reading rooms and the “Stern” Sports Society,producer and consumer Cooperatives, Poalei Zion and other Schools. Thenthere were the Trade Unions of the Lace Makers, Needle-workers, Upper-leather sewers, shoemakers, and transport workers. The Artisans Societymaintained a vocational training school.The Zionist Movement maintained a library in many languages and areading room, it provided courses for Hebrew study, and also participated inall elections.The model HJiiza Urzeszkowa School was housed in a building of its own.Tuition was in Polish. The Jewish Hospital with its numerous beds and fullrange of departments was also in a private building. Mention should bemade of the Workers* Home which played an important part in spreadingprogressive culture and thought. It was situated in Ciasna Street. Apart fromits three little rooms it had a large Hall which was used for lectures,meetings and performances. This was a very lively institution that wassensitive to all communal problems.The premises of the Trade Union Centre had a canteen. It also housed adramatic group which used to give performances in Kalish and the neigh-bouring towns. The Workers Sports Club “Stern** had its gymnastic andfootball team, a library, reading room and Band. Literary evenings werefrequently held.The Jewish Community in Kalish lived an autonomous national life of itsown. All this has been eradicated. The Jews were murdered, their propertypillaged, their homes destroyed. Grass grows everywhere. Even the OldCemetery has vanished and is covered by new buildings. Only a little portionis left, surrounded by barbed wire. There remain only a handful of Jews,who passed through the Inferno and survived in order to tell the world ofthe mass murder whose like has not been known in human history.THE MEN OF THE CITY85J. M. HEBERFIVE YEARS OF COMMUNAL WORK, 1931—1936Herewith we offer a first attempt to give the Jewish Community in Kalisha Report on the activities of the Community Council during its five yearsof office. The Council decided to publish this Report in accordance with aresolution of the 1935 Executive. In submitting this comprehensive accountwe have had the following purposes in mind: 1. To give Kalish Jews, whobear the burden of the Community, a clear description of the purposes forwhich the funds placed at the disposal of the Council have been expended;2. To prepare statistical material for later Community Councils, so that theycan learn what good actions deserve to be imitated and what actions shouldnot be imitated. Let us stress here that this comprehensive Report marks theend of an epoch which has been possibly the most difficult and responsiblein our History. Hence it is a weighty undertaking and a contribution tothe communal experience and life of our City.In summing up and surveying our activities it is first necessary to con-sider the conditions under which work has been done. Let us pause toconsider some of these conditions more particularly.One of the main difficulties against which the Council has had to struggleconsistently in order to keep its Budget balanced was the weak and irregularflow in the payment of communal taxes. A large proportion of those owingtaxes, and particularly persons of means among them, were in no hurry atall to pay. Furthermore, they demanded that their charges should be reducedto a half or a third. In most cases the Council had to agree, so our accountshave always been at a deficit. The Council often sought for ways of influencingthose who were in arrears, but to our regret were not always successful.And the compulsory collection also did not have the success it deserved. Itwas found that the crisis was stronger than all the laws and the tax-payerswere in so bad a situation that they simply disregarded the level of taximposed on them and were in no way alarmed by the “yellow form” of theCollection Department, since they no longer had anything to lose. If theCouncil nonetheless succeeded in paying all allocations and the wages of itsstaff to the last farthing, that has been its greatest achievement.In considering the budgetary difficulties of the Community and the mainreasons for this, we must re-examine the year 1932, when Kalish Jewrysuffered a severe blow with the death of its great leader and guide, thelearned Rabbi Yehezkiel Liebshitz of Blessed Memory, one of the greatluminaries of Polish Jewry, Chairman of the Society of Polish Rabbis andRabbi of Kalish for many years. During his years of office peace andharmony prevailed in our midst, and the majority of the Council conductedcommunal affairs firmly and resolutely to the benefit of all sections of theJewish population in the City. His death has shaken communal life to itsvery foundations, and we can still feel its effects. Our community cannotconsole itself for this irreparable loss.86THE KALISH BOOKAlmost all the charitable institutions without exception are in considerabledeficit on account of the constant decline in income. This situation has ledeverybody to impose the principle of pressure on the Community, on theassumption that it has to help all who are in need. And although the demandsfrom the Community increase from day to day, we succeeded in surmountingthe difficulties and obstacles and to the best of our ability largely satisfiedthe needs of the Jewish population.In considering cultural institutions we may state with assurance thatif the fine modem Talmud Torah, where 450 children of indigent parentsstudy and are fed, continues to exist, this is thanks to the CommunityCouncil which regularly pays all allocations.The Council has also elevated the Rabbinate to a level befitting a citylike Kalish. The religious Institutions are maintained, the Rabbinate has beenpaid a regular salary, Kashrut is under proper supervision. In particularthere is the major Passover undertaking and a kosher Kitchen for Jewishsoldiers and prisoners, and many other activities which swallow up a large partof the communal Budget.In setting out to sum up the activities of the present Community Councilat the close of its period of office and on the eve of new elections, we lookback proudly on our activities during the last five years. What has beendone reflects credit on the doers and those faithful communal workers whohelped. More than once our opponents brought us to the verge of despair,but our strong feeling of responsibility gave us the strength and energy tobring the hard work to its close and pass it on to those who will be electedas the forthcoming representatives of the Community in Kalish.Kalisher Leben (451) 28, 3rd Elul 5696, 21.8.1936B. C.BLASZKIThere is a little town most of whose inhabitants were Jews. The place hasremained but the Jews are no longer there. Those who came to Eretz Israelor emigrated elsewhere were saved. The rest suffered the fate of the sixmillions.From the account of friends we have reconstructed the story of this place,although the account is certainly incomplete. Whatever was told was writtendown. There are no reliable documentary sources.The little town was fairly close to Kalish, only 28 kilometres away. Onthe one side was the Joszanka tributary of the Prosna, which came fromJoszema Village. This was a little stream whose water was drunk by thetownsfolk. They washed and did their laundry there, they caught fish in trapsand they built their ritual bath (Mikveh) over it. On the other side was therailway line. Between the railway station and the little town was the graveyard.THE MEN OF THE CITY87There was a bridge over the stream. Then there were two main streets,Sieradz Street and Kalish Street, which were the entry and exit. They metat the very large market-place, which was divided into upper and lowersections. Every Monday and Thursday were market days. The Jews did notbuild stands in the market. They put boxes there and fixed covers overthem. In the centre of the market-place was a wheel pump, a rope and abucket. In winter they used to slide on the ice here. There was a big buildingin the market-place called the “Blaszkowianka”, with shops below and abovea hall for performances, a gymnasium and a bath-house.Only Jews lived in Kalish Street, while in Sieradz Street more than halfof the inhabitants were Poles, chiefly craftsmen — shoemakers, carpenters,and pork butchers. There was also a street of the Dutchmen. These wereChristians from Holland, chiefly shoemakers.What did the Jews do? They made their living from the neighbouringvillages by means of the market days. There were also Jews who used toexport eggs and had grocery shops. The trade in grain and seeds played abig part and the merchants were the important people of the town.But crafts played an important part. Readymade clothing for men wasimportant. The goods were sold to the peasants at the market and were alsosent to Poznan. Of the Jews, 15% were tailors. The hatmakers also senttheir goods to Poznan. Jews worked as tinkers, carters, watchmakers, porters,owners of hand-carts, carriage drivers to the railway and on inter-urban lines,and were water-drawers. The line to the railway station, which was 3.5kilometres from the town, was in the hands of Jews who owned open carriages.There were also goods carriers. Nor should we forget the bakers, barbers andbarber surgeons.The latter, known as feldshers, were doctors to all intents and purposes.They carried out minor operations, they dressed wounds and they set fractures.In particular Itzik Feldsher and Feivel Feldsher should be remembered.When the Polish reactionaries began to encourage the anti-Jewish boycott,a Christian shop was opened next to or opposite every Jewish shop. Theactivities of the anti-Semitic Rozwoi Organisation could be clearly felt.It is estimated that until the Twenties more than 400 Jewish families and215 Chrisian families lived in Blaszki. Afterwards there was an extensivemovement from the village to the town, and the number of Christians in-creased to 50%.The Great Synagogue also contained a womens’ section. In the House ofStudy there were several Minyanim (Prayer quorums), and young men alsostudied there. Likewise there were Hassidic Stieblech of the Hassidim ofGur, Alexander and Sochaczow. The secular minded Jews sent their childrento the Polish elementary School and Gymnasium. The observant maintaineda “Bet-Yaakov” School for girls. There was also an Agudat Israel School.In 1919 a “Yavneh” Hebrew School was founded and became a model institu-tion.Jews were not permitted to study at the Tsarist School, but the teachersused to give lessons in the Hedarim (Private Hebrew Classes). In 1913 a four-88THE KALISH BOOKclass School was built and the Heder children used to visit it for half anhour a week in order to learn Russian.In 1907 Rabbi Isaac Meir Kanal was appointed Rabbi and held the postuntil 1922, when he became Head of the Rabbinical Court in Warsaw. Heaccepted the post only after talks with the representatives of all groups, andwas received with much honour. He brought Rabbi Fuchs, member of theMizrahi and active Zionist, to the town. It was his practice to gather theyounger generation in his home and familiarise them with Zionist ideas.He also used to teach Bible in the Polish School. One day the Hassidim whowere opposed to this practice of his sent a boy to remove the Ikon (HolyChristian picture) in the class room. The Ikon fell from his hands and broke.The rabbi was charged and imprisoned. He was so distressed that he grewill and died.Relations with the Christian population were characteristic. In 1910 duringan important fair a Jewish pickpocket who did not belong to Blaszki wascaught while at his work. The peasants beat him murderously and after-wards crushed his throat under a waggon wheel.Following the Declaration of Polish Independence in 1918 the Christianswished to conduct a Pogrom. A meeting of the Town Council was held withRabbi Kanal’s participation. A number of the large estate-owners of thevicinity were also present together with the Priest. All of a sudden shoutswere heard and there was a state of alarm. A crazy Jewish lad was wanderinground in the town, and a rumour spread that he had shot at the Poles.An Antisemite went to the railway station and shouted: “The Jews aremurdering Christians!” A man named Guracki went up to him and asked:“Tell me which of them has hurt a Christian?” He had no answer.Peasants began to arrive from the neighbouring villages with their scythesin order to engage in riots against the Jews. The Municipal Council and thePriest took up positions at every entry to the town and prevented them fromcoming in.In the same year soldiers of General Haller’s army arrived by train. TheJews then in the station were busy sending off chickens and eggs. Thesoldiers began beating them and they ran away and looked for hiding placesin attics. The soldiers chased them yelling: “Where are the Jews?” Whenthey found them they beat them, and also injured a woman who refused totell them their hiding-place.In 1934 another atempt was made to cause an anti-Jewish riot. At a Fridaymarket a Pole went to the shop of Samuel Rockman to buy boots. He tookthem and went his way. It was already sunset and the Jew locked his shop.Meanwhile the Christian showed the boots to his friends who decided thatthe Jew had swindled him. The man went back to the shop and when hefound that it was closed he began to smash the door. Jews were alreadyon the way to Synagogue, and the Poles began to beat them. The Christianporters came out with knives in their hands. When a Jew went to speakto them they declared: “We shall kill all the Jews”. Many Jews werewounded.THE MEN OF THE CITY89The Rabbi went to the Priest, who calmed the crowd down. The Jewsdid not go to Synagogue that Sabbath.The Nazis concentrated the Jews of Blashki in three places: Sarniaki,Losiec and Sokolow Podlaski. They encouraged flight beyond the frontier,and many ran away to Russia and the Warsaw Ghetto. The rest were eithershot or sent to extermination camps. When they entered the town the Nazistook ten hostages of the leading townsfolk, brought them to the ChristianCemetery and shot them. In those days the roads were crowded. Many Jewscame to Blaszki in the hope of saving themselves, only to meet their deathhere.SHRAGA ENGEL:STAWISZINThe little Community of Stawiszin lived its quiet life in the KalishDistrict, about 17 kilometres from the city. The 80 Jewish families made up12% of the population. It is known that under the Polish Kingdom Stawiszinhad the status of a City. The ancient buildings and Cemetery served to showthat the Jewish Community has existed here for hundreds of years.Togeher with the 80 families there was a neighbouring village Hutaszcontaining another 10, making up 90 in all. Together they provided a livingfor two slaughterers, a Rabbi and a Shamash (Synagogue attendant), main-tained a House of Study and a Hassidic Centre for various groups. The menwere organised in various traditional Jewish Societies, such as the Societyfor Visiting the Sick and Burial, Reciting Psalms, etc. The women had aSociety of their own.There was no special Jewish street or Quarter. Jews lived in every secondor third house and here and there they were more widely scattered. Theyhad been living in that way for hundreds of years and preserved their customsand character. For the greater part relations with their Polish neighbourswere satisfactory. The only imporatnt event I remember was in 1918, whenanti-Jewish excesses were the fashion. Some unknown person then brokedown the Synagogue fence at night. But on the other hand the townsfolkregularly came to enjoy our Simhat Torah processions, and took part in thereception for a new Rabbi. The young butchers and horse-dealers, who wereon very close terms with the villagers because of their business, told howtheir comrades used to defend them in Fairs and Markets elsewhere, whilethey also used to come to the aid of their neighbours if they were attacked.The Zionist Society was founded in 1916 by a group of young men. Aspecial Society of Youths for the study of Torah was founded, and RabbiTamarson and other scholars gave lessons in Bible every Sabbath afternoon.Gradually they began to invite lecturers who were not very orthodox. In duecourse the Society became definitely Zionist and women were also acceptedas members.90THE KALISH BOOKI would like to mention one simple but exceptional person. When jewelrywas contributed to the Jewish National Fund after the Balfour Declarationwe went from house to house. I was Secretary. We specially left out thehome of the late Abraham Gruenbaum, the only porter in town. But hecame and complained. We went to him. In his clean and very modest dwellinghis wife gave us her gold earrings. Such people are not forgotten.We have no details about the end of the Community.RABBI DR. MEIR SCHWARTZMANNRELIGIOUS LIFE IN THE CITYKalish prided itself on more than its great Rabbis. Almost every Hassidicrebbe had his own Hassidim there. The Hassidim of Gur had several Shtieb-lech. One of these was known as the Shtiebel of the ‘'Young Men” wherethe young newly married men who were supported by their wealthy fathers-in-law used to meet and study together.The Hassidim of Alexander also had a big Shtiebel. I should also mentionthe Shtieblech frequented by the Hassidim of Sochaczow, Skiernewic, Kotzk,Sokolow, Parisow and Radomsk. Nor were they all.Reb Velvel Mozes, one of the Rabbis of the city, used to teach a specialdaily lesson in Talmud to the keenest students. A lesson was also taught bythe Dayan, Rabbi Morgenstem, who was shot by the Germans in 1914.Many youngsters from outside the city also studied at the Yeshiva, andeach of them ate on different “days” of the week at the homes of varioushouseholders. Apart from this fathers taught their sons and fathers-in-lawstheir sons-in-law. Every pious and observant home was a small-scale Houseof Study.In 1914 matters took a turn to the worse. The Germans brought botheconomic and spiritual destruction of the City. The “free” wind that blew fromGermany accelerated the process of mass secularisation. The workers beganto organise. There was an increase in the number of parties and organisations.The Houses of Study began to empty. The younger generation began toabandon the old-fashioned style of life. The Trade Unions inherited theShtieblech, and the party club premises replaced the Houses of Study.This development aroused observant Jewry to action. Outstanding figuresheaded by Reb Abraham Mordechai of saintly and blessed memory, the Rebbeof Gur, established the Agudat Israel, which was first known as “ShelomeiEmunei Israel” (The Entirely Faithful of Israel). Something fresh emergedin Jewry. Hassidic rabbis and rebbes, together with the rabbis of Lithuaniaand Germany, united in order to rescue Observant Jewry.THE MEN OF THE CITY91In Kalish the Agudat Israel was headed by Reb Joseph Moshe Heber andHananel Rosenblum, who established one of the strongest branches of thecountry in the City. After the death of Rabbi Ezekiel Liebshitz there was adispute about the new Rabbi to be elected. The Mizrahi and the Hassidimpresented candidates of their own, each of whom was actually worthy of theRabbinical seat. In this struggle the Hassidim of Gur were successful togetherwith the Agudat Israel. The younger son of the Rebbe of Gur was electedto the office. This was Reb Mendele, until then the Rabbi of Pabianice andthe brother of the later famed Rebbe of Gur. Reb Mendele was also electedPresident of the Rabbinical Association of Poland, thereby continuing thetradition established by his predecessor and maintaining the golden chain ofthe great scholars of Kalish. His opponents also accepted him fully. He wasslain and hallowed the Name together with the members of his Congregation.MOSHE FEINKINDTHE “MAGEN ABRAHAM”Reb Abraham Abbele Gombiner, known as the “Magen Abraham” by Jewry,suffered the fate of Jewish sages, and lived in poverty and need all his life.That, as is known, is the way of the Torah.He was born in the hamlet Gombin in 1636. In 1655 his father Reb HayyimHalevi and his mother perished in that town at the hands of the “Con-federates” under the Polish Hetman Czarnecki. After the Polish-Swedish War,those brigands finished what the Cossacks of Bogdan Chmielnicki did notdo in 1648. Whenever these Confederates came to any town they slaughteredthe Jews who lived there. A similar fate befell Poznan, Kalish, Lenczic,Piotrkow, Przedboz, Gombin, etc. Reb Abbele was nine years old and hisyounger brother seven when he left home to study Torah. In Lissa he hadkinsfolk among whom he grew to maturity. He came to Kalish bearing heavyburdens. In those days Kalish was known as a centre for advanced studentsof Torah. Reb Abbele began to teach Talmud to young men in order tomake a living. His dwelling was a cellar in the house of Alrich, where hededicated himself to Torah by day and night in spite of his poverty. Thesefacts are confirmed by Reb Joseph Samuel, Rabbi of Frankfurt, in theHaskama (Approbation) he wrote to the work “Magen Abraham”.Reb Abraham Abbele was very modest and dedicated exclusively to hisstudies. For a long time the townsfolk were not even aware that they had anoutstanding scholar in their midst. His knowledge and perspicacity werediscovered in the course of a Halachic debate on a grave problem concerningHametz (leavened food during Passover) which was discovered within theCommunity. The Rabbinical Court found it hard to issue any judgment forthe problem was very difficult. Reb Abbele expressed his views among hisacquaintances, from whom the community suddenly learnt that the simpleHebrew teacher was an outstanding Halachic authority. The Court adopted hisdecision.Thereafter the Community appointed him Head of the Yeshiva and Dayan(Member of the Rabbinical Court). However, Reb Abbele refused to depriveany former Dayan of his livelihood and accepted the post only on conditionthat he was appointed “Synagogue Dayan”. He was known accordingly aslong as he lived in Kalish. It was only when Reb Israel son of Reb NathanShapira became Rabbi that he summoned Reb Abbele to be a member ofthe Communal Court.Reb Abbele began to write his Commentary on the Shulhan Arukh beforehe was thirty years old. He used to write on torn paper bags. When somerelevant thought occured to him at night he would write it on the wall withcharcoal, in order not to forget in before morning. He continued to writeeven during the illnesses that afflicted him on account of his poverty.However, he never lived to see his work published, though it had receivedthe approbation of Rabbi Isaac son of Rabbi Shalom Gombiner, Rabbi ofTHE MEN OF THE CITY93Lissa, in the year 1671. His brother, Reb Judah Gombiner of Cracow, wentespecially to Amsterdam in order to publish the Commentary but died onthe way; and the manuscript was lost.After the death of Reb Abbele his son Reb Hayyim set out to seek for themanuscript. The person holding it was commanded to return it by the Councilof the Four Lands. Two years later the Printer Reb Shabtai Meshorer Basspublished the Commentary on his own account, and it was printed in hispress at Duerenfurth in 1692. There it was given together with the ShulkhanArukh and the Commentary entitled “Magen David” (Shield of David)written by Reb David Halevi of Lemberg, usually referred to as the “TureiZahav” or TAZ. The name of the new Commentary was given as “MagenAbraham” (Shield of Abraham). Reb Abraham Abbele himself had called it“Ner Israel” (Light of Israel).The publication of this new Commentary together with the already authorita-tive Commentary of the “Turei Zahav” immediately established the author of“Magen Abraham” as one of the leading Halachic Authorities of Poland andGermany. The rabbinic world began to respect him and accept his reasoningin their decisions. The Commentary is very succinct, clearly written, deeplylogical and shows a consistency of thought. It deals with the customs ofEast European Jewry which were not mentioned by Reb Moshe Isserlein inhis work “Darkei Moshe”, whereby the originally Sephardic Shullhan Arukhwas adapted to the needs of Ashkenazic Jewry. For this reason we arenot going too far if we claim that after Reb Moshe Isserlein the MagenAbraham became the most widely accepted Halachic Authority in Poland.So succinct was he in presenting his thoughts and views that Reb Shlomoof Cologne found it necessary to write an elucidation entitled “MahtsitHashekel” (The Half-Shekel) which serves to complement the major work.Reb Abraham Abbele also wrote a Commentary on the Midrashic CollectionYalkut Shimoni, which he entitled “Zayit Raanan” (Fresh Olive, printed atDessau in 1704); a Commentary on several Talmudic Tractates of the OrderNezikin (Amsterdam 1771); and sermons on certain weekly sections ofGenesis called “Shemen Sasson” (Oil of Gladness), which were published byhis son-in-law Reb Isaac Meir Kaufman. Rabbi of Kutno.Reb Abraham Abbele also wrote religious hymns which were recited inthe Kalish Synagogue during his lifetime. Two of these hymns were publishedin his son-in-law's own books of commentaries, but did not win the heartof the Congregation. They lacked religious poetic inspiration and the poeticlanguage found among other hymn writers, and have therefore been forgotten.After a prolonged illness Reb Abbele passed away on 15th Adar 5443(1683), when he was not yet fifty years old. In his will he left instructionsthat nothing more than his name and the name of his Commentary should beengraved on his tombstone.The beginnings of our Old Cemetery go back to the year 1287. On theheight within it lie buried the outstanding Rabbis of Kalish and their94THE KALISH HOOKdisciples, who are known as the Sages of Kalish. There the grave of theMagen Abraham was also placed. At the head is a simple stone bearing thelegend: “Here lies Reb Abraham Abbele son of Reb Hayyim Halevi, theMagen Abraham”. This inscription was recently restored by the town scholarWeltsman. On the Two hundred and fiftieth anniversary of his passing itwould be proper to fence in the tomb of this holy and humble scholar andauthority.Kalish Leben, 9 (79); 19th Adar I 5689, 1.3.1929.MORDECHAI WEISSTHE GAON REB ABBELE HARIFReb Abbele Harif (the Keen-minded) was born in Lask in 1738, and wasa member of a distinguished family. He served as Rabbi of Kalish forforty-two years. Details of his period of office have not been preserved, buton the other hand there are several legends about his first year as Rabbi.The rabbinical chair of Kalish was far-famed. Rabbis who assumed officethere had all had outstanding careers elsewhere. In spite of this Reb AbbeleHarif was elected to the post in 1767 at the age of 29, and had neverexercised his rabbinical authority anywhere alse.There are various legends as to how he came to be elected. Here we shallonly quote those that seem likeliest.Reb Abushel Lisser, Rabbi of Frankfurt, married a second wife in hisold age. This was the daughter of Reb Nahum, one of the magnates of Lask.In the year 1767 a major dispute began between Reb Abushel and otherrabbis regarding his approval of a divorce. Owing to this dispute the Rabbiof Frankfurt became known throughout the Jewish world. In the course ofthat year Reb Abushel returned from Lask, passed through Kalish andspent a few days there. The communal worthies entreated him to suggest asuitable candidate for the vacant rabbinical office. The Rabbi recommendedReb Abbele, a youthful resident of Lask, whom he had recently met. Theleaders of the Community accepted his counsel, prepared a Certificate ofAppointment as Rabbi and sent two sages with it to Lask.When the emissaries came to Reb Abbele’s home they hesitated to offerhim the document, for they could not imagine that so young a man shouldbe worthy and fitting to become their Rabbi. However, no sooner did theybegin discussing Torah with him than they realised that Reb Abushel hadbeen correct. When they told Reb Abbele why they had come he refused tobelieve them until they presented the Certificate of Appointment to him.His wife also could not believe them until they left a large sum of moneyTHE MEN OF THE CITY93with her, in order that she should be able to clothe all the members ofher family in a fashion worthy of the Kalish Rabbi. In any case Reb Abbelerequested them not to say anything about his appointment in Lask, in orderthat no mocking remarks should be made.Kalish welcomed the new Rabbi with much pomp and circumstance, butthe veteran scholars decided that they would not permit him to assume officeon account of his youth. They therefore decided to heckle him with Halachicquestions during his initial sermon until he would be so confused that hewould not be able answer them and would leave the City in shame.However, Reb Abbele answered all their questions. As soon as he realisedthat these were not intended for purposes of clarification or for the sakeof Heaven, but the men asking them were trying to trick him and trap him,he said to one of the hecklers: “May the Lord cut off all smooth-speakinglips”, and immediately began giving a sermon on matters connected withthe Temple and Levitical purity, which are not frequently studied; whereuponall the scholars grew perfectly silent. And indeed Reb Abbele completed hissermon very successfully and his appointment as Rabbi was confirmed. Asfor the man to whom Reb Abbele had applied the verse quoted above, heperished that very year; and this brought the awesome power of Reb Abbelehome to them all.However, there were still opponents to him. Reb Mordechai Pamass wantedone of his kinsmen to obtain the post, and plotted against the Rabbi. RebAbbele, however had a wealthy kinsman in Plotzk, a great scholar knownas Reb Itshele. The latter wrote to Reb Hayim Pamass requesting him tocease persecuting the Rabbi and enclosing a gift — a currency note of onehundred roubles. After that Reb Mordechai Pamass began visiting the Rabbiand indeed became his friend.When Purim came round Reb Mordechai sent the hundred rouble currencynote to the Rabbi as a Purim gift. Neither Reb Abbele nor his wife knewmuch about currency notes. She went out next day to do her marketpurchases and paid with the note. However, the shopkeepers could not findchange for this huge sum, and they wondered how such a treasure couldhave reached the Rabbi. The Rabbi's wife swiftly returned home and toldhim what had happened. Reb Abbele feared that there might be some hintof bribery in this gift, and at once sent to summon Reb Mordechai. Thelatter told him where the note came from and refused to take it back. ThenReb Abbele sent it back to his kinsman.In due course the Rabbi and Reb Mordechai Parnass made a matchbetween their children. Then the kinsman of Plotzk sent back another hundredrouble note, this time as a wedding gift to the young couple.Reb Abbele Harif passed away in 1809, after having served as Rabbi ofKalish for 42 years. To this day his name is mentioned with the utmostrespect. And there are some who say: From Reb Abraham Abbele (TheMagen Abraham) to Reb Abraham Abbele (Harif) there was none like RebAbraham Abbele.Kalisher Leben 25 (107); Sth Elul 5689,13.9.1929.96THE KALISH BOOKM. KALISHAl:RABBI HAYYIM ELIEZER WACHSReb Hayyim Eliezer Wachs was generally known among the Jewishpopulation by the name of his scholarly work “Nefesh Hayya” (A LivingSoul). The story of his life and his public stand and struggles display anatural leader who did not enclose himself within the four ells of Jewishlaw but lived a full and entire life and was strict rather than lenient. Someinteresting information about him is found in the volume of reminiscences“Poland” by the Yiddish journalist J. J. Trunk, the great-grandson of RabbiJoshua Trunk, teacher of Nahum Sokolow, who was famed throughout EastEuropean Jewry as Reb Shiele Kittner (i.e., of Kutno).“The fame of the ‘Nefesh Hayya’ in Poland did not actually come fromthe genius displayed in the work but from its enlightened approach. Thegreat Rabbis of Poland were familiar only with the four ells of Jewish lawand were not particularly well versed in everyday affairs. They lived simplelives after the fashion of scholarly teachers. This was not the case with the‘Nefesh Hayya’, who used to run his household after the fashion of thewealthy. He belonged to a rich family that came from Galicia, and introducedthis wealthy and enlightened style of life to the casual and rather impoverishedatmosphere of the world of the Polish Rabbis and Hassidic Tsadikim. Thismade a tremendous impression. He also sent his daughters to school. Theycould speak German and Polish and could read Schiller and Mickiewicz. Thespoiled and prideful girls played the part of grand ladies rather than daughtersof a Rabbi, and there was nothing in common between them and a simpleJewess like our saintly Aunt Saraleh. The Rabbi of Kalish married hischildren off to the families of wealthy Polish Hassidim like Reb IsaiahPrives, Reb Jacob Engelman and Reb Itshe Blass.“...The Rabbi of Kalish lived in a fine dwelling and lived the life of awealthy man, rather than in the usual style of the Rabbi. He planted a flowergarden in front of his house and went out every morning to tend the fineand beautiful roses which he grew. This was very exotic for a Rabbi inPoland. There was something of a Jewish nobleman about him.“He dedicated himself to the resettlement of Eretz Israel, according to theconceptions and possibilities of his period. He very much desired to improvethe charity-ridden approach to the Haluka (collection and distribution ofFunds for the Jews of Jerusalem, Hebron, Safed and Tiberias). He used toencourage wealthy supporters in Warsaw to build houses in Jerusalem. Sincethe constructive purposes of the Rabbi were not sufficiently clear, thesehouses finally fell into the hands of the Haluka authorities. His plans forsettlement in Eretz Israel were more modern than those of other PolishRabbis. He approved of Jewish settlement in the country.“In Poland itself he did his effective best to convince his fellow-Jews thatat the Sukkot Festival they should use only the citrons of the Land of Israel.For some reason the Polish Rabbis did not approve of the citrons from theHoly Land. In their opinion the Korfu citrons were more fully suitableTHE MEN OF THE CITY97(kasher) for fulfilling the festival commandments. The Hassidic Rabbi ofGut, who afterwards wrote the work “Sefat Emet” (True Speech) wasparticularly unenthusiastic about the Eretz Israel citrons, as was Reb GershonHenech the Rabbi of Radzin, who fought a bitter fight against the Rabbi ofKalish on this account and wrote a polemic on the subject.“The Rabbi of Kalish set out to defend his citrons with a lengthy 'Teshuva'(Responsum) which is printed at the beginning of his work 'Nefesh Hayya\But since the Rabbi of Radzin knew only how to fight in a savage andinsulting polemic style, the legal and theoretical differences of opinion wereswiftly transformed into savage animosity. The Rabbi of Radzin engaged incoarse personal attacks on the Rabbi of Kalish, his fine living rooms andhis roses. He claimed that all such rich men's habits belonged to the thingsproscribed under the rule that Jews should not follow the practices of non-Jews. He objected to the fact that the Rabbi's daughters were learningforeign languages, and above all that non-Jewish servant-girls were to befound in his home. This opposition to non-Jewish servant-girls was a favoritetheme of his. He wrote a long Teshuva on this in savagely polemic style,including cruel and bitter attacks on Reb Hayyim Eliezer Wachs, the Rabbiof Kalish. This Responsum was also printed. Matters reached the pointwhere the aristocratic Aunt Shifra-Mirel, who was his second wife, camein tears to her father and begged him not to permit the Rabbi of Radzinever to enter his home again. That is, the home of her father Reb Shiele,whom the Rabbi of Radzin often used to visit as a kinsman and friend.“The highly-regarded and aristocratic Rabbi of Kalish had to leave thatcity for the following reason: Kalish was a frontier centre near Germany,and contained many wealthy and progressive 'Maskilim' (Enlightened Jews).Berlin breezes began to blow in the city and the Maskilim wished to 'reform'the Synagogue by placing the bema beside the Holy Ark, and not in thecentre of the building. The Rabbi of Kalish was sharply opposed to this.Finally the Berlin-style reformers took the tried and tested means ofdeciding such disputes; namely, they found an excuse for denouncing theRabbi to the District Governor. The 'Nefesh Hayya' had to leave Kalish andmove to Warsaw. Since he was known to be familiar with daily affairs andbusiness problems, the richest Jews of Warsaw began to submit their businessdisputes to him for adjudication according to the Torah (Din Torah).“In Warsaw as well he lived in a fine dwelling and ran his household inlordly fashion. In due course he was elected Rabbi of Piotrkow".Reb Hayim Eliezer Wachs was born at Tarnogrod in the Lublin District,in the year 1822. He studied with the leading scholars of the day but followedhis own course. One of the things that characterised him was that he neverwent to the Courts of any of the Hassidic Wonder-Rabbis. His second wifewas the daughter of Rabbi Israel Joshua Trunk the Rabbi of Kutno, whowas one of the leading men of his generation in Poland and who was widelyknown as Reb Shiele.When he was about forty years old he became Rabbi in Kalish, after havingserved as Rabbi in Tarnogrod for twenty years. It was he who had theNew House of Study constructed and gathered scholarly householders round98THE KAL1SH BOOKhim. He taught in the Kalish Yeshiva and handled rabbinical affairs firmly,not submitting to the Wardens and holders of vested interests (Takkifim).When he introduced the Eruv in the year 1878 (and thus permitted thecarriage of necessary objects within the Jewish Quarter on the Sabbath), theChristians found it an excuse for riots. (See the article on the 1878 Riots andthe story of the Eruv.) He initiated regulations to encourage modesty ofclothing and behaviour at festivities.But his national activities deserve a chapter to themselves. Apart from theIsrael citrons which were a central issue in his life, he supported the WarsawPolish Kolel (Community in the Land of Israel) and did much for it. Hevisited Eretz Israel himself in 1886.His work “Nefesh Hayya” is a collection of Responsa on the four sectionsof the Shulhan Arukh, which is the standard codification governing the lifeof modem Orthodox Jewry. His work displays his deep knowledge and in-dependence in the interpreting of Jewish law.In 1882 he became Rabbi of Piotrkow and held that office until his death.In 1889 he passed away in the vicinity of Kalish, and was buried in that city.A. K.RABBI EZEKIEL LIEBSHITZRabbi Ezekiel Liebshitz was born in a small town of the Kovno District.His father Reb Hillel Elijah of blessed memory was rabbi first of Suwalkand later of Lublin. Even in his youth Reb Ezekiel was known to be anenlightened prodigy. He learnt several European languages and was ordaineda rabbi at an early age. Blessed with a clear and sharp mind, he studiedincessantly, and was therefore at home in world literature too.He began his rabbinical career at Yarburg in Latvia, then proceeded toBoisk in Courland and later to Plotzk. From there he came to Kalish wherehe was rabbi for 25 years. He achieved renown in the rabbinical world withhis work “Hamidrash vehamaaseh,, (Theory and Practice). Large com-munities such as St. Petersburg, Tel-Aviv and London requested him tobe their rabbi, but he remained faithful to Kalish.He served as President of the Rabbinical Association of Poland. Thisenabled him to take steps towards solving the grave problem of agunot(forsaken wives who cannot obtain a divorce under Jewish law). For thispurpose he visited U.S.A., where he was received by President CalvinCoolidge.Rabbi Liebshitz was an outstanding Lover of Zion and was in constanttouch with Rabbi Kook of blessed and saintly memory. When the JewishAgency for Palestine was established in 1929 he joined as a representativeof non-party Observant Jewry, and was elected a member of the Presidiumat the Constituent Session. He was an ardent supporter of “Totzeret Haaretz”(all products manufactured or produce grown in Eretz Israel). During thefinal years of his life he published an ardent Appeal in the world Jewishpress, calling for the use of Eretz Israel citrons rather than those of Corfu.He passed away in Adar n, 5692 (Spring 1932) at the age of 73.From the Memorial Notes of M. Carmel:Reb Yehezkiel Liebshitz was an exceedingly deliberate person. It seemedas though he weighed and measured each word before he uttered it. Hispleasant Lithuanian pronounciation sounded like fine poetry. A tributary ofthe Prosna flowed along the street in which he lived, and trees grew on thebank. It was the Rabbi's practice to take a walk in their shade every after-noon, and his attendant Moshe Baruch would accompany him. All who passed,whether Jews or non-Jews, were enchanted by the spell of his personality.For indeed he was honoured by all. His wisdom was accepted by all, andpeople came for his advice on all serious problems, whether private or public....When my father put on his Sabbath garb and took me to the Rabbi’shome I did not yet know the truth. Only when we arrived there did I learnthat Reb Itshe Podaretzki had carried home the rabbi who had suffered aheart attack, and had summoned physicians. But they came too late.100THE KALISH BOOKIn the large room the tables had been pushed aside. The rabbi lay on apoor straw mattress covered in black, with large candles burning at his head.At the side sat women, sewing the shrouds....The Great Synagogue was full to overflowing, with all the three storeysof the Women's section and the galleries round about. There was tensesilence charged with grieving honour. It seemed as though the glass of theancient candelabra was vibrating. The same silence used to be felt in thesynagogue on the Great Sabbath (before the Passover) when Rabbi EzekielLiebshitz used to deliver his sermon, which was a delicate fabric of deepthought and sarcastic remarks about communal worthies and affairs. Thecongregation would hold its breath in order not to miss a word he said.He used to speak and pause while a deep sigh of weariness would leave hislips; the weariness of one who bore the weight of the whole life andproblems of the congregation.Now his gentle voice will no longer be heard; only sorrow and sighing andbitter weeping and mourning...ARYEH BORN STEINTORAH AND PRAYERI do not claim to indicate the full range of religious life in the city, butmerely to raise a memorial to several outstanding centres of Torah and prayerand tell a little about Torah students.In a separate wing of the Great Synagogue was the House of Study of the“Magen Abraham". Householders prayed there all the week round and alsostudied their daily passage of the Talmud. In the second storey were the ladsand young men who studied on their own. Some of them studied all day longand were supported by their parents, while others studied together in a groupafter the day's work. Every year they elected a committee of their own, headedby their most mature members. Up there they also had at their disposal theLibrary containing all the relevant Torah and rabbinical literature. It wasthe largest in town, and all who studied Torah made use of it. The after-workstudy was organised by Aryeh Knoblevitch, who passed away in Israel, Mor-dechai Roy and others. About four hundred young men participated in it.The older young men used to guide and instruct the youngsters, all on avolunteer basis. When it came to the study of Torah both the Hassidim andthe Mitnagdim, who were opposed to Hassidic practices, took part on an equalfooting.The Magen Abraham Yeshiva was housed in the rooms over the House ofStudy. This Yeshiva was established by the young men themselves, headed byPinhas Goldberg and Mordechai Kaperman. Boys studied there from the ageof 11 until they were capable of studying on their own, after which they wentover to the House of Study. About 100—150 pupils attended the Yeshiva. At itspeak period the Head of the Yeshiva was Reb Mendel Wechsler.THE MEN OF THE CITY101Reb Idel Traube founded and conducted the Etz Hayyim Yeshiva formore than twenty-five years. The Yeshiva Committee was headed by RebEzekiel Liebshitz. The Yeshiva Heads were Reb Hersh Yehuda Mamlok andReb Katriel Stein, who are still with us. The Committee maintained theYeshiva thanks to contributions of members and individuals, and did notcollect any tuition fees. Students without means from small country townsused to eat on different “days” with various householders. There were Jewswho preferred to pay money instead.The Hassidim were concentrated in Shtieblech. Most of them were Hassidimof the Rebbe of Gur, who had about ten Shtieblech in town. About thirtyprayer quorums used to pray in succession in the two largest, and fromthree to five in the smaller ones.There was also a centre for Alexander Hassidim, with several hundred inthe Congregation. The permament Warden there was Reb Moshe Wolf Traube.Then there were the Piltz Hassidim of several score only; the SkiemevitzHassidim numbering between a hundred or hundred and fifty; the Hassidimof Strykow, of Radomsk and of Sochaczow, each with their own Congregations.There was the Society for the Study of the Mishna (Hevrat Mishnayot).Householders used to pray in the New House of Study. The Hassidic Rebbeof Zychlin and the Rebbe of Wola also lived in the city.In addition there was a branch, in actual fact a Contributing Committee,of the famed Yeshiva of the Sages of Lublin. Its members were: Reb VelvelMozes, David Perle, Shlomo Jarecki, J. M. Heber, and Arieh BernsteinSecretary.A particularly impressive occasion was the meeting of the Jews of thecity after evening prayers on the Eve of the New Year at the crossing ofthe Nowa and Ciasna Streets, when it was the custom for them all to wishone another a good New Year.E. KROTIANSKITHE CANTORS OF KALISHKalish was highly respected for its synagogue Hazanim (cantors) andmusic. Not because there were so many cantors. On the contrary. Duringthe last century there were only four or five cantors in the two principalSynagogues. For it was the local practice to engage a Cantor for life.The old Synagogue-goers still remember that the series began with RebSrolke, a Lithuanian leader in prayer and scholar of impressive appearance.Some of the older folk still remember his works which were all impromptu;that is, sung spontaneously as he stood at his post. These melodies werenot written down. In his old age he left to join his children in Eretz Israel.Reb Srolke was followed in Kalish by Reb Noah Zaludkowski, who possesseda powerful and lyrical baritone. He was an outstanding musician and great102THE KALISH BOOKCantor Noah Zaludkowskischolar. His prayers and choral singing used to arouse the Congregation,particularly at the High Holidays. His “Avoda” on the Day of Atonementwas famed far beyond Poland. From him we learnt his compositions andsongs for four voices. He himself conducted the Choir, and usually sang hisown works which were “stolen” by other Cantors. After Kalish was burntby the Germans during the First World War, Reb Noah Zaludkowski servedas Chief Cantor in Rostow on the Don. When the War was over he cameback and remained in Kalish till his death. For 45 years he prayed beforethe Ark in the Great Synagogue, which had no regular cantor after his deathbecause it was difficult to select a worthy successor.Kalish also had a modern Synagogue in the Western style, which was builtby the wealthy local Jews in 1912. At the time it had about thirty memberswith Raphael Frenkel as Chairman. The members included local Jewishmagnates such as Dr. Zucker, Markus Holtz, Alexander Preger, AdamSchreier, Herman Gurny, and Isaac Meisner. This was a lofty Synagogueand was officially known as “The New Synagogue”, but Kalish Jewry namedit “Die Deutsche Schul”. In Russia a Synagogue of that kind was called aChoir Synagogue. The building had the form of a little Temple, as in Berlin.It contained a large harmonium which the townsfolk called the “organ”.The Hassidim boycotted it and held that Jews were forbidden to pray there.The “Germans” soon advertised for a Cantor. Before long they invitedShlomo Kupfer, the best student at Abraham Birnbaum’s School for Cantors.He was a little man with an echoing lyrical tenor. In his recitatives the toneswere weighed and measured, and always fitted within the setting laid downby his great Master.The question of a Conductor for the Choir promptly arose. The Synagoguewarden asked: “Why do we need a conductor? Mr. Cantor, don’t you havehands?” And Kupfer had to explain that while the Choir stood above andthe Cantor below there had to be a conductor between them, using his hands.Nor was that all. The Conductor had to train the Choir. Thereupon anadvertisement for the post of Conductor was issued. The writer of this article,Elimelech Krotianski, who is the son of a famous Cantor, was invited toconduct the Choir. I set up a large Choir of over twenty singers, men andboys. The outstanding soloists were Moshe Golombek, First Tenor, now inAmerica; Leizer Traube, First Baritone; Isaac Bordowitch, Alto; WelvelTennenbaum, Bass; Gershon Messer, Soprano; and Wachtel, Alto. These laidthe foundations of the New Synagogue Choir.The question of the repertoire also arose. The “Germans” desired the worksof Lewandowsky. It stood to reason. If this was a German-style Synagogue,the works of a Berlin Conductor should be sung. However, Kupfer, whowas a devoted follower of Birnbaum and Seltzer, wished their works to beheard. I myself came from the vicinity of Odessa, Yekaterinoslaw and Kievand was very fond of Nowokowski, Dunayewski and Minkowski. I even madeit a condition with Kupfer that if he did not include two pieces by Dunavewskiin the Service he could go and find himself another Conductor. Finally wehad to sing some of the works of all the above in order to satisfy everybody.Cantor Shlomo KupferTHE MEN OF THE CITY103However, I was not satisfied with my Synagogue work alone and desired awider field of action. With the aid of music lovers like Mrs. Merantz, Mrs.Kletchevsky, Mr. Hammer, Mr. Ahronowitch (now Arnold), Mr. Leib Wolko-witch, etc., I succeeded within a single year in setting up two large mixedchoirs. There was the Sports Club with 30 vocalists and the Choir of theBund and Poalei Zion Members. Alongside the Sports Club a Brass Bandwith twenty-five players was also established. In preparation for the openingof the “Hazamir” Society initiated by the Banker Landau and Handwurzel,a String Orchestra was also established. Unfortunately the District Governordispersed the Society after the first Concert, for he refused to issue a permitfor a Musical Society in the Hebrew language. In spite of this the HazamirSociety organised several concerts at which extracts from the works of theclassic composers were held. There were passages from Handers Oratorios,Handel’s Halleluyah Chorus, Haydn’s works, Mozart’s Requiem, etc. Indeedthose years were full of musical activity in Kalish, and song and melodycould be heard in the Jewish streets. Those who could not afford a pianoplayed the violin or the mandoline; but they all played.Let us return to the Cantors. After the death of Reb Noah Zaludkowskithe Great Synagogue remained without any cantor for a long time. Afterseveral auditions a young man named Israel Boniufka with a good tenor voiceand a sound musical sense, who himself conducted a choir, was invited. Fromtime to time he would sing Lewandowsky’s “Lecho Dodi” and Sirota’s“Retzeh”, and would close with a finale by Koussevitsky.Now began the competition between the synagogues. Two rival groupsbegan to crystallize: The “Jews” and the “Germans”. One party claimedthat all the geniuses belonged in the “Jewish” synagogue, while the otherclaimed the opposite. If you wished to hear a fine “Lecho Dodi” or a“Kedusha” with a finale in C — the highest possible — you would go tothe German Synagogue. The dispute reached the point where Rabbi E.Liebschitz was told that women were singing in the German synagogue choir.He promptly ordered that the women should be sent away; but there wasnobody to send. However, Cantor Bonofka did not stay long in Kalish. Hewished to pray in a “modern” synagogue. Heaven helped in this and in1933 he was called to pray in the New Synagogue at Lodz, in place ofAlterman. Thereupon the competition between the two Kalish synagoguesvanished as though it never had been.Once again Kalish was left without a cantor. However, the German syna-gogue was also left without a cantor, though for a different reason. A strangeepidemic spread among those who prayed there, and they perished one afterthe other within a few years. The only ones left were Shimon Preger andMoritz Friedman. Cantor Kupfer was a realist. He understand that there wasno sense in exhausting his throat for “Germans” who were already at rest,so he made his way to Leipzig and living German Jews; for by this timehe had achieved a reputation thanks to the records in which he effectivelyimitated Yossele Rosenblatt. From Leipzig he made his way to Manchester,where he is to be found until the time of writing. Not long ago he wroteto me that the high C was still functioning in his throat... After Kupfer left,the Synagogue Choir also came to an end. In due course the Cantor Israel104THE KALISH BOOKKowalsky was engaged, but served only for a little while and then went toEngland.Once again there was a Cantorial Competition at the Great Synagogue.Many hazanim came for auditions. Three came for one Sabbath. One wasgiven the Eve of Sabbath Prayers, a second the Morning Prayers and a thirdthe Additional Prayers. There were numerous gay occasions. One week thecantor Mottel Schwarzenberg arrived and remained another week for theHigh Holidays. The congregation took a liking to him and the competitionwas over. However, he never prayed wihout a choir. Negotiations about aConductor began again, and after prolonged discussions I was summoned toconduct the Choir.The Hassidim protested vehemently against appointing a Conductor of theGermans. Was it possible that a godless fellow, who for eighteen years hadbeen a conductor in a synagogue with an organ, should enter the synagogueof the Magen Abraham? (Truth to tell, the harmonium was played only onHanukka and Purim and during vacation periods.) However, Noah Hiller, theVice-Chairman, announced at a meeting that the Hassidim were the verypeople whose duty it was to transform the godless one into a fit and properJew; and they accepted his argument.Now began Sabbaths that were really Concerts. On Friday evenings thesynagogue was full from wall to wall. There was something new in having aconductor in the synagogue, and above all, in the music. On Sabbath Evethey could hear the works of Zeidel Rovner, “Ernes Ve-emuno”, and onSabbath mornings came “Borikh Shemeih.”Unhappily these were the final Sabbaths. On the New Moon of Ellul 5699,September 1939, the Second World War broke out and destroyed bothsynagogues of Kalish together with all its cantorial music which had flourishedfor almost a full hundred years. If a son of Kalish now comes to the city,he would have to search hard in order to discover where the two synagoguesonce stood.Kalish, October 1947.SHLOMO YEHIEL NOBELIN THE YESHIVAI can still picture before my eyes Kalish as it was from 1908 until theFirst World War, Kalish of the Jews with the Jewish Street. On the one sidewas the House of Study of the Magen Abraham of Blessed and Saintly Memoryin Grabski Street. It had two floors. On the ground floor was a Prayer Hall,where hundreds of Jews of all sections of the community used to pray. On thefirst floor was a large Study Hall, a true Bet Hamidrash or House of Study,seating about 300 young fellows of all ages from thirteen to the early twenties.They studied there from the morning until late at night, and their voices couldbe heard afar. On the other side was the New House of Study.In addition to the House of Study I have mentioned, there was a Yeshivawith four classes. The Head of our Yeshiva was Reb Yehiel Lasker whoseTHE MEN OF THE CITY105pupils used to make his life a misery with all kinds of tricks. The Manager ofthe Yeshiva was a Reb Yudel Traube, who used to devote himself to his workfrom morning till late at night. He regarded us as his children because hehad none of his own. His wife used to treat us very affectionately when wecame to his home on Friday in order to receive slips instructing us to whomwe were to go on Sabbath for examination in our week’s studies; and onSundays when we brought back the slips with the marks.M. BEN MEN AHEMTHE JUBILEE OF THE ERUVThe Story of a PogromThe Eruv we have in our town is now all that it should be according toJewish law and practice; and it is almost always in proper order. This is dueto the watchful activities of three or four people who constitute a Committeefor the purpose. But in the past the Eruv led to a bitter quarrel between Jewsand Christians. On the Jubilee of the Eruv, let us record what happened then.Fifty years ago the Rabbi of Kalish was the scholarly Gaon Reb HayyimEliezer Wachs, who was honoured and esteemed by all. One of the matters towhich he devoted himself was the establishment of an Eruv in town. Dozens ofmeetings were held in this connection. Everybody wanted to help the Rabbisomehow in this holy task, but the poverty of the community caused the matterto be deferred for a very long time. However, at length the actual stretchingand construction of the Eruv began. The Rabbi himself supervised the execution.When no more pillars were available, the Rabbi called on the wood merchantswho responded favourably.Work continued for months. The Eruv was stretched round the urban areaas it then existed: From the “Rogatka” as it was then called, beside theChristian Hospital as far as the Bridges across the Stawiszin and Turek Streets.It was completed round about Midsummer 1878.In those days the Russian Authorities tried to frighten the Poles away frompolitics. Those, after all, were the years following the Second Polish Revolt.So they decided to exploit the Eruv for their own base purposes.Within a few days the rumour spread among the Polish population that theEruv was a piece of withchraft. The rumour was spread by Russian agents.Reb Hayyim Eliezer Wachs, they claimed, had surrounded the whole City withan iron wire so as to bring the entire Christian population within the field ofoperation of the witchcraft. Oil was poured onto this fire of incitement againstthe Jews by the evidence of the wife of the Christian physician Remarkevitz,who claimed that she had seen Jews throwing stones at a passing Christianwoman. The doctor’s wife was telling the truth, but this was a Russian pro-vocation. The supposed Jew was a disguised Russian provocateur.106THE KALISH BOOKOn Sunday, 3rd July 1878, when the Christians went to Church, the priestsdelivered sermons of incitement against the Jews, particularly the Rabbi, andthe Eruv served as the excuse. When the Christians left the Church theyproceeded to the Jewish Quarter in masses and began rioting.They began thrashing every Jew who came their way, they pillaged Jewishproperty and wrought destruction in the Synagogue and Jewish Hospital. Whenthey finished all this they gathered round the home of the Rabbi. Here, however,they met with the effective resistance of the House of Study students, headedby Tratel Green the Butcher. The crowds had to withdraw.Three Jewish children were killed in these riots, while many grown-ups wereinjured while defending life, limb and property. It was estimated that goods toa value of more than 100,000 roubles were looted and stolen.The Russian Authorities in Kalish, who had planned and executed this finepiece of work, were very satisfied at the results, but concealed the whole in-cident from the knowledge of the Colonel of Hussars, who was a Liberal andwould undoubtedly have protested against the whole proceedings. And sureenough, as soon as he learned about the Pogrom he came to the town at thehead of his Regiment and put an end to this dreadful game. At his order theHussars placed many Heder children on their saddles to save them from thecrazy crowd and fetch them to their homes.Against their will the Russian Authorities had to approve of his actionsand round off his humane measures. They imposed a fine of 120,000 roubleson the Christian population of Kalish and the vicinity.However, the late Reb Hayyim Eliezer had to resign his rabbinical office inKalish on account of the incident. That was the beginning and the end of theEruv Pogrom in Kalish fifty years ago.Dos Kalisher Leben 2, 29.7.1927.M. MEN AHEM ATA POGROM IN KALISH IN 5638 (Another Version)The Jews of Kalish have had plenty of trouble during recent years, and newtrouble makes one forget old trouble. Little by little the history of the City isbeing forgotten. The old folk depart without recording what happened to them,and maybe they do not wish to tell their children about the troubles they saw.In either case a large part of the history of Kalish, where every joy is mixedwith tears, is being forgotten.We shall describe one such incident fifty years after it happened. This wason the Christian Green Festival one Sunday in 1878. A tremendous crowd ofChristians from the city and all round gathered to pray in the Churches ofKalish. Their priests had summoned them in particular to gather on this Sunday,and prophesied that there would be great events.THE MEN OF THE CITY107The clergymen ordered platforms to be erected in the city squares, in orderto be able to preach to the crowds who were waiting for them. But nobodyknew what was liable to happen. So early in the morning believers in crowdsbegan flowing to the City and gathering at the Churches and round the plat-forms in the open air. After prayers were over the priests mounted the platformsand in their sermons ordered the crowd to go and pillage the Jews. Nobodyknows what the excuse for this incitement was, to this day. Some claim that ithad some connection with a Liberation Movement of sorts in Poland. In anycase the Order was carried out at once. A mob of more than 10,000 begandashing down into the Jewish Quarter with clenched fists, yelling all kinds ofcurses at the Jews.With particularly savage rancour part of the mob burst into the Synagoguecourtyard and broke open the doors. They dashed to the Holy Ark, where theybegan tearing Torah Scrolls. One of these had been written by the learnedscholar who was the author of “Bet Yehudah” (The House of Judah). Manylegends about this Torah Scroll were current among young and old in the City.The mob also smashed the Hanukka Lamp.The Russian Army emerged from its aloofness at last, and made an endof the savage rioting of the heated mob.This happened on 22nd Sivan. The local Rabbi, author of the “Nefesh Hayya”,ordained a Fast in Kalish as a memorial for this Pogrom. Since many of theTorah Scrolls had been rendered unfit for use the Rabbi renewed the old Societyknown as “Tikkun Sofrim” (Corrections by Scribes) whose first task was toengage in the restoration of the Torah Scroll written by the “Bet Yehudah.”These events were recorded in the proceedings of the Tikkun Sofrim Societyby Reb Israel Yaffe, who was the Cantor of Kalish in those days.Dos Kalisher Leben 13 (41), 20 Sivan 5688, 8.6.1028.HANSK1A BLOOD LIBEL IN KALISHThe evil minds of the infamous Endeks never cease. The blood-thirsty rabble-rousers, who can find nothing too evil to defame the Jews whom they regardas a bone in their throat, are reviving diabolical stories from the darkness ofthe Middle Ages.Issue No. 37 of the black journal “Samo-obrona” describes in lurid colourshow Jews use Christian blood for religious purposes: First, two weeks in theyear the rabbi takes the blood of a murdered Christian child and smears it onthe doors of Christian dwellings in order that those who dwell in them mayfeel kindly towards the Jews; second, a solemn ceremony is carried out at everyJewish wedding, in which the rabbi gives the youthful pair an egg to eat which108THE KALISH BOOKhas been dipped in Christian blood; third, the Jews smear the eyes of theirdead with Christian blood; fourth, at the Passover the Jews eat matzot thathave been kneaded with Christian blood. The name of this kind of matza is“Afikoman”; fifth, in order that Jewish enterprises may be successful they takea letter from the rabbi containing Christian blood-stains. They bury this letterin front of the home of a Christian, and that is enough to ensure them a goodliving.The writer sets out to show that Jews are born, wed, do business and diethanks to the blood of Christians.Undoubtedly we would have laughed at all this farrago of ignorance andstupidity which might suit a circus clown who wants to nake his audience laugh.But instead of laughing, we have to think it over very seriously.This filthy gutter-sheet is sold in tens of thousands of copies, particularlyamong the masses. It fills the villages and is sent to all part of the country inorder to incite the base instincts of the mob, who regard the printed word asholy truth. What are the writers and disseminators aiming at? The demagoguesof that party must certainly know what they are after.We ask the Jewish members of the Municipality, all the community leaders,our Chairman: Do you intend not to react this time as well? Are you just goingto sit and wait for these vipers’ eggs to hatch? Can you not see the Hitleristincitement? Must you wait for the fruit to ripen?We appeal to all representatives of the Jewish public: Do what has to bedone to end this Devils’ Dance which may go on and grow to — Poznan was a centre of Antisemitism, but thanks to the energetic measurestaken by the Jews there the pogromist paper “Poznanski Prengiez” was sus-pended and its editor sent to prison. We await your announcement about thesteps that will be taken to eradicate this dangerous poison.Dos Kalisher Leben 2 (331), 25 Tevet 5694,12.1.34.JOSEPH MILNERKALISH AS A FAMILY NAMEKalish Jews pride themselves on the Magen Abraham. It is true that hewas born in Gombin, a small town near Warsaw where there were no morethan about 400 Jews. But he spent his life in Kalish. The date of his birthand death are not precisely known, though according to the leading Jewishbiliographer Professor Moritz Steinschneider he was born in 1636 and passedaway in 1683.His work, thanks to which he became known as “Magen Abraham”throughout the rabbinical world of Ashkenazic Jewry, was printed at Dueren-furth in Silesia, at the then renowned press of Reb Shabtai Bass, who wasTHE MEN OP THE CITY109also referred to as “Basista” and also “Meshorer Bass’". This Shabtai MeshorerBass was himself the first Jewish bibliographer. He was bom in Kalish in 1641and died in 1718 at Krotoschin. His parents were killed in the 1655 pogromat Kalish and he found his way to Prague. There he became a “Meshorer”or leading choirsman supporting the Cantor in the Altneu Schul Choir. Hisexceptional voice secured him the family name “Bass”. He continued studyingof his own free will and became one of the leading Jewish and generalscholars of the region, achieving a reputation beyond the boundaries ofPoland. Jewish and general scholarly circles in Germany, Holland and else-where evinced considerable interest in his bibliographical work. ChristianOrientalists translated his studies into German and Latin. He settled inBreslau and spent four years trying to obtain a permit for a printing press.In 1687 he opened his press at Duerenfurth, a small country town not farfrom Breslau. His books were veritable works of art and drew the attentionof booklovers throughout the world, Jews and non-Jews alike. The Jesuitsalso began to take an interest in him, and finally had him imprisoned forpublishing Reb Nathan Hanover’s “Shaarei Zion” (Gates of Zion) whichthey regarded as anti-Christian. He brought up his son Joseph Bass toshare his love of books, and the son continued his father’s lifework.Shabtai Meshorer Bass passed away in Krotoshin, which was a centreof Jewish learning in which the Magen Abraham also died. There were agroup of hand-setters in this city who were among the most famous inJewry. After the persecutions conducted against him Reb Shabtai persuadedthe Monish Family to open a Hebrew press in the city which afterwardsbecame known throughout the world. The Monish family were closely relatedto Professor Heinrich Graetz. Before the latter achieved renown as a historianhe was proof-reader at the Krotoschin press of his uncle Monish. Dr. MaxNordau also used to pride himself on being descended from this family.All persons with the name “Kalisch” or “Kalischer” are connected withKalish in one way or another. These two surnames are common among theJews of Germany. Many Kalish Jews migrated to Prussia by way of Posen.Those who migrated to Kiew were all called “Kulisher” without exception.There were many Kalish folk among the Jews of Germany, and in theLodz district of Poland as well. Bertha Kalisch was born in Lemberg andis the only Galician who bears this name. She was a Jewish actress in NewYork who played in Yiddish and successfully presented the plays of JacobGordin. David Kalisch was a wellknown German humorist whose parentscame from that city, though he himself was born in Breslau. Isidor Kalisch(1815—1886) was a German poet. Ludwig Kalisch (1814—1882) was a Germanwriter and literary man. Markus Kalisch, a scientist who took part in the1848 Revolution, had to seek refuge in England. His parents came fromKalisch and afterwards moved to Treptow in Pomerania.In the Seventeenth Century there was a Dr. Moshe Kalisch in Poland wholeft medical works written in the Judeo-German of the period. Isidor Kalischwas a Rabbi in Cincinnati from 1857. He was an outstanding scholar of the110THE KALISH BOOKperiod who published important works on Jewish subjects, and achieved aconsiderable reputation in America.Rabbi Zvi Hirsch Kalischer was born in Lissa in 1815. He served as Rabbiin Torun where he died in 1884. Reb Yehuda Leib Sheindels (Kalischer) wasalso born at Lissa in 1807. His son Reb Akiva Kalischer was a Dayan inthat city. Reb Yehiel Mechel Kalischer, who also wrote a work called“Shaarei Zion”, lived in the Seventeenth Century. Alfred Kalischer, anauthority on Spinoza, was a university lecturer (Privat Dozent) in Berlin.Salomon Kalischer of Torun was a physicist in Amsterdam round about theyear 1878.In Russia there was a well-known ethnographer, jurist and historian namedMichail Kulisher who was born in Lutzk in 1847. His son Joseph was anauthority on Economics and his other son, Evgeni, was a Criminologist. InRussia there were many Jews bearing the name “Kulisher”, including famousphysicians and journalists.A. K.THE JEWISH PRESS OF KALISHDuring the Twenties a number of weekly journals began to appear in manyPolish cities, including Kalish. Much material was lost during the SecondWorld War. Here we shall summarise what is definitely known.Kalisher Blatt, weekly, 1922. The first to appear, edited by H. Solnik.Only three issues were published.Das Kalisher Wort, weekly, edited by S. Stern. Three issues.Kalysher Tog, daily, 1925. This did not last long.Kalisher WeJcer, 1931, weekly. Four issues. Organ of the Bund. Dedicatedto Kehilla elections. In 1937 a special issue was published, dedicated to theFortieth anniversary of the Bund.Kalisher Express. A daily local supplement of the Warshaver Express,it did not last long.Kalisher Leben, weekly, edited (most of the time) by A. J. Mamlok.Published with some interruptions until the Second World War. This wasunder Agudat Israel influence.Kalisher Woch, weekly, appeared with interruptions until the Second WorldWar. Under Zionist influence.THE MEN OF THE CITY111PERETZ WALTER1904—1920Before the revolutionary years the younger generation did not engage inany social activity. Most of them used to wook at various kinds of embroidery.After work or on holidays they all used to stroll round the Town Hall,which contained the Army Club where the Military Band used to play.In the years 1904 and 1905, the period of the First Revolution, thingsbegan to liven up. Political strikes were held in Kalish too and were led bythe Bund, Poalei Zion, P.P.S,, and the Social Democrats. The Russian Author-ities engaged in large-scale arrests of the strike leaders. Every Thursdaymorning they used to send off a transport of arrested revolutionaries toSiberia. Heartbreaking scenes took place in the streets when mothers sawtheir sons being exiled. More than one Jewish revolutionary perished on theway or was buried in frozen Siberia.In 1909 or 1910 the Authorities permitted “Hazamir” Singing and MusicalClubs to be established in Poland. The Kalish Society set up an Orchestraand Choir. The Club had a fine hall for premises and infused a spirit of lifein the Jewish youth who used to come, sing folksongs and play musicalinstruments.In the years 1910—11 the “Yiddishe Turn und Sport Verein” SportsSociety was established and awakened the enthusiasm of the younger genera-tion, who were proud of their shirts and caps in the national colours. Mostof the youngsters were members. I remember a ramble to Opatowek, adistance of seven miles from the city. The sportsmen marched together inthe national uniform, and the non-Jews showed their respect for the proudJewish youngsters. Preparations for the Sport Festival lasted a whole year,and it was very successful. The entire population, Jews and non-Jews alike,gathered to watch the competitions and exercises.In the course of time the Society became a Cultural Centre for JewishYouth. A Hebrew and Yiddish library was established and lectures inYiddish and Hebrew were given from time to time. The Society continued tofunction until the First World War. The Russians left the city on the 2ndof August 1914. The German entered on Sunday. The Jews received themwith white flags and in friendly fashion. But the Germans displayed theircruelty even then. They began shooting in the streets at 6 p.m. and manyJews and Christians fell.Next day Polish and Jewish reserve troops who had been mobilised butnot called to the retreating Russian Forces returned to the city. The Germansordered them to lie down in the street, and shot anyone who raised his head.On Tuesday morning the Jews were ordered to open their shops, and anybodywho refused to do so was threatened with punishment. After the Jews obeyedorders the Germans began shooting again. This dreadful situation continuedfor several days, and there were many victims. The Germans who hadoccupied Kalish came from Poznan (Posen). The Poles placed crosses in theirwindows.On the Friday the Jews opened their shops and the Germans shot into them.112THE KALISH BOOKThey took people out of their houses, placed them against the wall of theMunicipality and shot them. Towards evening they left the city and bom-barded it with artillery all night long. On the Sabbath morning Germanpatrols returned, collected men in the Breslau Street and took them out ofthe city. There they were lined up and were told that every tenth manwould be killed.The Jews began to run away from the city, but all the streets and roadswere packed with refugees. Now the German soldiers killed more Jews andpillaged the abandoned Jewish shops. After that they set the city on fire.Jews began returning to Kalish only after several months had passed.Many did not find their homes. The shops had been looted or burnt. Povertyand need were widespread. A Relief Committee organised a “Tea-Hall” atthe Jewish School, where tea was served to the returning refugees. YoungJews served as volunteers in this institution. The Jewish Aid Society inGermany supported this Tea-Hall, and actually ensured its existence. Bythis time the Jewish population were virtually starving. The Aid Committeeestablished a Communal kitchen where bread, soup and potatoes were pro-vided free. Long files of men, women and children used to line up there.In 1915—16 the Germans kidnapped young people in the streets for forcedlabour behind the lines. As a rule these were Jews. The weaker ones whodid not have the strength to work were beaten murderously, and manyperished. My brother Abraham Jacob was one of the few who returnedunharmed.In 1916—17 the Germans again permitted the public organisations tofunction. The Sports Society also renewed its activities at the new hall inWieska Street. Sports groups were reestablished and the library was reopened.Lessons in Yiddish and Hebrew were organised as well as scientific lectures.Once again the Choir was established and a dramatic circle was founded andproduced plays from time to time. The Society also participated in theOlympiad of all the Jewish Sports Societies in Poland, which was held inLodz. The political parties likewise began to reorganise, particularly theBund and Poalei Zion. Most of the young Jews belonged to the SportsSociety. The “Tea-Hall” was renamed the “Arbeiter Heim” (Workers Home).Here lectures were given and a Consumers' Cooperative Store was openedfor foodstuffs and kerosine, and sold its goods cheaply. A Workers' Kitchenprovided good meals at cheap prices. The Aid Society in America supportedthe kitchen.After Poland became independent we set up the Childrens' Home, wherethe children learnt and studied. The Poalei Zion party was the largest amongthe Jews and gained most of the votes in the elections to the Seim and theMunicipality. The Party Club was in the Workers' Home. The Bund had itsown club and so did “Zukunft”. Other parties included the Zeirei Zion,General Zionists, Folkists, etc. Among the Polish parties there were theEndeks, the P.P.S. which had no Jewish members, and the Polish SocialDemocrats.Each party set up Trade Unions. The Communists began to organise theworkers who were engaged in clearing the ruins of the city. Their club wasTHE MEN OF THE CITY113in Weiland House in the Josephine Allee. Every evening meetings and debateswere held in the Club. The subjects were the Revolution, brotherhood, im-proving the state of the workers and better bread; for at the time the breadcontained a high proportion of straw. A few days before Purim 1919 a strikewas proclaimed in order to achieve these demands. Early in the morningthe strike could be felt in the air, and everybody knew that the matterwould not end peacefully. In the morning I opened our (sausage) shop inthe Jewish street. At nine o'clock my mother came and said that near thePolice Station she had seen the Police Chief, a weUknown anti-Semite, sharingout cigarettes to the unskilled workers of the Communist Society. Thisfriendship between the chief of police and the workers made my mothersuspect that something unpleasant was going to happen. I went to theWorkers' Home where I learnt that the Communists intended to arrange aDemonstration, but the P.P.S. were refusing to participate. The demonstrationwas to begin at 10 a.m, and would pass through the New Market andCiasna Street, pausing at the Workers' Home because they wanted us to jointhe Demonstration.We promptly held a meeting to discuss the matter. Most of the membersrejected participation because the P.P.S. were not taking part. The minorityapproved since the demands were exclusively economic, being for better bread,etc.The Demonstration began at the appointed time. When it passed theWorkers' Home a number of members snatched the Poalei Zion flag onwhich revolutionary slogans were embroidered, and went out to join. Othermembers also joined by themselves, and so a group of the Poalei Zion marchedin the Communist Demonstration. We sang revolutionary songs and manyyoungsters joined us on the way. The Demonstration grew steadily bigger.When we passed through Ogrodowa Street near the Bund Club they alsojoined. We marched on to the Gates of the Town Hall where the Demonstra-tion stopped, and a representative of the Communists gave a speech callingon the Mayor to improve the quality of the bread.At this point we began to feel suspicious. During the speech many of theCommunist demonstrators vanished. They climbed onto the broken-down wallsof the ruined Hand-embroidery Factory that had belonged to Meizner. Whenthe speech ended these ruffians began to throw stones at the Jews in theDemonstration, and beat their “comrades" with long sticks. A panic beganin our ranks, but we promptly understood that this was a provocation andwe must go on marching. We reached Breslau Street and the buildingcontaining Burshin's Cigarette Shop, where we saw a dreadful sight.The ruffians attacked the Jews, several of whom began bleeding at once.My companion Ragashinsky and I held fast to the flag, which the rioterswanted to drag away from us. The flag fell to the ground for a moment.Two ruffians dashed to pick it up. I kicked one of them while Ragashinskypicked up the flag and ran away with it. Now I got the wooden stick outof the hands of the other ruffian and began to lay around with it on allsides, banging them hard. Then I started running towards the Workers'Home. As I ran a stone hit my head and leg. Blood began streaming overmy face but I went on running. Suddenly I saw a woman gate-keeper coming114THE KALISH BOOKout of one of the houses and hitting a Jewish boy over the head witha wooden clog. I dashed over, plucked it out of her hand and hit her overthe head with it until she shrieked “O Jesus”. Near by there was a MilitaryHospital, which had been a Commercial High School in the days of theTsar. When the soldiers heard her shrieking they came out and began tochase me. With the last of my strength I reached the Bund Club where Ihid in the attic. About an hour later I dashed over to Havera Levitt, whohad a shoe shop and is now in Israel. She bandaged my hand and leg. NowI ran to the Jewish street where I learnt that the ruffians had carried outa real pogrom. The policemen had “suddenly” vanished and the ruffiansrioted without interference, looting shops and beating Jews.Next day the rioters tried again. They approached the Jewish butcher-shops, where they received what they deserved. The Jewish butchers wereorganised and went out to meet them with choppers and cleavers. There wasa savage battle. One of the scoundrels was badly wounded but Moshe Anzel,son of a butcher, was stabbed to death. Joshua Rosenblatt was also severelywounded and afterwards died of his wounds.The riots continued for two days. The Polish press announced that thePolice had the Poalei Zion flag which bore revolutionary slogans against thePolish Government. In this way they wished to renew the riots. As remarked,the flag was in our hands.The news of the riots startled the whole of Poland. The Jewish Deputiesin the Seim submitted interpellations. A Committee of Seim Deputies wasappointed to investigate the Kalish Pogrom. A few of the ruffians were givenlight punishments, but the Police Chief who had organised the riots wasnot touched at all.Two days after the riots the first assistance of the Joint arrived. BaruchZuckerman, representative of the “Peoples Relief”, reached Kalish. He lecturedat the Workers' Home, calmed the Jews down, encouraged us and promisedthe assistance of America. The Kalish townsfolk in America also began tosend help.In those days the Deputy, Dr. Rosenblatt of Lodz, was in U.S.A. as arepresentative of Polish Jewry. The Kalish townsfolk in New York gave himmoney to help the Jews of the City. At the time all the Kalish townsfolkthere had united in a joint Committee which worked to help the Jews intheir old home. This Committee was joined by the Kalish Lodge, the KalishUnion, and the Kalish Young Men's Arbeiter Ring, Branch No. 241.In Kalish a Committee was elected for the fair distribution of thesefunds, and I was appointed a member. We then received more than Threethousand Dollars from the United Relief Committee in New York; and inthose days it was a very considerable sum. The money arrived just beforethe Passover and we distributed support for Matzot and potatoes. We alsoallocated sums for the Jewish Hospital, the Old Age Home, the Rabbi'sYeshiva and the Childrens' Homes of the Poalei Zion and the Bund.During those years many attacks on the Jews of the city were made byhooligans, but the youth had learnt how to defend themselves and paid themback in their own coin.Those are my memories until 1920, when I emigrated to America.THE MEN OP THE CITY115SIMEON HORONCHIKTHE CLATTERING MACHINES (Extract)The days and weeks dragged on grey and heavy, like clouds bestrewn withspots which only faintly brightened on brief and lean Sabbaths.Eizik Sheniak, a tallish fellow with a bent back who had taken Benjaminon to work as a threader, did have something good about him: Because heworked in the factory of Uncle Leib Hayyim, Benjamin could by sure of hisweekly wage of several zloty. But in all other respects Sheniak was neitherbetter nor worse than the average run of embroiderers. For a whole week heworked his hardest at the machine urging the threaders on, and himself as well;toiling and busy from five o'clock in the morning till late at night. Beforethe Sabbath he took the week's wage from the cashier, drank himself drunkon the Sabbath, wasted all his wages to the last farthing, and came back towork on Sunday fuming and angry, to start the race all over again.Yes, he was no better than many other embroiderers, but no worse either.The working day dragged on forever. The lamps had already been lit but itwas still a long long time before they finished. The hour grew later and laterand the machine was already moving more slowly. The handle began to slipfrom the weary hands. The hands of the threaders were also as heavy as lead.Toilsomely the fingers and eyes were closing by themselves. All their limbs werepraying for rest.Nearby, at the threading table, a girl was sleepily singing. In the middle ofthe day when the machines were clacking loudly her song could not be heardat all. Now, with the more easy-going work of the late evening hours, a fewwords of her song could be caught from time to time. She was singing aboutthe young men who had promised to write letters and did not keep his word.Here was a melancholy reproach:And remember how love did glow,And now it has gone out already —The sad melody made something quiver inside Benjamin, but he was sotired that his ear caught the notes indifferently, his heart did not respond atall, and he wanted to do nothing but sleep, sleep.Cold, turbid like winter rain after midnight, came some more of the girl'ssong:And remember how you promisedWithout a dowry me to wed.By now the machines were keeping up a broken rhythm that seemed tosupport her, unlike their normal clatter in the daytime.At length the work was done. Like all the threaders Benjamin removed thetools and parts, put out the lamps haging above all sections of the machine andwent homee.It was a clear winter night outside. His lungs had been breathing the dustyair of the factory all day long. Now they widened, deepened dnd he took longbreaths while his eyes enjoyed the sight of the snow. Everything was white116THE XALISH BOOKand the gas-lamps were burning. A solitary policeman wrapped up in his furswas pacing this way and that in the middle of the street.All of a sudden Benjamin forgot the day that had passed so greyly anddustily amid the oil. The desire to live which had slumbered now woke upwithin him in a single instant, and as though he wished to test his strengthhe began to run. Not in order to get home more quickly, just for the pleasureof it. He was alive and he was young. Here he was, running like a foal, shakinghis head and jogging his arms while the night watchman looked at him inastonishment.The day was only beginning now at home, after the work was over. Motherhad prepared a herring for supper, and all were eating it slice by slice withbread, gulping down tea at the same time. The little family sat round thetable. His mother was praising little Simmeleh, telling how clever she was,bless her. She could be sent on errands to the shop and she bought whateverwas needed and brought back the proper change.Malka raised her head from the book she was reading so diligently. She toldhow something had gone wrong in their office today. A few cases of goodshad been returned because of defects. Rosenblum, Uncle Leib Hayyim's partnerin the factory, had raised hell.Israel Noah, who was renowned as a nimble threader, asked Benjamin howhe was getting on at work, whether he fell far behind the girl who was thehead threader. Tranquilly and cheerfully the family spent the evening togethertill Mother reminded them that it was time to go to bed.But things were not always in order. Quite often something disturbed thehome. Mother, Simmeleh or somebody else became ill and expenses went upat once. Sometimes one of the embroiderers did not pay Israel Noah a fort-night's wages; and the whole family promptly went short of food and fuel.They would all go to bed on half-empty stomachs, and hunger would not permitthem to fall asleep. In his restless slumber Benjamin felt that he was nowin the factory at the table, with needles in front of him. He promptly feltafraid, wondering why his hands weren't busy. Thereupon he began working,moving his hands as though he were threading the needles... It seemed asthough Israel Noah also couldn't fall asleep on an empty stomach. He kepton waking up, then suddenly sat up in his bed and said drowsily in a frightenedvoice: “I must get up! Mother, what's the time?"Then he fell asleep again.And just as though of set purpose it was very cold indeed outside and thechill made its way through the thin walls of the miserable hut and tookpossession of it. The walls seemed to be covered by a layer of glass. The motherpadded the bed next to the wall in advance with all kinds of clothes andoddments, so that the children should not catch cold God forbid.At dawn when they had to get up the room was so cold that all their teethwere chattering. When they opened their mouths their breaths formed a vapourjust as though the cover were taken off a boiling kettle. Mother gazed at thefrozen window which looked as though some snow-white hairy skin had beenstretched over it, a skin set with flashing diamonds. And the sighs left herlips, one after the other.THE MEN OP THE CITY117Now the boys rose, dressed wrapped themselves up in huge mantles thatMalka had brought home for “repair”. The mantles with their corse unfinischedembroidery was wrapped round their bodies several times. They put the lampout, each took a chunk of bread left over from last night’s supper and theywent off to work.Out in the open it might be the end of the world. There was a shriekingraging snowstorm, piling up heaps and heaps of snow-dust.Benjamin and Israel Noah trudged along, bent and bowed like old men. Theirnecks were warmed by the mantle. They felt warm. The faint scent of soap,in which the embroidery threads were dipped before being threaded, now reachedtheir nostrils. The smell made them sneeze, and since their stomachs wereempty they began to feel nauseated.They exchanged some words with one another. The words were very fewand serious, only what was absolutely necessary. Within a few weeks the hardlabour and need had turned the boys into grave elders, practical men withheavy responsibilities on their shoulders.Said Israel Noah: “Now we have a bad model which eats up lots of thread.We have to hurry.”Benjamin, who was not yet a swift threader, remarked: “We always haveto hurry anyway, every day.”And when they reached the parting of the ways each of them turned off inhis own direction without a word.When they reached the factory they pressed the frozen palms of their handsagainst the glass of the lamps while their stiff and frozen fingers moved withdifficulty until they thawed little by little. The embroiderer was better off.He swung the handle with his whole fist, so he warmed up quickly. When hesaw the threaders standing with their hands against the lamps he gained theimpression that they didn’t particularly want to begin working. And he startedannoyedly:“Stop this business now. You’ve warmed up enough already!”★That was how the monotonous days ran on like long grey threads. The onlyray of light for which their eyes looked out was the Eve of Sabbath and theSabbath. Sometimes Uncle Leib Hayyim paid them a visit. He stayed a fewmoments in order to do his duty, to pay a debt, and promptly disappearedwith a promise to come another time. Sometimes his daughters came, Leah themarried one or Esther with the red cheeks who was already grown up. Thehouse seemed to grow brighter when they walked in. Mother became a bitcheerful, hid her wisps of white hair, invited the guests to sit down. Shespoke to them directly as to nieces, but affectionately and politely. As long asthey were in the house they seemed to bring a ray of light with them out ofthe happy home from which they came.Yet when they went all the family felt as though they had been tricked.There was a sense of resentment at heart because they had come, The poverty118THE KALISH BOOKhere seemed worse, painful almost. It seemed as though the poverty was heavierthan it had been before they had made their visit.The Sabbath passed and it was a weekday again. Somehow they felt asthough Sabbath was shorter than any other day. Now the workaday weekhad begun. They wrapped themselves in the mantles and went off once more.★And now something happened which they had all dreaded and about whichthey had been speaking apprehensively. Aaronsohn the manufacturer broughtmachines. No longer would they need the embroidery machine with a handleand a man’s palm, and the pedals for his feet. Henceforward engines andbelt transmissions would set the machines moving.A black dread settled on the streets and alleys in which the workers lived.The whole quarter was gripped in a deadly fear that their livelihood wouldbe taken from them. Nor was it the embroiderers and threaders alone whobegan to be afraid. The fear also spread to the local mechanics, who had learnthow to repair the machines not in Saxony or Switzerland but here in Kalish.They had been accustomed to break down one machine after another untilthey had “grasped the principle”. Even Seidel the head mechanic grew me-lancholy. Some said he had told his wife to be a bit economical in her house-hold, and not to make so much noise with the big ladle...It became generally known that the new machines had already been broughtto Aaronsohn’s new building and were being assembled there. A mighty hostof German mechanics, embroiderers and threading helpers had come with themand the new machines would start working in a few week’s time; and therewas a great outcry and alarm among the workers. The moaning and groaningcould be heard in every home. The wives of the embroiderers met in theshops. There was nothing else they could talk about except the black cloudhanging over their heads. Any moment now their husbands would be leftwithout work, and they wouldn’t even have a mouthful of food at home for thechildren.As soon as the shop-keepers heard about the shaky position of the embroi-derers, they stopped their credit well in advance. And so the trouble came veryclose indeed, and the necks could already feel the knife.The dangers of the steam-driven machines were the general topic of con-versation; in Benjamin’s home, of course, as in all others. Mother became deadafraid of the Germans and their steam engine, dead afraid of the days tocome. Those Germans would deprive her household of their last crust of bread,she sighed and moaned all day long; and she paid frequent visits to the homeof her brother Leib Hayyim in order to hear what was being said there.In one of the conversations Benjamin remarked that the steam machineswhich did the work of human hands did not harm the workers but wouldbenefit them; only it would be necessary to get better working conditions as aresult of the advantages which the machines would provide.But Israel Noah insisted that the new machines were a calamity for theworkers. They would increase unemployment and the manufacturers would grabTHE MEN OP THE CITY119all the advantage from them. So the only thing to do was to smash thosemachines by force.“And then they'll bring new machines", said Benjamin.“We'll smash the new machines into bits as well, until the importers getsick and tired and don't bring any more".And Israel Noah told a story. When he was still a little boy there had beena waggoner in their little town named Moshe Aks, and he used to fetchmissionary books from somewhere. He fetched them once and then fetched more.Jews used to try and persuade them not to bring any, but he stood fast, saying:“What do I know? They pay me so I bring them." And that was how thingswent on until one day Jews waited for him just outside the town, stoppedhis waggon, did whatever they felt they had to do to him, and he stoppedfetching the “goods".“The same with the machines", Israel Noah drew the parallel. “If it's im-possible any other way, we can only rely on our fists."Abba was present at that conversation and had the same opinion as IsraelNoah.“It's the only way", Abba added his opinion, “to smash the machines andmake it tough for the Germans. And then they'l take their legs away fromhere."Benjamin was not prepared to accept the view of Israel Noah under anyconditions. But mother tended to agree with him except for one little change:“First we should go about it gently, and go to Aaronsohn and make himrealise quite clearly what a calamity he's bringing down on us with his newmachines. An only if he turns us away, then we have to use force."It was all they spoke about in the beer-houses on the Sabbath. Nota Makowerhad a beer-shop. He had formerly been an embroiderer but had to give it upbecause of his health, so he opened an unlicensed beer-shop in his single room.That Sabbath afternoon an unofficial Council gathered there.Nobody was invited. They all came without having been called. Each onefelt it necesary to discuss the business because he was worried at head andat heart. Since most of Makower's customers were elderly embroiderers, skilledcraftsmen whose name carried weight among the workers, the Council hadsomething of the character of an official deliberation about the ways by whichthey could defend themselves against the danger of the power-driven machines.Joel Pancher, who also came to down a glass of beer, said what Benjaminhad said at home, that steam-driven machines were not the danger, but thedanger lay among the workers themselves. His words aroused a tremendoushubbub. The elderly workers, who looked like horses worn with toil, wereangry at him. It almost seemed as though they would come down on him andgive him a thorough working-over.Hatzkel Pins, who was one of the best of the craftsmen but still did nothave any decent clothing and educated his sons at the Talmud Torah, jumpedup to silence him.Kreide, who worked at the Walberg Factory, was a tall thin Jew with eyessurrounded by shadows and a high-pitched voice like a cock. He suddenly began120THE KALISH BOOKdeclaring, nobody could say why, that the worst of the dogs were the manu-facturers who had come up from the muckheaps. All the others present spoke,each one declaring what he had at heart, and all speaking at once, yelling,fuming, calming down. Then he began yelling again. Not a man paid attentionto any of the others.When they silenced Pancher’s arguments he swiftly cleared out. After theyhad all calmed down a bit Meir Kalb, a dwarfish embroiderer with a greyish-black beard, stood up and proposed that they should set up an Embroiderers*Society like Pancher wanted. But let them bring a Torah Scroll there and prayand have the teacher come and teach a chapter of the Books of Moses thereevery Sabbath afternoon.A little later Feldberg, the superviser of Waldberg’s factory came up to thebeerhouse. At the sight of him old Propper vanished unseen. He was afraidthat Feldberg might relate in the office that Propper was earning enough fora glass of beer as well. Kreide also began to feel uncomfortable. All theembroiderers became silent.As they came down the stairs they agreed that it was necessary to call ameeting in some public place, the House of Study, for example. Makower, withthe thinnish little beard, the glasses with the astonishingly thick lenses andthe ears sticking out on either side, suggested going to the Rabbi and askinghim to summon Aaronsohn and persuade him to send the new machines backto the place they had come from, and not to destroy the livelihood of a wholecity full of workers.Sure enough the elderly workers met together and decided nothing, and thewhole business finished off with verbal argumentation. But the youngsters weredifferent. They came together, it seems, in some other place and decided ontaking real steps. A few days later the Germans, returning at evening fromtheir work in the building where they were assembling the new machines, wereattacked by a gang of youngsters and savagely beaten.Sure enough, the Germans were badly bruised; but next day the Police werebusy conducting embroiderers from all the factories to the Chief of Police.From factory to factory went the policemen, inspecting the young fellows;and each and every one of them who seemed sharp or tough was arrested.All of them were brought together in one place and then led to the lock-upunde guard.Fear and alarm spread everywhere. Faces grew pale, hearts began to thudand quiver like leaves in the wind. GimpePs mother the potato-seller camerunning to the office and howled, as she begged Rosenblum to persuade thePolice to set her bread-winner free. Tevel Knop was also arrested because oneof the policemen remembered him from the time when he had been a real tough.Fear hovered over all the factories. Nobody was sure that he would be leftalone, and they would not come to arrest him. Trying conclusions with thepolice is no trifle. There is a common saying, “keep your distance from thered collars.” The members of the older generation who used to visit Makower’sbeershop wished to disassociate themselves from the deeds of the young ruffians,and to prove that they did not like such tricks. A few of them went up toTHE MEN OP THE CITY121Aaronsohn, spoke out their frightened hearts and begged for Mercy’s sake thathe should send the machines back.Aaronsohn, so they related later, received them in the corridor. He calledthem idiots and cautioned them to be more careful in future and not to attackGermans. As for the fears that the Germans would rob them of their work,that was just so much nonsense, for everybody was capable of learning howto work the new machines. He had no intention whatever of employing theGermans for any length of time, but only until they had taught the localworkers what had to be done. As soon as the local people learnt the businessthe machines would be handed over to them, while the Germans would goback home. And in any case the new machines did not manufacture the samethings as the old. They only made muslin and applique embroidery. And allin all, said he to finish off with, it was sheer idiocy to oppose the developmentof machinery...The messengers went back to the factory and told the workers what Aaronsohnhad said. They could not quite make out what he meant, and nobody knewwhether to be glad or sad. But one way or the other they all became accustomedto the new trouble, accepted the existence of the machines, calmed down, andno longer thought of revenge.MORRIS WALTERTHE BEGINNINGS OF THE CENTURYThese are the things I remember in Kalish near the beginning of the Century:The Old House of Study, the Great Synagogue, the Shtiebel of the AlexanderHassidim, the Shtiebel of the Ger Hassidim, the New House of Study, theCemetery, the Mikveh, the Slaughter House and the Slaughter House for Poultry.The Jewish representative, known as the Dozor, was Berish Shimkowicz, whosebehaviour was not all it might have been. He was the Shtadlan or intercessorwith regard to conscription, and it was told that he used to get the sons of therich exempted while he had the poor young men conscripted in their place.The Chief Rabbi was Reb Samson Ornstein, a great scholar who was wellversed in everyday affairs and knew several languages. The Dayan (AssistantRabbi) was Reb Moshe Schlumper, who was a scholar, quite capricious, a Ma-naged or Opponent of Hassidism who prayed in the House of Study of theMitnagdim. It was his habit to be very stern and rude towards youngsters,and he showed no particular respect for adults. The third Rabbi, known asthe Moreh Horaa (Teacher and Educator) was a noble-minded Jew who prayedin the Old House of Study.The cantor was Yisroelke, who was famous throughout the world. Of himI can only mention his way of praying. But I knew personally one of hisassistants, Itschke Bass. Later he was also the Bass for Reb Noah, and hismighty voice still echoes in my ear. In my day Reb Noah Zaludkowski wasCantor in the Great Synagogue where Reb Samson Ornstein prayed. Reb Noah122THE KALISH BOOKwas renowned as Noah Klager. One of his assistants, the Cantor Katchka,went to America and became famous there.The Great Synagogue was used for meetings, weddings and in time of troubleas a gathering place. But only the wealthy had regular seats there. The nextsocial rank, the learned householders who were not too rich but were respected,found their place in the New House of Study. They were definitely Mitnagdimbut meticulously complied with all the commandments. The ordinary all-the-year-round Jews used to pray in the Old House of Study, and their cantorswere all Baalei Tefilla; Prayer-leaders from among their own number. I canremember Reb Hayyim Sheinik, the Shamash or beadle of the Old House ofStudy, who was the patron of any visitors and guests.The following division reflects the various classes within the Kalish Com-munity: Wealthy intellectuals, ordinary rich people, householders, scholars,everyday Jews and the Hassidim of Ger and Alexander.All the week long they were all busy making a living *— the innkeeper,shopkeeper, artisan, porter, agent — but on the Sabbath they were all to befound in the synagogues. On Sabbath afternoons the scholars would refreshtheir memories of the Mishna while the ordinary folk strolled round the MarketSquare, pausing at Czenkalowski’s shop, feasting their eyes on expensive im-ported dainties and tropical fruits which only the wealthy could afford, winesand sweets. That is how things were in those days.The leading Kalish industry of lace-making had negative as well as positiveaspects. There was no compulsory education, so children were taken to worklong hours for a miserable pay. Since the families were large, the pay that thechildren received was an important part of the income. After a few years' workthe threader became an assistant at the age of 15 or 16, and his wages went up.But the result was the emergence of an ignorant generation.Then came the days of Zionism and Socialism: Poalei Zion, Bund and Ahdut.In 1898 the Zionist Club was in the Breslau Street. It had a Yiddish andHebrew library and newspapers. There were debates on current affairs, andSongs of Zion were sung in chorus. They used to say, “Next year in Jerusalem"from the very heart. They purchased shares in the Jewish Colonial Trust withfull faith in the Jewish State. Young lads in the Yeshivot (Talmudical Aca-demies) used to read profane and heretical literature in secret.“Ahdut" was a Jewish Socialist Party. The Czarist Regime prohibited eventhe reading of Socialist literature. But the prohibitions led the students tospread this literature far and wide and to hold meetings. Two groups emerged:The radicals of “Ahdut", and the nationalists who were Westernized Zionists.The orthodox combatted both groups alike for having lost their faith in Messiah.They called the Ahdut people shiftless lads and scamps, or rebels against Godand State.In 1903 I felt that there was no place for me in Kalish. The Colonel of theGendarmes began to pay attention to me, and informed me through a Gendarmethey called “Hammer" that he wanted to have a chat with me because hewanted to take me under his protection as I was the son of a house-holder;so I was invited to come to his office. I decided not to go because I was nineteenyears old, almost old enough for conscription to the army, which I hated; andTHE MEN OF THE CITY123because I suspected that he wanted to make an agent provocateur out of mefor certain matters. A few days earlier a provocateur of that kind had arrivedfrom Lodz, and we helped him find his way to the hospital.This is how it happened: One day a young fellow from Lodz, aged abouttwenty, paid me a visit. He introduced himself as a messenger from Ahdut inLodz, and wanted to meet the Ahdut members of Kalish. But we had beenwarned of his arrival in advance. Since I was a supporter of Ahdut, I toldthe members of his arrival. We decided to give him a lesson. I promised thatI would arrange a meeting in the field near the Slaughter-house.The meeting was attended by several tough members like “Show me” theporter’s son, “Klapper” and others, about twenty in all. We arranged ourselvesin groups and started whispering to one another. When the provocateur arrivedand asked, “What are those fellows whispering?” we answered him courageously:“They say you are a spy!” “What are you talking about?” “I think they’reright”, I answered. The signal was given, the lads surrounded him and gavehim a thorough beating. He spent several days in hospital and then he vanished.The gendarmes summoned me because they hoped I would give away thenames of those who attended the meeting in the field. I had a frontier passport.So on Friday morning I crossed the frontier. My uncle from America hadsent me a ship’s ticket. I parted with a curse and a vow never to return.After a year of adapting myself to U.S.A. like every greenhorn, my uncleShlomo Feil brought me to the Kalish Fraternal Union (Kalisher Bruder Verein).At my very first meeting I was unfavourably impressed by the undemocraticcharacter of the Society: The secret rappings at the door, the official greetingsand the almost military ceremonial, the “by-laws”. For instance only a RussianPolish Jew could be admitted to membership, the Fund was the Holy of Holies,the cemetery was “the ground”. These were the things dieussed at every meeting.They all repelled me but there was no choice. This Society was more liberalthan the “Kalisher Lodge”. So I remained in the Society. When I proposedthat we should also interest ourselves in general Jewish affairs the Treasurer,Mr. Levi, protested that we wanted to use up all the funds and Galewski thePresident accepted his opnion; and that was the end of it. Monotonous yearspassed without any change. Only during the First World War did I succeedin establishing a Relief Committee for Kalish, and in associating our Society aswell in the Relief, which resolved that all the Societies had to contribute tothe Relief Fund.In 1918 young immigrants arrived and with their aid we established theKalish Young Men’s Society. It was set up at the home of Abraham Wolkowiczwith the assistance of M. Friedman, the three Waxman Brothers, S. Kapp,M. Beatus, J. Kott and myself. When the Young Men joined the Workers’Circle I left. I could not accept the attitude of the Bund towards Zionism.That year the General Relief Committee for the Kalish Poor was founded withthe aid of: Sigmund Galewski, President, Sam Kapp and myself for the YoungMen: Joseph Kott, Joe Frashker and Morris Friedman. Participants of theCommittee in Kalish were: Eliezer Friedman, Yehiel Tenzer, Yehiel Grinspan,Peretz Walter, M. Kletchevski and Levenberg.I attended the Inaugural Meeting of the Non-Party Relief, which resolved124THE KALISH BOOKthat its purpose was to assist aging embroidery workers in Kalish. Its non-party character was streesed as a primary condition, and its name also clearlyexpresses this.When it was decided to plant the Martyrs’ Forest the task was joined in bythe Shalom Aleichem No. 30 Lodge, the Walter Family Circle and the Relief.Within three years we collected close on $ 10,000. In 1958 the Jewish NationalFund arranged a trip to Jerusalem for the Memorial Days. I participated in theDelegation of Kalish Folk from the United States.126THE KALISH BOOKTHE JEWISH POLITICAL PARTIESEliezer Birnbaum writes on the establishment of TSEIREI ZION in theyear 1917. Jewish life was just beginning to revive in the city. A numberof young members of what can be described as the middle class were seekingfor social progress, though not necessarily along the lines of the workerswho already had their Poalei Zion, Bund, etc. The new Society had itscentre in Warsaw. In Kalish they had about 50 members to begin with andbegan with qourses in modern Hebrew. They also organised a Choir of theirown, and actively engaged in all Zionist activities. Within a year they hadabout 100 members, and fully supported the United Zionist List in the firstSeim Elections of the new Poland. In those days interparty relations werefriendly and differences were largely restricted to official debates.When the split came about in the Poalei Zion movement the Tseirei Zionjoined Hapoel Hatzair of Eretz Israel and established the “Hitahdut”.★H. Shurek describes the early years of the LEFT POALEI ZION, from1915—1919, when a number of young Zionist workers moved away from theGeneral Zionists and established their Poalei Zion cell. As they had noclub of their own they joined the “Tea Hair'. In due course they electedan Executive which sympathised with them, so that it gradually becametheir centre. After the Germans left Kalish in 1918 the Committee changedthe name of the Club to “Arbeiter Heim”, which engaged in extensivecultural and other activities and also had a dramatic group and a Choir.★L. Makowsky gives an account of the “YUGEND” Youth Section of theLeft Poalei Zion, and its activities in Kalish between the two World Wars.It was a large Organisation and took an active part in labour, communal,cultural and sports life. Most of the members were themselves factoryworkers. One of their chief activities was the Evening Classes at whichthey provided youngsters with an elementary education, teaching themWriting, Arithmetic, History and Geography. “Yugend” was never recognisedby the Authorities and therefore conducted its activities under the guise ofa Sports Organisation. Now and again one of the members was arrested fora few days and released after a thrashing. The Association used to hold aSummer Camp of its own every summer.★Hayyim Brand describes his activities on behalf of POALEI ZION. Hecame to Kalish as a Polish soldier in 1920 and was impressed by the firstmeeting of the Poalei Zion which he attended. At the time the Branchwas setting up party groups in the Jewish Trade Unions and taking thefirst steps towards the establishment of a kindergarten, which afterwardsdeveloped into the Borochow School. When he left the army the KalishSOCIETY AND CULTURE127Branch appointed him as Secretary. Poalei Zion had already been inexistence since 1916, and during the First World War it established aConsumers Cooperative and a Bakery. Various other institutions providingthe necessary minimum of staple foods were also to be found in town.Lectures from then Warsaw Headquarters included among others ZalmanRubashow, now Zalman Shazar Third President of Israel. There was aPopular University giving two lectures a week. Political economy was studiedevery Saturday morning while current affairs were discussed on Fridaynights. The Sections in the various Trade Unions used to meet once afortnight. The Textile Workers Union had to hold double meeting to enableall members to attend. Poalei Zion increased its strength at every electioncampaign.In Elections to the Sick Fund Council the main opponent was the Bund.Poalei Zion obtained 5 seats and the Bund only 2.The chief fields for public activity were: Municipal affairs, work for theunemployed, anti-Jewish persecution, the Ghetto Benches at the Universitiesfor Jewish students, the various British White Papers on Palestine, etc.The Borochow Youth played the leading part in Demonstrations. Between1918 and 1922 there were no international First of May Demonstrations,following the attack on the Demonstration in 1919 described elsewhere.In 1922 all groups agreed to share in a common Procession. The Bund firstdemanded that Eretz Israel slogans should be prohibited, but had to giveway because the Polish Communists supported the stand of the PoaleiZion. Defence groups were organised in advance along the line of the Pro-cession, which was attacked by Polish Students with clubs. The defencegroups dispersed them, and indeed, several were taken to Hospital. However,two members of Poalei Zion were stabbed. There were, of course, no Policein sight.Poalei Zion conducted successful activities in the following unions: Porters,Food Workers, Clerks, Leather Workers, Needle Workers and Textile Workers.The most active group in the Party were the Borochow Youth, who alsomaintained the Stern Sports Club.★$. Ziezwinski briefly describes the successful HITAHDUT party, withits Reading room and Library, lectures, meetings and discussions, which weredevoted almpst entirely to Zionist problems and the realities of Eretz Israel.The party actively supported the Cooperative Bank and worked to help theArtizans and Small Merchants. Many members came to Eretz Israel between1933 and 1939. Younger supporters were organized in the “Gordonia”Movement.★Saul Zalud gives a detailed and affectionate account of HASHOMERHATSAIR, which originated as a Jewish National Scout Movement inGalicia and had reached Warsaw and the larger towns of Poland by theend of the First World War. In Kalish the senior Gymnasium studentswere the first to join, but were rapidly followed by others, including the128THE KALISH BOOKlawless gangs of youngsters who were part of the debris of the war. Someof the wealthy Jews of the city placed their summer estates at the disposalof the youngsters to serve as camps. Afterwards they went on longer hikesand rambles. Kalish was particularly fortunate in its membership. Theleaders organised courses in various subjects including Philosophy, theTheory of Relativity and Radiotechnics. The local branch produced the firstworking crystal-set radio in the town. Hashomer Hatzair became a Movementwhich seemed to provide everything that the youngsters found lacking inhome, school and surroundings.Actual immigraiton to Eretz Israel, which the Movement called Hagshama(fulfilment) began in the early Twenties. Sets and libraries of books weresent to the early settlers, workshops of various kinds were gradually esta-blished, and when Hachshara (Training for Eretz Israel) became officialZionist policy in Poland, Hashomer Hatsair took an active part. In EretzIsrael and Poland the Movement became more political and there were splits,but the nucleus in Kalish profited by becoming more mature. Looking backafter almost half a century, the writer concludes that the efforts spent inand on this Movement have more than justified themselves by the results inthe new Israel.★Z. K. describes the GENERAL ZIONISTS, who made up the greater partof the Movement which arose at Herzl’s call in 1897 and succeeded theHOVEVEI ZION that had functioned in Kalish from 1882 until about 1894—5,as described in an essay by Shmuel Zvi Weltsman (It should be rememberedthat Rabbi H. E. Wachs, the rabbi of Kalish, had been one of the guidingand initiating spirits of this Movement.)Though the Jewish National spirit was widespread, it remained virtuallyunorganised before the First World War, and only became efficiently unifiedas an outcome of the Balfour Declaration of 1917. Activities includedsupporting the Zionist Funds, disseminating the Shekel, supporting the YouthMovements and combatting assimilation. In 1927, when the “A1 Hamishmar”wing of the General Zionists gained control in Kalish, there were about600 members. Hebrew sutdy groups were widespread. The Youth Movementsbegan to become popular with the worsening economic situation and emergenceof active Antisemitism in 1928, and a branch of WIZO (Women’s InternationalZionist Organisation) was also established. As elsewhere the final years weremarked by intra-communal struggles, chiefly with the Agudat Israel.★/. Kletchevsky, in recording the activities of the BUND, tells of the guildstructure that had emerged of itself among the Kalish embroiderers, andthe entirely exposed position of their helpers and threaders. As a result itwas far easier to organise the latter than the skilled workers and mastercraftsmen. The first steps in this direction were taken by Jewish membersof the P.P.S. (Polish Socialist Party). The Bund as such began to be knownat about the turn of the century and had established itself by 1902. By 1904SOCIETY AND CULTURE129there were 4 meeting centres in operation. The manufacturers took activesteps against known Bund members, which led to grave disputes and theinjury of two manufacturers. By Spring 1905 the Bund had enlisted thesupport of most Jewish workers in the city, who engaged in active demonstra-tions even before the 1905 Revolution. The Kalish prison was assaulted andtaken, the authorities disarmed and the political prisoners released.Russian reinforcements killed several demonstrators and wounded manymore. Hundreds of Bund members were arrested and exiled to Siberia.Though the workers’ conditions improved, however, Bund leaders and memberswere persecuted and the Bund had to go underground again. It was revivedonly during the German occupation in 1916, with a membership of about 60.A Clubroom was opened in 1917, and the Bund emerged as a political partyof the Jewish workers. It began organising unions, set up a consumercooperative, a club and a kindergarten.After the war its influence began to increase. It had two representativesin the Kalish Town Council, one of whom was chosen as Town Clerk. Areport in the Labour Almanac for 1920 gives the following information:There were 125 political members; 2 Town councillors (563 votes); it largelydominated the Needle Workers and the Leather Workers’ Trade Union, theZukunft Cultural Society (315 members); the Children’s Home (62 children),the Einigkeit Workers’ Cooperative (160 members); a Youth Organisation(50 members) and a Youth Club (100 members). In the Second MunicipalElections the Bund obtained more than 1000 votes and the same two re-presentatives were returned. The Town Council supported the Jewish schools.However, these friendly relations did not last long.A People’s University established in 1917 continued to function until 1927,from October to May, and lectures were attended by 500 persons regularly,from October to May. Towards the end of the Twenties the Bund also beganto participate in the affairs of the Kehilla, and its representatives wereelected to that body.★P. A. records the POALEI AGUDAT ISRAEL who first organised in 1910as the Poalei Shlomei Emunei Israel and finally adopted the new name inthe Twenties, when a Hebrew anthem was composed for them to whichthe famous cantor Yossele Rosenblatt composed a tune. Kalish, indeed, wasone of the first three cities in which the Organisation was established. Oneof its main purposes was to ensure employment for Jewish workers whowere not prepared to work on the Sabbath day, and to help train fullyobservant youngsters for the industrial life of the city. By the early Thirties,however, it was taking an active part in hachshara activties for Eretz Israel,and members were immigrating to Eretz Israel by the mid-Thirties. ABnot Agudat Israel for young women was established in 1928, and had about400 members.Issachar Kott gives a brief account of the POALEI ZION (Z.S.) knownas the Right Poalei Zion, whose members engaged in Hehalutz and Hebrew130THE KALISH BOOKactivities, besides conducting activities in Yiddish, and supporting the socialstruggles of the Jewish workers. Lecturers from Eretz Israel, speakers fromother towns and local members all lectured at the Popular University. TheParty operated within the Kehilla and influenced the Artizans* Organisation,and all the Zionist Labour Parties collaborated in the League for LabourEretz Israel. It collaborated with the Polish workers and took part in MayDay demonstrations. Many of the members came to Eretz Israel.★Jacob Bienstock gives an account of the way the left-wing parties operatedunderground in Tsarist Russia, when he was a member of the POALEI ZION.He himself had a Hassidic upringing in the home of his father, an AlexanderHassid, and in his childhood constantly envisaged the coming of Messiah andthe return of his family to Eretz Israel, where they would all till the soil.In 1905/6 the Left-wing parties were illegal, but had their regular meetingplaces as described in the section on the Bund, Each party sent its bestspokesmen to the meeting places of the others in the hope of winningadherents. The Poalei Zion were divided into “circles”, each of ten members.It was his own task to provide literature for 2 such circles. On one occasionwhen he was at the Bund section with his pockets full of illegal pamphletshe began trying to explain the principles of Marx and Borochow to aBundist. Suddenly he looked round and saw that the other had vanished andthe whole stretch of pavement was empty. Looking to the left he saw theChief of Police and 3 mounted policemen riding very slowly by, with whipsin their hands. He went walking on for several dozen paces, then stoppedand stared at the Chief of Police, who stopped and stared back. As he waswearing typical “Jewish” garb, the other suspected nothing wrong and in afew moments spurred his horse and gallopped off with his men.After the parties were legalised following the Russo-Japanese War heused to prepare the flags, banners and slogans of all the Left-wing partiesto their satisfaction. Before the First of May 1906 he worked very latepreparing the Poalei Zion flag, which he thrust under his vest. On the wayhome he was stopped by police who wanted to know what he had in hispocket. A red flag, he answered. “Show us!” they ordered. He produced ared velvet bag and showed it to them. “What do you keep in it?” “Bombs.”“Open it and show us the bombs.” He opened it and displayed his tephillinand prayer-book. Thereupon they let him go.★Gershon Wroclawski describes the Club of the ZIONIST YOUTH and theGENERAL ZIONIST HEHALUTZ, which united during the final years, andhad several hundred members. Their whole ideology was summed up inthe one word: Eretz Israel. Thanks to this organisation there are severaldozen more Kalish folk in Israel than would otherwise have been the case.There were both Summer and Winter camps. Instructors were trained atthe latter. The older members used to proceed on hachshara before goingSOCIETY AND CULTURE131to Eretz Israel. At first their parents were opposed, but gradually oppositionfaded away. Israel Bienstock and the writer headed activities, including fund-raising, until the last. The writer managed to bury the Hehalutz flag inthe Club courtyard during November 1939.★H. B. describes BETAR, which was commenced in February 1929 by agroup of 8 youngsters who were soon joined by others including a group oftwelve and thirteen years old. When they numbered 60 or so, they hiredpremises. When Jabotinsky visited them the following year they wereheaded by Binam Grausalz. By this time there were some 600 members, whowere given a sports and para-military training. In 1930 Kalish sent adelegation numbering 30 to the First Betar Assembly in Warsaw; and thefirst members then left on hachshara. Boxing was introduced in 1933, andmembers engaged in “Aliya Bet” (immigration into Eretz Israel without theCertificates demanded by the Mandatory Government). BRIT HAHAYAL,consisting of ex-soldiers, was founded in 1932, as was the BRIT HATZOHAR,the Zionist Revisionist Party. The Movement participated in the Boycott ofGerman goods in 1936. The Rowing Crew won first prize in 1937. The Betargroups met 3 times a week for courses in Jewish History, Zionist History,Drill, Singing and Dancing and talks on discipline, etc. As the members grewolder they graduated into the Revisionist Movement.★Benjamin Zvieli gives a brief account of HEHALUTZ HAMIZRAHI andHASHOMER HADATI. The former consisted largely of observant youngworkers more or less parallel to the older MIZRAHI, while the latter was aYouth Movement. Both alike engaged in hachshara with a view to proceedingto Eretz Israel, a step which was taken in due course by groups andindividuals. Hashomer Hadati was set up in 1932; and not long after the“Torah Vaavoda” (Torah and Work) training kibbutz was established inKalish and participated in by observant young people from all over Poland,almost all of whom proceeded to Eretz Israel later on.HAYYIM STEINSEEKING FOR THE WAYThose bright years of the youth movements in general, those years whenaspirations awakened and there were so many longings for a lofty purpose,were the most joyful period of our lives.Kalish, like the other towns of Poland, had almost all the parties andyouth movements to be found among the Jewish population. We remember thenights full of significance and thirst for study when we used to attendlectures and engage in debates without ever growing tired. In those days we132THE KALISH BOOKwere wide awake to all that was going on in the world at large, andwithin Jewry in particular. Like a baby sucking insatiably, we longed andyearned to know everything that was going on and developing in the world.And of course we were primarily concerned with our own part of it.That part was broken up into many sections. On the one side were theBund and the Fraction as the Communists were called, who opposed Zionism,on the other were the two Poalei Zion movements; and in between were theZionist youth movements which regarded Aliya to Eretz Israel as theirultimate purpose. Those Olympian heights attracted us in particular. Therewas something of the daring of youth in going against all the acceptedsocial and family practices, and proceeding to fulfill great ideals. Not that ifwas easy, for it involved tremendous effort and a capacity to stand againstall those who deplored the “hot-headed craziness of the youth.”I could tell a great deal about those days, when it was hard for me to getaway from parents who crowded round me and entreated me to “deliver”their children from the danger called Aliya. I had to calm them down andreassure them. But they did not always come with requests. Sometimes Ihad to wander through the streets of the town for hours in order to escapethe platoons of parents who were waiting for me at the entrance to myhome. The days of Hachshara and finally also the days of Aliya, whichwere so unforgettable for the Movement, were a source of tears and angerfor parents and kinsfolk. We required strength and a firm will in order tobreak away from loving arms when we saw angry tears instead of afarewell smile.This life with all its glory, grace, pain and heroism shaped the YouthMovements. The world round about us was all but forgotten, and the onlything we were concerned with was shaping the rosy dreams of tomorrow.We had no small help from educators and men of good will among theadults, although their help did not always benefit us. For they themselveslived a hopeless grey monotonous life, where nothing but local communalaffairs put any spirit into them. Zionist and Mizrahi circles had the functionof collecting money. There were many among the Zionists and Mizrahi whowished to go there themselves; but they did not have the financial resourcesand had to provide for their impoverished families as well.Here I wished to mention a person who was popular among the youngsters.This was Yurek Klinger, an enlightened but very unfortunate man. All of uscan remember the negligent way he went about, the shaggy hat on his head,his ridiculous physique. He came to every Youth Club, whether invited ornot, he lectured and debated, he learnt and taught. He was aware of every-thing that was going on within the Jewish street.Here I have been told a great deal about him. Under the German Occupationhe appeared as a Volksdeutsche and in that way helped the Jews, riskinghis life for others. The Nazis caught him in the middle of his activities andkilled him. May his memory be blessed.Then there was another person who served us as a model. This was theelderly Shabtai Seidorf, representative of the Jewish National Fund, whogot on well with everybody. He regarded the Fund as something really holy.SOCIETY AND CULTURE133He reckoned he was the oldest Zionist in Kalish and enjoyed telling stories ofbygone days.There were many exceptional characters in our city, and indeed there isnot enough space to list them all. Intensive Zionist activity of every kind wasengaged in there. The movement was represented on the Kehilla Executiveand the Town Council.When Bialik visited us it was a great festival. All the Youth Movementsand Zionists were there to welcome him. The pupils of the Hebrew Gymnasiumlifted his carriage up on their shoulders and brought him into town thatway. The leading Jewish lecturers and speakers visited us and always hadan attentive and intelligent audience. The “Hehalutz Hamerkazi” (CentralHehalutz) Movement consisted of youngsters who did not find their place inthe other movements for reasons which do not need to be gone into here.But one thing was clear. Most of those who sought a way to be Halutzimpure and simple found their place in its ranks.EDZIATHE “LAMIFAL” TRAINING KIBBUTZ IN KALISHKalish was a Jewish city which had known many Halutzim during quite along period, and was less surprised by us when we met than we weresurprised by the city. It was an outstanding centre of light industry, parti-cularly lace and embroidery. There was a Jewish working class with a fulllabour consciousness, which at the same time longed for aliya to Eretz Israel.It expressed these yearnings, among the older generation by belonging toZionist Organisations, and among the younger groups through membership inyouth movements. For a long and continuous period the city had been livinga lively Zionist youth life, and a widely-known Shomer Hatzair group hadexisted there only a year or two before our arrival.The first “Lamifal” section which arrived in June 1933 met the last membersof the previous Hachshara Kibbutz in a little apartment of two rooms at95 Gornoszlonska Street. But before long we remained alone facing thedifficulties of adaptation; and this at a time when, in general, local Zionistactivities, youth movements and our own movement group were all at avery low level. — But within a month there were about sixty of us.Some of us made our way into industry and the Jewish needle tradeoccupations. The Jewish manufacturers looked at the Halutzim with eyes ofpity, you might say, as though they felt it was only for the sake of Zionthat they were prepared to keep us in their factories. Still they were notafraid to exploit our lads thoroughly in bringing materials to the machines,packing and other work. The girls took piece-work home from the laceindustry. They spent hours on hours removing the black threads that joinedthe lacework. We called this job: “Drawing the consequences”.Another part proceeded to agriculture, working for a Zionist with a large134THE KALISH BOOKkitchen garden, who grew tomatoes for industrial purposes. Some of the girlsalso engaged in this work, while others tied up sacks and transported themat the flour mill.Here we first began to take part in the life of the workers, their organisa-tion and the struggle for working conditions. At the kitchen garden near thecity we met with the tyrannies and oppressive regime of the Polish peasantat the hands of a certain Leibush, the foreman of the owner. It is unnecessaryto add that the peasants regarded us as queer fish. They could not understandthis lunacy of abandoning good homes in order to hunger together withthem.Two not particularly large rooms and a small kitchen served us for every-thing: Bedroom, dining room, meeting hall and reading room. We exploitedthe height of the rooms and constructed bunks in tiers.We paid no particular attention to food. We reckoned that that was some-thing incidental, while the Idea always came first. Our partial unemploymentand the low wages of those who were working caused difficult conditions.The light did not always burn, for the bill was not always paid in time. —But cultural activities were well developed. Many groups were operative,particularly in learning Hebrew. They worked under very difficult conditions,reading a great deal in our rooms and talking a great deal....When new members began knocking at our doors we hired a large apart-ment in Piskozewie Street 15. This was a spacious hall in an unused factoryModest provisions were made to divide it into sleeping rooms, dining room,a workshop containing a carpenter’s bench, shoemaking utensils, and a sewingmachine, together with a kitchen and conveniences of a sort. These con-veniences consisted of a half-closed room containing two basins. In thosedays we were always saying “Pm next” about the turn for washing. Whatwas lacking we made up for by taking a bath once a week in the Com-munity’s kosher Mikveh (Ritual Immersion Pool) which was specially warmedup for us. We did away with the bunks but slept two in a bed. The diningroom had an iron stove that was heated with coal. To be sure, it was a poorobject but it served as the focus of social life. A radio set was obtained.Hunger and poverty continued to reign supreme, but we silenced them withtempestuous dances and overcame the cut-off electricity with romantic songs.This was the third year of our training, yet there were scarcely any immi-gration certificates to Eretz Israel... Most of the boys were called to theArmy. We hired a private dwelling containing small rooms which we paintedvery carefully. There was also a carpet of a kind on the floor. Here we hada reading room and even a music room — and even a shower bath withsprinklers and hot water.In the courtyard was a vegetable garden and one milch cow, on which thelove of the whole group was concentrated. We were helped to set up this“small-holding” with the aid of a group of Zionist supporters who also helpedus with our Immigration Fund.— And Aliya came at last!SOCIETY AND CULTURE135MEIR PACKENTRAEGERCULTURAL LIFEKalish with a Jewish population of close on 30,000, never had the slightestreason to be ashamed of its cultural achievements in the fields of journalism,theatre, art, etc.In 1919 the first Jewish Weekly in Kalish, “Die Kalisher Woch”, was foundedon the initiative of local writers and journalists. This was the organ of theGeneral Zionists, and was edited by M. Abramowitch and Shlomo Brish.The weekly quickly became popular and several thousand copies were sold.Its writers included not only the editors but also Zalman Kaplan, HershelSolnik, Mordechai Shmuelevitch, M. Wieroszewski and others. From time totime a poem by Rosa Jacobovitch was published. Shlomo Brish publishedsharp and effective light articles in which he dealth humorously with localcommunal workers and institutions.In the same year a second weekly appeared. This was “Dos Kalisher Leben”edited by I. Mamlock, a gifted journalist and editor educated in the Yeshiva.He raised the level of his weekly, and his own weekly article was wiselywritten and was full of choice and apt quotations from Jewish sources. Hewas also the correspondent of the Warsaw “Moment”. Other contributorswere Jacob Alberstein, Shlomo Rubin, Moshe Flinker and Meir Packentraeger.An orthodox Jewish paper also appeared for some time. In 1930 JacobAlberstein began publishing a daily “Der Kalisher Express”, which had tosuspend publication before long. In 1926 the Kletzkin Publishing House inWarsaw issued a volume of stories by Hershel Solnik entitled “Fun altenKloister” (From the Old Close).In connection with a Jubilee issue of “Maccabi” in 1939, Zalman Kaplanwrote in “Der Kalisher Woch” about the beginnings of the Sports Movementin the city:“It will not be in any way paradoxical if I say that the beginning of thesefestivities is connected with a Singing Society called “Hazamir”, with whichthe Sports Movement began. It happened in 1912 when the youth were verybusy in the successful lace industry, and wished to provide themselves witha place for social meetings. In those days there were no secular societies at all.But the Kalish industrialist Handwurzel displayed a highly developed socialsense when he headed the Hazamir Society.“The conductor Krotianski had a choir and a symphony orchestra underhim. The rules and regulations of the Society were submitted to the Authoritiesfor approval. Everything would have been in order where it not for theTsarist regime, which did not show even the slightest interest in permittingany communal activity whatsoever. Within a few weeks a Government Orderto close down the Society was received. This compelled the young people tomove in a different direction, and the idea developed of founding a SportsSociety.“Mr. Handwurzel was very dejected after the failure of “Hazamir” anddid not wish to help in setting up the new Society. But it was necessary for136THE KALISH BOOKus to gain the approval of the Authorities, and the only way to do this wasbribery. We adopted this course and were assisted by the influence of theBanker Hermann Landau and our friend Handwurtzel, who finally allowedhimself to be persuaded to take the necessary steps. And so the SportsSociety was established and included all the members of Hazamir.“The same Hazamir group also carried on the cultural work of theSociety. In the course of time these members engaged in interesting literaryand musical evenings, aud staged operettas of a good artistic level byGoldfaden and others.“Although the Society engaged mainly in sport it also did a great deal inother cultural fields. To our regret the Archives of the Society have not beenpreserved, otherwise we could have had a very interesting picture of pioneeractivities during twenty-five years.”There were only a few writers and journalists in the City. They concentratedon the two local Yiddish weeklies, and each of them contributed whatever hecould to Jewish cultural life.Undoubtedly the leading figure in the group was the poetess Rosa Jacobo-witch who published a volume of poems. She began writing almost togetherwith J. L. Peretz, and at the time described here she already had forty yearsof literary activity behind her. All the writers of the city used to be in andout of her home, reading their work to her, listening to her opinions, andaccepting her advice. Hershel Solnik was a regular visitor. Mention shouldalso be made of the poet Mordechai Shmuelewitch and of Israel Rubin, whowrote a great deal for the theatre and the variety stage. His one-act playsand sketches were presented successfully by the “Comet” Light Theatre ofKalish. All the townsfolk of those days remember his verses “What do I getout of it?” the melody of which was composed by the Conductor Krotianski.Of the journalists I shall mention Moshe Flinker, M. Abramowitch, I.Mamlock, and Shlomo Brish. None of them have survived, and no one knowswere they are buried. Professional troupes from Warsaw often visited Kalishand appeared at the Theatre which was managed by Levin. The CometTheatre was established in 1932 upon the initiative of the poet MosheBroderson.8. BAUMCULTURAL ACTIVITIES — 1918—1939When Poland was liberated in 1918 and the Polish-Russian War broke out,there was no organised communal life in Kalish whatever because all theparties had been abolished. It was then that the Sports Society “YiddisherTurn un Sport Verein” was founded, and the social forces of all the partiesgathered round it; for it provided the only opportunity of establishing andmaintaining Jewish cultural activity. A library was founded which gave youngJews their first impulse towards knowledge and culture. Courses wereSOCIETY AND CULTURE137arranged for the study of Polish, Hebrew and other languages. Lectures weregiven three times a week on Science, Politics and Health, which interested allsections of the Jewish public. Sports attracted their own people. When youentered the Sports Club you were welcomed by noisy and pulsating activities.The liveliness when the Committee was elected goes without saying. Eachparty did its best to increase its membership, and the propaganda and contestswere very obstinate.Little by little the branches of activity developed. In 1921 Mr. Witkowskiproposed that a Brass Band be founded. Members were promptly recruitedand they began to study the instruments they were to play. The Bandappeared for the first time three months later and promptly achieved popu-larity. It held concerts, took part in gymnastics and sports displays, inrambles and hikes, and also responded to invitations from Sports Clubs insmaller towns such as Zdunska-Wola, Blaszki, Sieradz, Wielun and Kutno.When we came to one of these places we brought a holiday with us. All theJewish residents came out to welcome us, old and young, religious andirreligious. We were appreciated by everybody except the Antisemites. When-ever we went out on a hike and on any other opportunity they attackedus and threw stones at us.I shall describe one such incident. After a Sports display our football teamplayed a Polish team, and God gave us the victory. We saw at once thatthere was going to be trouble. We arranged all our members in ranks headedby the Band and marched away to our Club in the Pulaski Street. When wereached the District Court Building we were attacked by the hooligans, butwe repulsed them and went on marching. When we reached our own streeta large crowd came up against us and began fighting. We swiftly hurried thechildren, the women and the Band into the house, where our members grabbedthe Indian Clubs used for exercise and dashed down to do battle. And it wasa real battle. The injured were taken into the Club and additional volunteerspromptly took their place. The hooligans received a thrashing which theyremembered for a long time to come.In 1929 Mr. Witkowski left Kalish and I took the Band over. After thata Symphony Orchestra was also established, as well as a choir conducted byMr. Krotianski. A motor-cycle section was added in the Club and had a largemembership. At every display, public appearance or hike they rode theircycles and made an impressive appearance. Later a Dramatic Circle wasesatblished and successfully produced both plays and operettas.In the years 1933—34 a large group of members broke away from theSports Society and found the Maccabi Sports Society, which restricted itsactivities to Sports alone. This was immediately followed by the Hapoel SportsClub whose Committee consisted of Simeon Baum, Gad Goldman, MordechaiBlaszkowski, Laszczewski and Piotrkowski. The Club developed and aboutthree months later held a successful first display. A Dramatic Circle of theHapoel was also established and successfully presented important dramas.In Kalish there was also the Haoved Society for Workers and Craftsmen,which engaged in cultural activities and organised courses in Hebrew.138THE KALISH BOOKThe “Yiddishe Turn un Sport Klub” served as the cradle of the cultural,sports and political life which was engaged in so intensively in Kalish untilthe Holocaust.ISAAC KLECZ“TURN UN SPORT VERKIN”The Yiddishe Turn un Sport Verein was founded in Kalish in 1911 andderived from internal Jewish needs. Industry was in a state of rapid growth,and the city expanded at a gigantic rate together with it. The mechanicallace-making industry was growing fast and attracted a new population. Alarge part of the young men who had been studying in the Yeshivot werelooking for some way of changing their lives. The growth of industry wasaccompanied by a shortage of workers, and poverty was gradually diminishing.The day’s work, to be sure, lasted ten hours but the wages were satisfactory.The members of the younger generation used to gather in separate circlesand groups either in the lovely park, or on the banks of the Prosna, or inthe dance halls. Naturally this state of affairs did not have a good effect.The youngsters as well as responsible community figures could feel theabsence of some public institution which would serve as a gathering placefor the youth, and improve their style of life.At the time Poland was responding to the slogan of “A healthy mind in ahealthy body”, and this finally crystallized in the idea of establishing societiesfor the physical development of the younger generation.The industrialist Meizner placed a hall in his factory at the disposal ofthe prospective Society, while steps were taken to obtain a permit for it.For until it was legally approved nothing serious could be undertaken.And, after several weeks of effort in various directions the rules andregulations of the new Society were approved by the Authorities, and itbegan to forge ahead. Youngsters began to flow to it. Fresh gymnasts joinedevery day. In the daytime children also came to the Club premises to engagein drill, gymnastics and various kinds of sport. All steps were on a voluntarybasis, and the need for guidance by professional sports instructors was soonfelt. A German was invited to serve as teacher and conducted the exercisesin German. Hundreds of young people belonging to all sections of the Jewishpopulation attended the inaugural meeting.As the Society began to develop the question arose whether it should restrictits activities to Sports only. For the desire to engage in cultural activitiesseemed to grow of itself. As a result of the discussion a Choir was founded,with Krotianski as choir-master. Sports competitions were held every year,as well as regular rambles and hikes in the countryside round Kalish, andswimming lessons. Each of these activities attracted hundreds of young people,so that the Society came to include almost the entire younger generation.The Society added a fresh, enjoyable and interesting dimension to thelife of the Jews in the city. But precisely when it was reaching the peak ofSOCIETY AND CULTURE139its activities the First World War broke out. The Germans invaded the cityand bombarded it, the population fled in all directions and everything wasruined. In 1915—1916 the Jews began to return and life gradually grewnormal under the German Occupation. The younger generation promptlyrenewed the activities of the Society and concentrated on them. This stateof affairs continued until Poland became independent in 1918.Within a few years the Society had become a non-party organisation fortraining youth. A Brass Band was founded and conducted by Witkowski.The younger generation began to display considerable achievements in sports,and the members of the Society were constantly among the first in all sportscompetitions in the City. In spite of the gradual appearance of politicalsocieties and organisations of all kinds among Jewish youth, this Societymaintained its position as a non-party Sports Organisation, and its activitiescontinued to provide a model and example for all the townsfolk. It maintainedthis position until 1939 when the Germans again invaded Kalish. This time itwas not the buildings of the City but the entire Jewish population which theydestroyed, with the wonderful youth of Kalish among them.8. PINCZEWSKIROWING CLUB K.W.30Rowing Club K.W.30 was founded in Kalish in order to enable the Jewishyouth to take an active part in water sports, while permitting older membersand their children to enjoy the jetty and the excellent fleet of boats whichthe Club possessed. In due course this Rowing Club became the social centreof local Jewish intellectuals with activities that spread far beyond thoseoriginally envisaged.Year by year, on the anniversary of the opening of the Club and at everyrowing competition, the members gathered en masse with their families andguests. The Club arranged Parties at the end of the year and at Purim, aswell as Dances at its Club premises from time to time. On occasion thesewere held in the larger chambers of the Town Hall or the Musical Society.In addition there were Satirical Evenings and lectures on Sports and generalthemes.It should be added that this Club K.W. 30 was an independent body and theonly one of its kind in Polish Jewry.The Municipality granted the Club a stretch of its own on the banks of theProsna, which was buttressed with planks and poles. Handsome woodenbuildings were constructed and painted in gay colours. They contained cloak-rooms, as well as a large covered area for the boats. Each member had a lockerfor his belongings. Year after year there were improvements at the jettyand the training installations. Architect L. Comber, a member of the Club,planned new buildings for Training Halls and cloakrooms. The finances werevery satisfactory and nothing held up building except the approval of theplans.140THE KALISH BOOKThere were 7 boats of excellent quality, both racing and semi-racing, whichwere purchased in Poland and abroad. They were among the best of theirkind in the country. In addition there were several dozen good rowing boats.Of the 250 members about 100 were active sportsmen, several scores of whommade up racing teams, both male and female. Jewish students spending theSummer holidays in the town were allowed to use the Club and its equipmentfor a nominal fee or even gratis. Apart from the jetty and buildings theClub had its Winter Premises in the Josephine Allee. This contained 6 rooms,a Library, a Reading Room which received many newspapers, and a Billiardand Table Tennis room. The rooms were always full to overflowing withmembers, even in Summer.The boat-racing which was chiefly engaged in in Poland required teams offour in racing boats. These needed close and well-timed cooperation of fourrowers and a coxswain for at least two years. In Kalish it was very difficultto ensure this. It was hard to build up several teams of this kind or toassure the proper combination of members in each team. In addition to thisunsatisfactory team construction, there was another difficulty. Under theconditions in which the Jews lived, the crews were bound to break up fromtime to time when one or other of the members left Poland or moved toanother city.Two years before the outbreak of the Second World War the Kalish Clubbegan to discuss a plan for sending a crew of four together with their boatto the Boating Competition in Tel-Aviv. It was decided to carry out thisplan in 1940. The Committee felt sure that the trip would serve to advancethe sportsmen of K.W. 30, would also have a good effect on the boatsmen ofTel-Aviv, would encourage everybody to make greater efforts and wouldincrease the number of sportsmen both in Kalish and elsewhere. However,those circumstances which were to make an end of Kalish Jewry preventedthis project from being realised.M. M.THE BUDGETARY SESSION OF THE KEHILLA COUNCIL, 1930A Meeting of the Kehilla Council took place at 6.30 p.m. on Sunday 16thFebruary in order to consider the Budget. Proceedings were opened by theChairman, Mr. Isaac Oder. Mr. Margulies, the Secretary, read the Minutes ofthe previous meeting in Polish, and Mr. Eisenberg then read them in Yiddish.Mr. Eisenberg stressed that there were certain discrepancies between the Minutesin the two languages, and that a Jewish Community ought to be simply ashamedot keep such Minutes in its Archives.Mr. Traube demanded that the Agenda should be amended to include a motionon easing the distress of the poverty-stricken masses, and another on the compe-tence of the Executive in signing promissory notes whenever it sees fit to do so.Mr. Eisenberg: It is not parliamentary procedure to add any more items toan Agenda that has been prepared. In view of the urgency of the matter henevertheless demanded that first there should be a discussion of ways of easingSOCIETY AND CULTURE141the distress of the impoverished Jewish masses, and only afterwards should theBudget be discussed.After an exchange between Messrs. Eisenberg, Traube and Oder, Mr. Steinwas given permission to speak and supported the proposal to deal with thedistress of the masses on account of urgency. Mr. Stein stated inter alia thatthe previous year several hundred Jewish unemployed had enjoyed Governmentsupport, while this year only thirty-odd were receiving it. He therefore thoughtthat it was the duty of the Kehilla to save the Jewish unemployed from ruinand starvation.Mr. Sheps: We cannot permit a motion which allows the Executive to signadditional promissory notes, even before they have given us a detailed Reportfor 1929.Mr. Kohn remarked that as far as the left were concerned there were onlyunemployed, while for the others there were Uso persons who were not makinga living. In his opinion it was first necessary to discuss the Budget, and onlythen to deal with the other questions.Mr. Eisenberg insisted that first there must be a discussion of the unemployedand those without any livelihood, since these were vital and urgent matters; andthe Budget should only be discussed afterwards.The question which item should first be discussed was put to the vote, andthe majority called for a prior consideration of the Budget.Mr. Kohn demanded a reconsideration of the resolution regarding the slaugh-terers, which had been adopted at the previous Meeting.(Commotion in the Gallery. Voice#: the slaughterers still have plenty to eat...We demand a discussion of the unemployed question).Mr. Gutfreund categorically opposed any reopening of the issue of the slaugh-terers.Mr. Eisenberg: If we reconsider the decision taken at the last Meeting therewill never be a finish. The same scene will recur at every Meeting.Mr. Stein thought that in order to reconsider a resolution it was necessaryfirst of all to obatin signatures. Only then could the question be discussed at thenext Meeting.When the matter was put to the vote it was resolved to re-examine the ques-tion of the slaughterers. During the renewed discussion on this matter it wasresolved inter alia that the chicken slaughterers should be paid 4,680 zloty peryear while the other slaughterers were to receive 7.800 zloty.Mr. Gutfreund: I protest vigorously at the cancellation of the resolution passedat the last session.The discussion of the Budget then began. The Secretary, Mr. Margulies. readout the following list of allocations for the year 1930:zlotyTalmud Torah12,000Mikveh repair7,000House of Study2,700Old Age Home1,000Talmud Torah1,200Artisans’ Synagogue8,000Eliza Arzeszkowa Orphanage5,000142THE KALISH BOOKBoys’ Orphanage1,500Girls’ Orphanage1,000Jewish Hospital2,000Hachnassat Orhim1,500Coal for the poor2,000Fire Brigade300Emigration1,500Linat Hatsedek3,000Gemilut Hassadim1,000Rescue Committee3,000Completing New House of Study10,000Hebrew Teacher in Government School2,400Jewish Gymnasium4,000Magen Abraham Yeshiva1,000Etz Hayim Yeshiva1,000Bet Lehem500Poor women in childbed2002 Scholarships500TOZ300Evening Classes at the Artisans’ Society1,200Unemployed3,000Mr. Eisenberg: The item of the Mikveh is fictitious, because nobody knowswhat is going on there. Of all the allocations 90% are given to religious functio-naries and only 10% for all other purposes. If you were employing Jewish wor-kers there would not be any Jewish unemployed at all (Applause from theGallery). For the Old Age Home there is actually 450 zloty instead of 1,000,and that includes the Matzot. The Eliza Orzeszkowa actually receives 1500 zlotyinstead of 5,000, and that also includes the Matzot. The same applies to theother Institutions.Mr. Eisenberg paused in particular to consier the Linat Hatsedek which isone of the most useful and important Institutions but was drowning in debts.Since 1927 it had hardly received anything from the Kehilla. The Medem Schoolshould get 3,000 zloty, the Peretz, Shurek and Borochow Schools and the popularUniversity should receive 10,000 zloty together.Mr. Sheps sharply criticised the Budget, remarking: A total of 2,000 zlotywere allocated for heating, but luckily we have had an easy winter. What wouldwe have done if the temperature had gone down to minus 40 degrees? Whatwould the poor have done? The Kehilla has also allocated 200 zloty in good cashmoney for poor women in childbirth. Isn’t this a sheer scandal? A city where19,000 Jews live is not in position to allocate anything more than 200 zloty forthose poor and exhausted women... The entire Budget is artificial!Mr. Stein (ironically): Five Budgets have already been discussed by theKehila in this automatic fashion... You could print another five copies and thenyou would have a Budget for another five years. You pass resolutions and don’tcarry them out, so what is the point of passing them? You are not fit to repre-sent us decently, you had better resign.SOCIETY AND CULTURE143He then went into details regarding the Linat Hatsedek, saying: If theKehilla allocates 3,000 zloty on paper it actually receives no more than 25%of the amount. Since the Linat Hatsedek is about to set up its own pharmacy,which will cost several thousand zloty, we propose that the Kehilla should parti-cipate in order to speed up the establishment. With regard to the allocation tothe unemployed, he demanded that payment should be made in money and notin goods.Mr. Stein then dealt with the emigration budget of 1500 zloty and demandedthat the Kehilla should distribute 5,000 zloty for this purpose. Since we couldexpect a constant worsening in the economic situation, it was clear that thestream of emigration would increase and he therefore proposed that the Kehillashould allocate 10,000 zloty for the purpose. He also demanded that the Kehillashould pay the Gemilut Hassadim Fund the allocation for the years 1927, 1928and 1929.Proceeding to the problem of the unemployed Mr. Stein stated that thoseprimarily to blame for unemployment were the Jewish industrialists who wereboycotting Jewish workers. He demanded that the Kehilla should require theJewish industrialists to abolish the special boycott of Jewish workers.Mr. Ader : No additional burden can be placed on the Budget, which is inflatedin any case. If we overload it we shall be unable to do anything.Mr. Goldstein: When the Kehilla received a letter from the Starosta (DistrictCommissioner) nobody thought it necessary to call a Meeting of the Executive.That means that some things are kept secret from the members of the Executive.As for the grants given by the Kehilla, they are not shared out on any correctscale.A resolution was submitted to pass the Budget in toto. The Resolution wasadopted. The allocations were also approved en bloc. A vote was held on Mr.Eisenberg’s proposal for the allocation of 10,000 zloty to various schools. Theproposal was rejected. Mr. Stein’s proposal for the allocation of 10,000 zloty foremigration requirements was then put to the vote and rejected.Mr. Eisenberg: In the future when we have a clear majority in the Kehillawe shall pay you back as you deserve, since you are causing us trouble, for youhave all united against us. We express our lively protest and resolve to leavethe Meeting.The Secretary, Mr. Margulies, read the supplements to the Budget but therewas so much noise that it was impossible to hear anything.The noise grew louder from moment to moment. Someone turned out the gas.Benches were overthrown. There were shouts and yells, confusion, curses, threatsagainst the Kehilla. It was impossible to calm the public.The Chairman closed the meeting at 9.30 p.m.Dot Kalisher Leben 3 (131); 2 Shevat 5690, 2S.2.1930.144THE KALISH BOOKA. K.RESULTS OF ELECTIONS TO THE KEHILLA COUNCIL, 1936The Elections to the Kehilla Council held on Sunday 6th September this yearended with the following results:List 1, Agudat Israel, 488 votes, 3 seats: Joseph Moshe Heber, HannanelRosenblum, Wolf Tosk. Deputies: Moshe Karman, Isaac Redlich, Simha Wieder-schall.List 2, The Rebbe of Wola, 200 votes, 1 seat: Noah Hiller. Deputy: JacobWaldfreid.List 4, Bund, 333 votes, 1 seat: Michael Eisenberg. Deputy: Leib Hirshbein.List 5, Zionist Labour Block, 242 votes, 1 seat: Zelig Kempinski, Deputy:Ber Gross.List 7, Poalei Zion, 366 votes, 2 seats: Sam Wolkowitch, Jacob Kenia. Deputies:Aaron Joseph Wolkowitch, Isaac Traube.List 8, Revisionists, 166 votes: no seat.List 11, Small Merchants, 240 votes, 1 seat: Hayyim Perle. Deputy: JosephSchachtel.List 12, Popular, 45 votes: No seat.List 13, Religious Worthies, 5 votes, no seat.List 14, Religious Block, 432 votes, 2 seats: Lipman Mansfeld, Nissan Gold-hammer. Deputies: Jacob Shapira, Isaac Kohn.List 15, Alexander Hassidim, 344 votes, 1 seat: Isaac Oder. Deputy: IsaacSolomon Rosenwald.List 16, Poalei Agudat Israel, 205 votes, 1 seat: Abraham Hersh Goldberg.Deputy: Mordechai Isaiah Perle.List 17, National Religious Block, 666 votes, 3 seats: Professor Asher Bakalar,Berish Shaviska, Henekh Sitner. Deputies: Jacob Lustig, Raphael Gruenbaum,Gustav Markowski.WHAT HAVE THE KEHILLA ELECTIONS TAUGHT US?The Kehilla elections were participated in by almost 4,000 of the 5,000 personswith voting rights, that is, 80% of the Kalish Jews entitled to vote. The resultsare instructive. To begin with we have seen the victories and defeats of severalorganisations, bodies and groups which claimed to be the representatives ofJewish Kalish, and their leaders and spokesmen. Yet in the light of the recentresults, in which public opinion expressed itself, we see clearly who is fit torepresent the Jewish public here and to speak in its name, and who has noright to do so.The election results proved the political maturity and healthy instincts ofthe Jewish public, which is unaffected by cheap phraseology, in spite of the so-called “press’ of a certain kind whose whole purpose was to degrade honest andworthy leaders. For months on end they did their best to blacken the reputa-tions of communal representatives of long standing and of the Orthodox majorityTHE MEN OF THE CITY145in the Kehilia headed by the Chairman Mr. J. M. Heber. Yet the Jewish publicdistinguished between destructive activities and beneficial honest measures forthe good of the public, and gave its main support for List One.If we remember that List One went alone to the elections and received 488votes while List 17, the Block that included the Zionists, Mizrahi, Hehalutz,Great Synagogue, Artisans, National Artisans, Small Merchants, Travellers toFairs, "Jewish State Party” and others as included in their own lists, obtainedonly 666 votes, we must reach the conclusion that List One gained a tremendousvictory, both numerical and moral.If we bear in mind the fact that the systematic incitement did not affect theresults of the elections at all, we can describe the latter as a victory of truthover falsehood. We can also view them as a barometer of Jewish society, whichhas proved its political awareness and maturity and has functioned worthilyat this hour of grave political decision. That is our consolation in these bittertimes, and from this we shall draw the courage to hold out until better times.Dos Kalisher Leben 31 (454); 27nd Elul 5696, 9.9.1936.DR. P. BEATUSTHE JEWISH HOSPITALAdam Hodinski, the honoured historian of our city, states that the JewishHospital was founded in 1835 from the contributions of the Jewish residents.This date is not quite accurate. The Hospital was founded in 1837. The Councilof the Institution set up a small provisional Hospital consisting of one room ina building belonging to the Jewish Community, and placed it under the chargeof Dr. Michael Morgenstern. The treatment of the, poor patients in the city wasalso entrusted to the Hospital's Director.On 26th March 1836 Dr. Morgenstern presented a Report to the aforesaidCouncil. From this, and from all the reactions which this Report aroused amongthe authorities, it is easy to understand that in 1836 there was no Hospital inexistence as yet, and its foundation took place during the first period of officeof the Committee of the Institution in Kalish, and the main Committee inWarsaw.Official recognition of the Committee of the Jewish Hospital was registeredon 9th December, 1835. The Hospital itself was not built from the ground upas had been done in Warsaw, Lublin, Radom and other cities, but was housedin a reconstructed building purchased in the year 1837, which was situated inthe Piskozhewska Street.The Hospital was built from contributions made by the entire Jewish public,which were paid to the Kehilia. Here, however, I must return to the ThirteenthCentury when the Jews of Kalish were permitted to build a synagogue onground belonging to the Canonican Church (the Church of Holy Mikolai) andwere charged with an annual tax the payment of which was to be secured146THE KALISH BOOKfrom income of the Kehilla deriving from slaughter (Shehita) and from thefour inns belonging to the Synagogue. This tax was not paid regularly, andafter the Order was abolished in 1810 the debt amounted to 14,967 zloty. ThePriest Ignaci Prszebilski, head of the Church Community of Mikola the Holy,imposed an attachment on the funds of the Kehilla, aiming at the HospitalFund as well.Ludwig Mamrot, Chairman of the Hospital Committee, began to take measuresfor the cancellation of this step. The Hospital Archives record that in 1840 thecase was heard at the High Court of Appeal in Warsaw, and the Funds of theJewish Hospital were released from the attachment.In the continuation we read that the Kalish Municipality thereupon com-menced a long trial against the Hospital, demanding payment of taxes amountingto 232 zloty. A Government Committee, to be sure, recommended that theInstitution should be exempted from taxation, but the Municipal Council was notprepared to renounce its claim so easily. On 1st. April 1837 the claims of theMunicipality were dismissed in virtue of an Order issued by the Govemorateof Kalish.This was not the only conflict which the Hospital had with the Municipality.There was a matter of land-tax. The plot on which the Hospital was builthad been purchased on perpetual leasehold. The vendor undertook to pay theMunicipality a tax of 1 Thaler and 20 Groschen twice a year; and after thesale the purchaser was to pay 5% of the estimated value. In accordance withthis agreement the Municipality demanded the sum of 1,838 zloty from theHospital Committee. The trial regarding this payment had not yet been endedin 1848, and litigation still continued in 1868. Finally the amount was dividedand paid off in instalments.In 1863 the Central Committee requested that in negotiations with the Autho-rities use should no longer be made of the expression “Hospial for the FullyFaithful” (Starozakonani) but “The Jewish Hospital”.From what has been written above we learn that the Municipality was neverthe owner of the Hospital and even evinced a hostile attitude towards it.In 1871 the Hospital Committee requested the Municipality to repair thebank of the Prosna that lay within the Hospital grounds. The Municipalityreplied in the negative, explaining that the plot and the ground were the pro-perty of the Jewish Community, and Jews alone were treated as patients there.Hence the Municipal exchequer was not required to meet this outlay of 81roubles 20 kopeks, which was not considerable and could easily be collectedfrom the numerous wealthy Jews of our City. In October of the same year theMunicipality wrote to the Curator, Maurici Mamrot, that since Winter wasapproaching they requested him to repair the banks of the Prosna within hisproperty, otherwise he would be held responsible for any damages that mightresult.Can there by any further doubt that the Municipality is not the owner of theHospital? However, there are two reasons for its claim. One is: During the(first) World War the German Occupants entrusted the Jewish Hospital to theMunicipality, and did the same with the “Hospital of the Holy Trinity”, inaccordance with the practice in Germany. The second reason is: Registration inTHE MEN OF THE CITY147the Land Registry has only recently been completed* The contract of purchasewas signed by Mamrot and Redlich, who were acting on behalf of the Kehilia;but that fact is not mentioned in the contract.And so it came about that the Municipality built an additional wing to theHospital without asking any permission from the owners of the land. TheKehilia conducted its own Health Service properly, and we find evidence ofthis in the 1839 Report of Czetirkin, Inspector of Health Services, who wrote asfollows: “The Jewish Hospital is excellently arranged, and the noble effortsthey make in their care for the sick in spite of their limited resources areworthy of all praise.”It was the Kehilia which supplied all the needs of the Hospital. Now all theimplements and equipment have been transferred to the “Hospital of the HolyTrinity” while only patients suffering from Internal and Venereal Diseases,mostly Christians, are admitted to the Jewish Hospital. Is it reasonable that aJew should be able to find a place only with difficulty in a Jewish Hospital?The Kehilia appealed to the Court and lost. It was decided that the Hospital isCommunal.Since there had been no registration in the Land Register, the Hospital haspassed into the possession of the Inter-Community Association which regards itas municipal property.Our Hospital was founded on the initiative of the Jewish population and wasabsolutely religious in character. Evidence of this is the Synagogue built therein the year 1885 by the heirs of Jeanette Apt. The Kehilia alone is capable ofensuring the religious character of the Institution, which was established onbehalf of one religious grouping within the total population. In the course ofthe hundred years that the Hospital has been in the hands of the Kehilia theMunicipality not only did not help it but actually harmed it.Yet there is another reason for the Municipality’s haste in proclaiming theHospital to be public property. After the Germans had burnt Kalish the PrussianGeneral Bessler prepared a plan for improving the City. According to this plan,which is to be found in the Warsaw Archives, all the houses in NadwodnaStreet on the left Bank of the Prosna were to be demolished and replaced bygardens. The Authorities approved the plan and the Hospital is also to bedemolished. If it should be municipal property, the Municipality would nothave to pay any compensation to the Kehilia.At the beginning of the Twentieth Century we proposed the building of amodem Hospital. The Silberstein Heirs contributed a plot of 2 morgen of landin the Udzialowa Street for the purpose, but the Municipality has impoundedthis property as well.*A DECADEjiGRAFIKA”J l w|,Jc.i P. SKOWRON-BEflTUSJiKallsz, ul. 6-go Slerpnia 3telefon 347JjL n >M* ,n —*1? mn-r\*nv'* *'»Mfoy n r» fnunrix wrwjiA ' ^‘s>sNfliiw mnnniMW n»>»y *>*iimwH» ]»>"? P*WrJE “ > ”* „g^g%^=-■I ^ 2E32S3SBWHa-r 1? t * 9 tf 1 »h + 9*^ LT^BMu-wafaf,n -14 W’axa I "OTiRpya 1R. HAJSZREKKailsz. PRsudsKiego 11 inni)* ’ M1B1I„, vvi»i Pi *m»# * «M»2T!SSa«OT : 1!r* *i'>».?A DECADE149KALISH IN 5687Our history has been enriched by one more year.Another year is over with all its happenings, both good and bad. We havegrown more mature, and that enables us to learn lessons and draw suitableconclusions. Together with Jewry as a whole, Kalish Jewry has to make asumming-up at the close of the past year, in the fields of culture and economicsalike. Let our more satisfactory achievements serve us as an example in orderthat we may double them in the future. And let our errors serve as warningto our leading personalities, in order that they may not repeat them. Let usbriefly survey the departing year before we bid it farewell.CultureWe would have done better if we had chosen “Lack of Culture” as ourheading, or if we had left a blank space. For if we propose to discuss thissubject at all we shall blush with shame at the ostensible cultural achievementsof our city.There is not a single Jewish society, or association, party group which doesnot feel that it has the holy duty of promising its members, in the veryfirst lines of its programme, that it is going to do wonders in the field ofCulture. All the parties, right and left, orthodox and other, promised theirmembers that they would provide a series of informative lectures whichwould help to satisfy the general longing for and aspiration towards informa-tion and Science in general and Jewish Knowledge in particular. Surely thiswas a field in which every group could show its capacity and prowess andtalents. How regrettable that none of these possibilities was realised. Nothingmore was achieved than a few beginnings at the most.During the whole of the past year not a single important lecture wasdelivered and not one scientific lesson was given in the fields to which wereferred. All we heard was petty party skirmishing and the settling of privateaccounts, which spoilt the members for anything useful; and that was all.A somewhat more serious approach and a little good will might have givenrise to tremendous results. If the leaders of the Societies take this to heartthe error will not be repeated.EducationThe educational situation in the community is more or less satisfactory.There is a network of hadarim and schools. Every party or current sparesneither money nor effort, and they all do their best to ensure the propereducation of the younger generation. Obviously each party does what it canto inculcate its own approach and methods; but this does not worry usmuch. Every Jewish father endeavours to send his children to the institutionthat is closest to his own point of view.Besides the hadarim and elementary schools we also have a Gymnasiumwith eight classes, the “Havatzelet” School for girls and the Trade School.In the course of their existence these institutions have rightly won the150THE KALISH BOOKapproval of the public. However, two matters in this field are not satisfactory.To begin with, a certain section of the parents do not appreciate theseschools but send their children to Christian schools which are alien, wheretheir Jewish souls are spoilt and they become estranged from their own people.This is partly due to insufficient explanation and propaganda; but it issomething that can still be put right.The second mistake is that fourteen hundred children are sent to Govern-ment schools, where they are almost forcibly estranged from us. We shallsuffer from this mistake before long, when this young generation grows upto be entirely assimilationist and absolutely without any contact with us.However, we have done our duty on all occasions and opportunities, andfrom our columns we have warned the public, rebuking them for the greatwrong done to our little ones. The correction of this mistake lies in thehands of our communal worthies who have both the power and the resources.CommerceIn our city wholesale and retail trade, together with handicrafts to somedegree, are dependent on the village purchasers. They in turn are dependenton the crops, which fix the peasant's purchasing power. During recent yearsthe peasants and farmers have become accustomed to using better-qualityproducts, and now their purchases depend entirely on their income.Last year the crops were unsatisfactory, and obviously the farmer’s purchas-ing power fell off considerably. But at the beginning of the harvest, whenthe peasant hungers for goods, he disregards such considerations and buyswhatever comes his way. And so the last year can be divided into twoparts: During the early months trade was almost satisfactory, but duringthe rest of the year it was almost at a complete standstill.However, the local Tax Commissioner completely ignored the state ofbusiness, and last year the Tax press squeezed hard. If the appeals of mostof the merchants are not satisfactorily considered, they will simply have toshut their shops.The three Jewish economic organisations should have done far more inorder to make the Tax Authorities realise the real situation of the merchants,and in that way save trade and commerce from collapse.The Lace IndustryThe Lace Industry, which was once the backbone of Kalish economy anda decisive influence in the rapid development of the city, has ceased to beimportant since the War and hardly has any influence at all. All efforts tosign a Commercial Agreement with Russia have been unsuccessful, althoughRussia before the War was the main customer of the local Lace Industry.So for the time being and until trade with neighbouring countries is restoredour industrialists must rest satisfied with the local market.The result is that the machines work only six months a year and in onlya few factories. The absence of any steady demand has compelled the laceA DECADE151manufacturers to unite, or at least not to compete with one another. Theyhave set up a common fund, to which each manufacturer makes a certaincontribution per kilogram of finished product. When the branch is at astandstill the manufacturer receives seventy-five zloty per week for eachmachine standing idle.The Fine Lace Industry has recently begun to develop in our city. Hundredsof these machines are now operating here. But as long as the Tariff War withGermany continues there is no hope of better prospects in this branch. Inany case it is clear that when a Trade Agreement is signed with Germanythe Government will have to take this manufacture into account, in orderto prevent the Polish market from being flooded by German lace.In some measure this industry has solved the problem of unemployment forthe present, and the Government must take this into consideration.Flour MillsThe second branch of industry in which Kalish stands out and of whichit is proud is its flour mills. Kalish plays an important part in the foodsupply of Poland through its flour industry. The grain that is ground herereaches the whole of Zaglembia from Kattowitz on the one side, and as faras Bialystok, Vilna* and the Russian frontier on the other.This development of the industry and the numerous mills secure the livingof large numbers of Jews. It also supports quite a few grain merchants whosell their goods by the railway waggon, and market merchants who alsosupply the grain to the mills.Last year the crop was not satisfactory, and the grain trade was almost ata standstill. Most of the corn was imported and the large mills managedwithout difficulty. This was not so easy for the small mills, including dealersand agents who have nothing to do, because all transactions were signeddirectly with the mills.The market dealers have no business because next to no grain was boughtfrom the villages. To sum up, the flour mills did not have a bad year,though the trade in cereals underwent a crisis.The export of bran and chaff to Germany, which always served as animportant factor in regulating the price of flour in Poland, has recently beenprohibited. More precisely, a customs duty of 7.5 zloty per cubic metre hasbeen imposed. This duty has stopped exports completely. It would only beproper to abolish it. Poland has never been in a position to consume all thebran and chaff It produces. Now, in view of the tremendous surpluses andthe fall in prices, the millers will have to find themselves some compensationby raising the price of flour, and it is clear that the Government is notinterested in that.Productive AssistanceKalish has done a great deal in this respect, and is certainly not behindotfter cities in the country. Here we have two Cooperative Banks whichlargely help the Jewish merchants. Their tremendous development is the best152THE KALISH BOOKproof possible of the confidence they have gained in local mercantile circles.The second Institution which has gained the confidence of the public is the“Gemilut Hassadim Fund” also known as the Relief Committee, whose loansare granted without interest. Thousands of families who would otherwise havehad to apply for charity have recovered thanks to the assistance of the ReliefCommittee; and that is certainly a tremendous achievement.★Those in brief are our achievements during the past year. As remarked,let us hope that the errors will serve as a warning and not be repeated,while the achievements are doubled and more.May a New Year begin with all its blessings.Kalisher Leben 12; New Year’s Eve 5688, 25.9.1927.KALISH 5688We are on the threshold of a New Year, to which we look forward withhope and faith. To be sure, it is only the faith of the Jew that gives us thestrength to withstand our distresses and look ahead to better times. Today,at the end of 5688, let us sum up the debit and credit sides of Jewish lifein Kalish.We shall register the important events and preserve them in our memoryin order to forestall the evil that may come, and in the hope of doubling thegood in so far as we have done good deeds. May these words be a thanks-giving offering to those individuals who worked to help the Jewish public inKalish; and may those who neglected their public duties give ear and magnifytheir efforts, so as not to lag behind their good colleagues in the year to come.The greatest impress on the public was made by the Local Governmentelections. The Jewish statesmen of the City became ardently enthusiastic, andwe even feared that we would never achieve any joint Jewish list at all.However, political common-sense proved victorious, and the large and in-fluential parties presented a common list. Thanks to the joint stand in theelections of such parties as the Agudat Israel, the Zionists and the SmallMerchants we won a complete victory. List No. 16 gained the largest numberof seats, as it had fondly hoped.Still, it is true that if their votes had been supplemented by the lostvotes of List 8, and the surplusses of List 17, the number of Jewish coun-cillors would have been still greater. But we shall never be short of personalambitions, and it seems that we shall never succeed in surmounting them.The satisfactory results of the victory were soon seen. The successfulelection of our candidate to the office of Alderman will certainly ensure asatisfactory and beneficial policy in the Town Hall, for the good of JewishKalish. And we may certainly say that our work was not in vain.A DECADE153It is possible that sceptics do not yet see the “golden mountains” of thenew policy. Let us remind them of the Polish proverb that “Krakow wasnot built in a day.” It would be a good thing if several of our local hotheadswere to remember this.★The Town Council is opening its term of office while our Kehilla (JewishCommunal Council) is preparing for elections because its term of office willsoon be over.According to information from the District Offices the Elections must beover by the 2nd December. So the Kehilla Executive and Council will do wellbefore giving up office to publish a report of activities during their four yearsat their posts.We are very well aware that when things were taken over from thePamassim (wardens) it was necessary to begin everything from the beginning.And indeed the organisation of the business of the Kehilla is a great achieve-ment and will he remembered in favour of the Executive, who did notflinch from responsibility but transferred the Shehita (ritual slaughter) toits own control. A beginning has been made with the construction of theTalmud Torah Building, but when will it be finished? In addition the Mikvehhas been improved and the allocations for certain institutions have been paid.Yet it must be stated that the Kehilla is not sufficiently interested, or maybenot interested at all, in the education of the younger generation.Thousands of Jewish children are being educated according to principleswhich are alien, almost hostile, to everything that is Jewish; yet the Kehilladisregards this. Surely it is in a position to help by opening an afternoonschool for children attending the Government schools. That will save Jewishchildren. In addition the children at the Talmud Torah are taught unsyste-matically and without any useful purpose. For what is a Jewish childtrained to do after he leaves the Talmud Torah?Why do we not remember the old Talmudic statement that any study ofTorah which is not accompanied with a handicraft leads to idleness? Let ushope that this defect will be corrected in the new building.★We have heard a great deal about the restoration of the Synagogue, butsee no signs of any steps being taken. Every year allocations are made forthe Relief Committee, yet they are not given a penny. Surely it would bebetter not to allocate anything and finished, as is the practice with “TOZ”and various other institutions.And we have another question to the Community Executive: What is thepoint in electing a Council and calling on it to approve the Budget, if it is notinvited to hear a Report on activities?★Large numbers of Jews find a little help in the Cooperative Bank. Thetremendous progress which the Bank has made during the last year marks154THE KALISH BOOKan institution of which Kalish Jewry may well be proud. Nor is it a matterfor pride alone. The Bank has really saved thousands of shop-keepers andcraftsmen, who have been delivered from the money-lenders in the streetsonly thanks to the help it has given. For the Bank's affairs are in full order,and show us that all currents which represent the general public in it arecapable of working together harmoniously. We have only to wish it continuedsuccess and expansion, in the same way as it has grown until now.Just as the Cooperative Bank has worked for the benefit of the masses ofcraftsmen and small shop-keepers, so the Merchants' Bank has helped theindustrialists and larger merchants. This is a relatively youthful institution inour city, but it already enjoys the recognition and esteem of the biggerbusinessmen and manufacturers. It was easy for us to learn what is going onhere. At the general meeting of the Merchants' Bank we heard a report onits activities. No better proof of the confidence of the public, which is sojustly vested in the Bank, can be found than its tremendous turnover duringthe past year. The Institution was established thanks to the initiative of a fewindividuals; and owing to their obstinacy and persistence we now have aBank of which we may be proud.These institutions with all their local activity are incomparably helpfulto merchants, manufacturers and craftsmen alike. Yet at the same time theGemilut Hassadim Fund is a necessity for thousands of families whom theBanks cannot help. The slight assistance they are given they receive fromthis Fund or, as it is called, the Relief Committee. It is superfluous to writeabout all that this institution does, for everybody can see the results. Yetit is our duty to remark that the Jewish public of Kalish has not yet shownany adequate appreciation for it.Admittedly we must point out again that in spite of our repeated remindersthe Management of the Gemilut Hassadim has not yet found time to engagein a drive for contributions; and if no one demands, nobody gives. It followsthat both sides are equally to blame, the Management and the public alike.It is our duty to give a warning. If the Fund does not expand its activities itwill deviate from the purposes laid down by its founders and will graduallybe transformed into nothing more than a very large charitable institution.This is how things appear: on the one hand efforts are made to help Jewsto hold out, while on the other the pressure of taxes is increasing tounimaginable dimensions and may well take the food from the mouts ofmany Jewish families. The Income Tax rates are now being fixed, and thefate of every Jew will be sealed. The Jewish economic associations muststand on guard, carefully preparing all the material that is submitted toCommittee members in order that the latter may be able to work properly.If this is not done all the outcry of those who are badly treated will beuseless later on; particularly those who have been wrongly assessed bymistake.The Jewish economic societies displayed ample activity last year, and thensomething became perfectly clear. As the influence of the political partieson the masses declined, the influence of the economic organisations grewgreater.A DECADE155We shall not try to explain this development now. Yet it is clear to usthat a large part of the change is due to the disappointment of the public.The political parties deceived them more than once by promising mountainsand valleys without fulfilling any of their promises. Let this serve as a lessonto the Economic Societies which have gained the hegenomy over the Jewishstreet. Let them be more careful in their methods, and act according to therule: Say little but do much.★The condition of cultural activities in our city is a miserable one. Thereis not even a single serious organisation or society to engage in our culturaland educational problems without narrow political and party interests.We regret that most of our Jews in Kalish have no understanding of whatmay be the most important issue of all. We always see the same sad sight.While one drags right the other drags left; and the ordinary Jew, the all-the-year-round Jew, remains perplexed and confused and does not knowwhat to do. Finally he pays no attention, neither to one nor to the other,and meanwhile he sends his children to the Government schools. As a resultthe younger generation of Jews gradually become a weak limb of the nation,assimilating little by little. At the same time the party leaders to right andleft can hear mocking laughter at their pretended concern for Jewish culture,but by now they are unable to improve matters. We can see how when itis a matter of sharing posts, honours, etc., the leaders of all the parties canreach an immediate understanding. But when it is a matter of what may bethe most important issue of all they cannot find and modus vivendi. Thesegentlemen should remember that if they do not pay careful attention to thismatter they may be left without a Community to control.★It is notable that while many institutions only exist for the seat and therubber stamp, a youthful institution like “TOZ” has already achieved much.Here we shall not refer to its financial resources. If the Jews of Kalish wereto help it properly its activities would naturally be wider and better. In spiteof this, “TOZ” has maintained Summer Holiday Camps for three hundredchildren during two seasons. The children receive good food and properpedagogical and medical supervision. We can only hope that “TOZ” will bewell supported and helped to build an Orphanage for Winter — its immediateobjective.★The above is a brief summary of Jewish life in Kalish during 5688. There ismuch to improve. Let those who can improve matters take the necessary steps.We ourselves shall continue to support every just cause, we shall be a platformfor every just complaint and help to realise every good idea. Maybe we shallat last achieve the old saying: May the year with its curses end and theyear with its blessings begin.Das Kalisher Leben, 27 (55); New Year’s Eve 5689, 14,9.1928.156THE KALISH BOOKKALISH IN 5689Let us now try to sum up all the joys and sorrows of Kalish Jewry duringthe past year. If we paint ourselves the necessary picture, we shall be ableto prepare a report and learn lessons for the future from it.To be sure we were full of hope at the beginning of the year, and werecertain that things would begin to go well. For it was hard to assume thatwe would still have the strength to bear any more spiritual and economiccrises. But it seems that there are no limits to trouble and distress; andpeople can be relied on to reveal the strength to withstand them as theycome.The parting year, which was so tragic for Jewry throughout the worldbecause it ended with the savage disturbances in Eretz Israel, was certainlynot happy in any economic respect for Polish Jewry. In this regard weunderwent a great shock. This unhappy situation also reigned in the economiclife of Kalish, particularly in local industry which is largely in Jewish hands.There were certain branches in which competition was almost savage, andthe merchants and dealers took bills whose dated payments were deferredalmost indefinitely.The transformation that came about in the whole country regarding thedate of payment of promissory notes naturally did not miss Kalish. As aresult there were quite a few cases of bankruptcy and the closing of businessesin the city. By now the situation has begun to settle down, and those factoriesthat have surmounted the crisis are secure more or less. They are doingtheir best to make a profit and even succeeding.The economic situation of the city suffered a severe blow through thebankruptcy of the Bank Kupiecki. This was a popular institution headed byoutstanding business and social personalities. As was natural, the presence ofthose leaders ensured that the masses should trust the institution. Undoubtedlythe merchant, or anybody else, deposited his savings in this Bank because hebelieved in the responsibility of the Management. The community was struckby the news of the failure like thunder from the bright blue sky. After ayear of waiting the depositors have not yet seen a penny of their savings.Those “trustworthy” leaders are to blame for this delay.It is not surprising that this unforeseen financial collapse of a Jewishinstitution has also given rise to uncertainty about other Jewish institutionsof this kind in Kalish. The public has begun to think and hesitate. But thehealthy instinct of the masses ensured their trust in the Cooperative Bank;and we are happy that we have learnt that the popular instinct was notwrong. From this incident we have learnt a very significant lesson. Aninstitution does not need noisy publicity nor does it have to be headed by“stars”. It is better if it is a popular institution managed by simple people,for then it can be trusted.While we are dealing with our local financial institutions we should mentionthe important part played by the Gemilut Hassadim Fund among thecraftsmen and small merchants in general; for it saves them from destructionand economic extinction. In the process of pauperisation which the JewishA DECADE157masses are undergoing, the Gemilut Hassadim Funds are a true salvation.Yet at the same time we must note the complete indifference of our well-to-docircles towards this useful institution. This attitude of theirs is almost ascandal. It may cripple the existence of the Fund and deprive hundreds ofJewish families in our city of a crust of bread.Jewish Economic SocietiesDuring the past year there have been several domestic revolutions, andchanges have taken place in the leading positions. In the first line came theMerchants' Society where Mr. Shelak was elected chairman. He was alsochosen as Adviser to the Lodz Chamber of Commerce. This change came aboutas a result of the bankruptcy of the Merchants' Bank, whose directors werealso the heads of the Society. After the changes in the Management theMerchants' Society regained the confidence of the Jewish public. It is now avery useful economic body that does a great deal for its members.The second change came in the Society of Artizans, whose previous Manage-ment had taken a very arrogant personal line. Its dictatorial methods gaverise to dissatisfaction, and the General Meeting elected ordinary people withoutany labels that had been prepared in advance. Truth to tell, the struggle inthis Society is not yet over. Things are not yet entirely in order, but even inthis case we can rely on the healthy instincts of the members and believe thatthey will elect the leaders they deserve.On the other hand there has been no change in the Small Merchants' Society.The heads of this Society are concerned first and foremost with the heavyburden of taxation, and the problems of making a living which always worrythe numerous members. There is no room for personal intrigues in the lifeof the worried small merchants who have to manage from day to day.In general those responsible for the activities of this Society stand firm, anddefend their members' interests wherever this is necessary.Yet what can be the supposed strength of these three economic Organisationsagainst the Sword of Damocles named Taxes, which always hangs over theirheads?In this respect our City is worse off than others, and the tax machinegrinds mercilessly here. With all our efforts to make things somewhat easier,we have failed. So it was with the Assessment on Turnover, and so it is nowwith the Income Tax Assessment, which is at present under preparation inour City and is terrifying the remnant of the merchants. That is whateconomic life is like in Kalish today.★There have been no improvements in our social life either. The Kehilla,(Community Council), whose term of office is long over, did not do anythingserious in the year 5689. Indifference, somnolence, helplessness marked theactivities of our representatives. They did nothing, they showed no initiative,they took no positive steps in the fields of charity or culture. The Kehilladoes not have the necessary cooperation and harmony for the public wellbeing.Our wardens and bosses do not even dream of worrying about the education158THE KALISH BOOKof thousands of children, some of whom receive a “supposed education” inthe choking atmosphere of the Talmud Torah whose new building is stillunder construction... Most of them are drawing away from their people andtheir own language in the official schools, while nobody says a word. Thequarrels about the Dayan (Assistant Rabbi) and Cantor have continued fora long time, but nobody has even given a thought to really serious communalactivity.Even the Hospital has been neglected, and that has caused much distressand bitterness. Yet we have not seen any real steps in this field either. Theparty men are out for party victories all the time, to the discredit of theother sides. So sure enough scarcely anything has been achieved during 5689.★Matters are different in the Local Authority. In the Jewish “Group” thereyou can find harmonious cooperation. Our representatives do their best toexploit every opportunity and every possibility for the benefit of the public.We owe this largely to our Alderman. Thanks to him the Relief Funds ofthe Local Government and other sources were opened to us in order to makeJewish poverty a little easier. In general, ever since Mr. Heber has enteredthis post the degraded position of the Jew in the Municipal institutions hasfaded away little by little.To be sure there is nothing to be enthusiastic about. We know that muchwater will still flow down to the sea before our rights become an actual fact.But this is not restricted to Kalish alone. In this respect we have to take partin the struggle of all Polish Jewry.★Cultural activities among the Jewish population have not improved at all.The regrettable situation we recorded last year is still to be found. All thisfield of action has become stamped with the party credos, and there is nogenuine concern for cultural education.In this respect the situation is so regrettable that there is simply nothingto report. Let us hope that matters will improve next year and there willbe more positive developments.Yes, in the field of physical education Jewish Kalish developed well during5689. A number of Jewish Sports Clubs were established and are developingsatisfactorily. In addition the Fifteenth Birthday of the Yiddish Turn andSports Club was celebrated on a lavish scale.★So here is a brief summary of public activity in Jewish Kalish. In generalit was a very difficult year both economically and socially. The positivelessons to be learnt from this year’s developments are very few. Let themserve as a warning for the future.May the year 5689 with all that happened during it be relegated to thepast, and may the coming year bring happiness to us and to all Israel.Kalisher Leben, 28 (110); New Year’s Eve 5690, 4.1.1929.A DECADE159KAUSH IN 5690We stand on the threshold of a New Year. Let us try to sum up Jewishlife in Kalish during the year that has passed.To tell the truth, we did not expect miracles but the realities were farworse than we anticipated. The economic life of the whole country reacheda very low point, and it is not surprising that Jewish trade and industry felleven lower. Jewish Kalish shared in the grave economic crisis. Factories wereclosed or worked only part-time. In general no buyers were found for theirgoods. The crisis was made even worse by the fact that the Jewish in-dustrialists received no Government credits, and credit from the street didnot permit manufacture on any reasonable basis of calculation. The Jewishmerchants and craftsmen found a little consolation in the meagre amountof credit provided by the Cooperative Bank.However, this Institution was also hit by the general situation and is nowin a state of convalescence. We shall not go seeking for the causes of thissituation. Larger institutions were shaken last year and actually collapsed,while our Cooperative Bank held firm. To be sure, banking activities werediminished this year, but we were not in a position to increase them. Still,we have to strengthen the Bank, for by doing so we shall all grow stronger.The Artizans* Society underwent an internal crisis during the year. Controlwent back to the “veteran” leaders, though there have been changes in theexternal representation. The near future will show whether this is going tohelp.Yet whatever our economic representatives may do to make the crisiseasier they cannot change the situation, for the roots of the distress lie inthe tax system which crushes trade and industry. Our Kalish, which in thisrespect is under “close supervision”, is simply being levelled flat under theburden of heavy taxation. Our only hope lies in recent rumours of taxcancellations for several years, and a radical change in the Income Taxsystem. For the time being we live on hope. And we very much hope thatthese will not end like similar election promises.A result of the present crisis is the tremendous increase in the number ofpersons applying for loans to the Gemilut Hassadim Fund. This institution isthe real barometer for the Jewish economic situation. To our regret wewitness a complete contrast between the desirable and actual situations. Thegreater the number of applicants, the fewer are the supporters. The numberof weekly contributors to the Fund grows less and less every week, andthe Management are not in a position to satisfy the increasing number ofapplications. It is the sacred duty of our local Jewish population to supportthis Fund, which is at present the most useful thing we have.In our Kehilla there is domestic peace. The members of the Executive arefinding ways not to fight. They always discover the golden mean whichsatisfies all groups represented. The only time there was anything like aquarrel was when several wardens wanted to appoint two additional Dayanim.However, common sense prevailed and for the time being it is not an urgentissue. That is what our communal representative institution is like. Silence,160THE KALISH BOOKno disputes, indifference, slumber without effort or action. Does this idyll giveevidence of fruitful public activity? We shall not answer this question here.But it is generally agreed that our wardens could be doing considerablymore.Kalish saw one satisfactory development with the restoration of the GreatSynagogue. It is true that those who prayed there were literally riskingtheir lives, because bricks and pieces of plaster had begun falling on theirheads. Thanks to the energy and insistence of the members of the newSynagogue Committee the interior has been restored and renovated. Apartfrom the assurance regained by the Congregation, they now have an aesthetic-ally satisfying House of Prayer as well. We should add that the vast financialresources which were needed for the restoration were collected by theCommittee from the local Jewish population; and that is a happy situationwhich should be noted.★Jewish cultural life has been marked by complete neglect.During the past year no activity in this field could be noticed. Good will,to be sure, was shown and even a strong desire to found a Cultural Society.But ideas alone are not enough. The non-establishment of such an institutionis the sin of the local Jewish cultural representatives. We must on noaccount neglect this matter. We shall go on demanding the establishmentof a Jewish Cultural Society in Kalish until it has been established.On the other hand our educational institutions are fairly satisfactory.We have a first-class Trade School conducted according to the most up-to-datepedagogical principles, with a staff of excellent teachers. In spite of this itis rather backward. This is due to the masses of Jews who still refuse tounderstand how important the School is for the coming generation of crafts-men. The Jewish public has to get used to the idea of vocational training inevery way possible, and raise a new generation in this school for its ownbenefit.The Jewish Gymnasium does not require any publicity at all. The Matri-culation Certificates which it issues every year, and its large number ofpupils, are the best evidence of the excellent education which it provides.But the Jewish public have not done their duty for the Gymnasium. Theyhave not taken steps to provide it with a building of its own suited to theneeds of so important an Institution. The time has come to bring bricks forconstruction. Our community has to do this job as a matter of sheer self-respect.★Mention should be made of the political maturity shown by the Jews inthe last elections to the Seim and the Senate. At many public meetings afirm and absolute demand was made to establish an all-inclusive NationalElection Block. We know beyond any shadow of doubt that if two lists arepresented the local seat is certain to be lost. So even if the leaders of theparties in Warsaw do not reach an agreement about this, our own regionmust present a united list of its own, headed by a generally respectedleader of the Community.A DECADE161★This balance sheet is not at all a cheerful one. The path of the JewishCommunity is strewn with thorns. Still, we tread it restored and full of faith.May this be our consolation. The year is passing and we are now waitingfor better times. May they come indeed!Kalisher Leben 37 (159); 19th Ellul 5890, 12.9.1930.KALISH IN 5691The year 5691 was difficult for Jews in every respect. The terrible worldcrisis which has affected so many nations and countries penetrated deepinto Jewish life and shook our well-based positions. The year was marked bythe economic ruin that ran riot through the whole world and hit the Jewshardest of all. As a result all other problems of Jewish life became ofsecondary importance, and our thoughts were dedicated only to finding arefuge from the crisis and easing the distress. Yet in spite of this we shalltry to sum up the important events of our Jewish world.★This was first and foremost the year of elections. Elections were held tothe Seim and the Senate. The Jewish parties all acted separately, and adeep abyss appeared between them. This division and struggle grew evendeeper in the recent elections to the Kehilla, in which the Agudat Israel andthe Zionists chiefly contended against one another. The atmosphere of thosedays still continues, and to our regret there is no likelihood that these twoelements will extend their hands to one another for the sake of Jewishinterests, which call for unity and intensified work together at this criticalhour.The Shehita (slaughtering) fees scandal exacerbated the quarrels anddivision. It was found that the Kehilla had been deceitfully robbed of manythousands of zloty. The Zionist wardens actually threatened to bring slaughter-ers of their own.During the past year the Jewish representatives in the Town Council, andthe Jewish Community as a whole fought a bitter fight for the existence ofthe Jewish Hospital. There were certain groups which wished to liquidatethis Institution entirely, or at least to merge it in the Polish Hospital; thusrestricting its activities to a minimum and ensuring that in due course it wouldbe entirely forgotten. Our journal, “Kalisher Leben”, was the first to soundthe alarm. We awakened Jewish public opinion and conducted a campaign toensure that the Institution should remain a Jewish Hospital in all respects.The Jewish Council members and various communal figures conductedstormy consultations. The Jewish public protested at mass meetings. Finallythose who wished to destroy the Jewish character of the Hospital and closeit down had to give way to the pressure of Jewish public opinion, whichproved to be firm and united about this matter.162THE KALISH BOOKIn connection with this campaign, Doctor Edward Beatus published a seriesof articles in the “Kalisher Leben” in which he proved by historical factsthat the Jewish Hospital belonged to the Jews, and that Jews alone havethe right to own it.★The economic crisis also led the Town Council to cancel its allocations toJewish charitable institutions. Naturally this decision shook those bodies,which are undergoing a severe crisis. As a result so important an institutionas the nocturnal First Aid Station of the Linat Hatsedek Society was closed.That is a tremendous loss for the Jewish Community. Let us hope that thelatter will have the sense to assess this night service at its proper value.We should also note that this year, after great effort, part of the buildingof the Talmud Torah has been completed. Now at last several hundred pupilsof the Talmud Torah will be able to study in spacious and airy rooms, andnot in dark and filthy premises.★This year the economic societies showed special activity. The paralysis oftrade and the bad times in the economy in general compelled the public toassociate in economic societies, just as people cling to wooden planks andboards after shipwreck. This year “Guilds” of all occupations have beenestablished in the Artizans’ Association, which is particularly important foreach separately and for all of them together.The Merchants1 Society and Small Merchants' Society have also shownconsiderable activity. Mention should be made of the Fifth Anniversarycelebration of the latter Society, at which its considerable achievements werewell displayed.Last year the authorities closed down the other Association of smallmerchants (at Warszawska 24), and its members then reorganised as a sectionof the Merchants' Association.This has also been a fateful year for the Cooperative Bank, which was sostrong in the past. At first it seemed that this Bank, which is the pride ofall Jewish Kalish, would finally overcome its difficulties and once again bewhat it had been. But apparently it could not regain the confidence of itsclientele. Finally it was declared bankrupt and is now about to be wound up.It has been replaced during the past year by two new Credit Institutions.One is the Small Merchants’ Cooperative Fund, which supplies credit to itsmembers, most of whom are small merchants. The other is the Credit Co-operative founded by Zionist figures, whose members are mostly the largeand medium merchants.Naturally these two banks have not progressed as rapidly as the CooperativeBank did at first. This is because of the present economic crisis, and aboveall owing to the loss of trust on the part of the clients, after the collapseof two major Jewish credit institutions in our city. But the persons headingthe new institutions are such that in the course of time these will come toenjoy the full confidence of the Jewish public once again.A DECADE163★In the cultural field there is now a deathly silence, just as there has beenfor so long a time. Nothing whatever is being done. On the contrary. Therewere a few stout-hearted people who wished to set up a Cultural Societywith the purpose of satisfying the cultural requirements of its members andthe Jewish public. But the institution has also collapsed and is now in processof liquidation. This fact proves for maybe the hundredth time that in ourcity the Jewish public has no cultural needs at all; and in addition it lackssuitable personalities who are capable of interesting the public in any culturalmatters at all.For a long time there was a strugle within the “Yiddishe Turn und SportVerein” as to whether its flag should be blue-and-white or green-and-white.Finally it was resolved to change the flag from green-and-white to blue-and-white.Mention should also be made of the Central Hehalutz which celebrated itsfifth birthday this year.Among those who passed away in the year 5691 were the devoted leader ofthe Artizans’ Association Abraham Rubin, who was one of the founders andeditors of “Kalisher Leben”; Reb Wolf Feiffer, the veteran communal head,warden of the Great Synagogue and most honoured communal worthy; RebNoah Zaludkowski, the beloved Cantor of the community, who was honouredby all; and Leon Margulies, the veteran Secretary of the Kehilla.★We are on the threshold of a New Year, concern in our faces, our skiesovercast, while the future of the Jewish People seems to be very black. Thegrave economic crisis and the terrible poverty have created a spirit ofdepression, without a single ray of light allowing us to hope for a bettermorrow. But let us hope that the New Year will disperse the gloomy cloudson the horizon and bring with it courage, faith and hope for a better future.May this be the end of a year with its curses, and the beginning of ayear with its blessings.Kalisher Leben 37 (210); New Year’s Eve 5692, 11.9.1931.KALISH IN 5692The year 5692 was marked by the effects of the general crisis whichspreads all over the world, and has impressed a special stamp on the Jewishmasses.The process of economic pauperisation of the Jews has gone ahead withgiant strides, and is affecting a steadily increasing number of victims. Theextent of the effects of the crisis on the Jewish population caa be seen fromthe following fact: At the time of the Passover measures inflated by theKehilla, 70% of the Jews in the City registered for help.164THE KALISH BOOKThe crisis has been particularly severe for large numbers of small merchantsand artisans whose earnings have declined to a nimimum, on account of boththe general poverty and the high taxes imposed upon them by the authorities.Their situation during the past year has been particularly bad on account ofthe ceaseless attacks and pogroms which have so greatly affected the fairand market travellers in the Poznan region, which is the source of live-lihood for a large section of each group. Only after the intervention of thelocal economic organisations and the central bodies in Warsaw did all theseattacks come to an end.The grave economic crisis also compelled the local Jewish economicorganisations to engage in urgent measures on behalf of their members. Itmust be said that the Merchants* Association, the Small Merchants* Associationand the Artizans* Association have achieved a great deal. Anybody checkingon the work done, the meetings held and the various measures of intercessionmust confess that these bodies have done much to ease the fate and conditionsof their respective members. Particular activity was shown by the Market-dealers* section of the Small Merchants* Society, which did a great deal tohelp calm things down at the fairs and markets.It is not surprising that in such a grave economic situation the state ofpublic and communal institutions is also bad, and there can be no improve-ment in communal life such as might have come about in better times. Inspite of this, let us sum up our more important institutions.One happy development during the past year was the opening of the newTalmud Torah Building for hundreds of pupils, who had been studying sofar in unhygienic and absolutely unbearable surroundings. The new buildingenables them to enjoy pure air and study in healthy surroundings. Thebuilding consists of two and a half storeys and cost 120,000 zloty, whichwere provided by the Kehilla budget and very large contributions from privateindividuals. Here mention must be made of the struggle between the TalmudTorah Committee and the young men studying in the Bet Hamidrash, whodemanded the best structure for themselves and for that reason engaged insabotage which the Committee could overcome only with difficulty.This year the Linat Hatsedek Society has opened a pharmacy in order tohelp the impoverished Jewish population to purchase remedies. This pharmacywas established with great effort and several thousand zloty were investedin it. Owing to this investment the Society had to suspend its First-aidNight Service, but succeeded in resuming it after a while. During the pastyear the Linat Hatsedek Society was particularly active. In addition to thepharmacy, it also opened a dispensary for examining the sick poor. Thework of the Society is particularly important during these difficult days ofcrisis, for it provides cheap medical aid for poor Jews.The Polish Territorial Conference of the Linat Hatsedek was held inKalish on the initiative of our local Society, and was attended by severaldozen delegates from all the cities of Poland. Discussions on the problemsof providing medical aid for the Jewish population continued for two days.A DECADE165★Mention must also be made of the changes that have come about in Jewishsport affairs. Hitherto there had been two Jewish sports clubs, Hakoah andthe Turn und Sport Verein. The former used the blue-white flag and thelatter had a green-white one. More recently certain members of the YTSCdemanded that their flag should also be blue-white. This led to a severestruggle between the two parties, which took the form of meetings anddiscussions in the press and in public. Finally, after several tempestuousgatherings, it was decided to adopt the blue-white flag. Soon after it wasdecided to liquidate both clubs alike, and combine them in one large MaccabiSports Organisation. This unification came about and today there is oneMaccabi Sports Club (that is, apart from Stem Labour Sports Club).Mention should also be made of the struggle among the Jewish boatingsociety members, which was formerly called “Jewish Boatmen’s Societv”.Several members of the Club demanded that its name be changed to “K.W.30”,in order that the Jewish part of the name should not be constantly in theeyes of the Poles.There were debates at meetings and in the press as well. Finally thegentlemen of the Boating Club refused to be convinced. They changed thename of the Club, and by doing so deserted from the field of Jewish sport.★During the past year a great deal has been written about the foundationof a Charity Fund, which is an urgent necessity in these hard times Finallyan Inaugural Meeting was held, and an Executive was elected whose taskis to initiate and organise the new institution.To our great regret nothing more has happened. The organisers began verynoisily but the entire matter has gone to sleep. This is not the place toanalyse the reasons for the failure. Yet the attempt as such was distinctlypraiseworthy, and no harm at all will be done if it is tried again.To finish our summing up, we must also draw attention to the great losswhich the Jews of Kalish have experienced by the death of their Rabbi.Reb Ezekiel Liebshitz of blessed memory passed away suddenly, only threemonths after the Community had celebrated the Semi-jubilee of his occupationof the Rabbinical Seat in our City. His passing has given rise to considerablegrief throughout the world, for he was one of the most outstanding figuresin contemporary Jewish life. Yet the loss to Kalish Jewry has been particularlyheavy. As long as Reb Ezekiel Liebshitz held the Rabbinical office, whichwas a matter of twenty-five years, there were no quarrels and disputeswithin the Community. Since his death opinions are divided with regard tothe election of his successor. Some wish to place his son Reb Eliezer onhis seat, while others propose other candidates. The Kehilla wished to deferthe dispute and therefore decided to put off the election of the Rabbi forthree years, during which period there will be no Rabbi in Kalish.A little later there was a dispute regarding the slaughterers, which wouldassuredly not have broken out if our Rabbi of blessed memory had remained166THE KALISH BOOKalive. The opposition within the Kehilla wished to bring pressure to bearin order to obtain their demands, and brought slaughterers of their own tothe city, who began competing with those of the Kehilla. In general therehas never been so sharp a struggle between the majority and the oppositionin the Kehilla as there now is, and it is impossible to say how far mattersmay go. In any case it is clear that this quarrel does not benefit ourcommunity, at a time when the Kehilla has to handle many grave andresponsible tasks.It should also be noted that the Kehilla has taken over the registration ofpopulation, which was hitherto in the hands of the Rabbinate. This wasdecided after the demise of the Rabbi, when doubts began to arise about theplace where the registers should be kept. It is an innovation in Kehilla life,for the registers are held by the Rabbis in most of the cities of Poland.Finally we must record the passing of the wealthy Reb Abraham AbeleFriede, who was bom in Kalish and lived in Cape Town, South Africa, formany decades. For the past eight years he had provided lunches for thehundreds of pupils of the Talmud Torah. This was a worthy enterprise andwas greatly appreciated. His passing has occasioned much grief.★As we see, the Balance Sheet for 5692 is not particularly happy. On thecontrary, it is a grim one, yet what lies ahead seems to be even grimmer.There is a spiritual and general dejection in all fields of Jewish life, and atthe moment there are no signs at all of any ray of light promising us abetter future. We also lack the strength to shake off the mood of despairand start looking for the way to a brighter future.But we are a people who have always lived by our hopes. Let us hope thatthis New Year will finally restore us, and that the sun will shine upon ustoo from out of the dark and menacing clouds.Kalisher Leben 40 (265); New Year's Eve 5693, 30.9.32.KALISH IN 5693The terrible world crisis, which has already been continuing for severalyears, could be felt in particular during 5693. It is unnecessary to add thatthe worst sufferers here were the Jewish masses who have always lackedfirm ground under their feet, so that every economic crisis and shock injuresthem first and foremost and drags them under the surface. But this yearthere was some slight amelioration for the small merchants and artizans,who suffer so greatly from the heavy burden of all kinds of taxes.The “Ryczalt” arrangement offered a kind of rationalisation of the taxproblem, for it set the tax-payers free from the Assessment Committee whichnever gives any consideration to the citizen’s capacity for payment. Yetthere is no assurance that this arrangement will continue in the future aswell. The economic organisations are already gathering all their forces inorder to take steps to ensure that it is maintained.A DECADE167The departing year was overshadowed by Hitlerist barbarity, which shookthe world and alarmed World Jewry, through the cruel persecution ofGerman Jews. The Jews of all countries organised in United Committees inorder to combat savage and evil Hitlerism. A united Committee of this kindhas also been established here and the leading communal workers and publicfigures participate in it. Its function is to provide for refugees from Germanyand conduct a boycott of German goods.Our local Jewish population was greatly concerned at the anti-Semiticpress. Our columns regularly report the regrettable fact that Kalish hasbecome a centre for anti-Semitic journals which are sent throughout the wholeof Poland from here. This press oozes venom and infects the Polish populationwith a dangerous Jew-hatred. It may lead to very regrettable results indeedunless effective defence measures are taken in good time.During the year 5693 various public festivities were held, including thoseof the Mizrahi, Betar, the Tailors’ SeCiety and the Maccabi. This SportsSociety has already undergone several transformations, including the unionwith Hakoah and the struggle regarding the blue-white flag. It is now a well-established society with a wide range of activities. This year Maccabicelebrated the Twentieth anniversary of its existence, and on this occasiondedicated its flag and inaugurated its private jetty for boating and swimming.The “TOZ” Society again began to be active in Kalish during the past year.It is unnecessary to explain its functions or describe what it does to theJewish masses. These are matters of general knowledge. So it is gratifyingthat the local branch of “TOZ” has been summoned to renewed activityunder the direction and supervision of well-known and experienced communalfigures.Here it is our duty to record the far too frequent crises at the TalmudTorah, which come about at almost regular intervals. It is clear that thisstate of affairs derives from the economic crises on the one hand and theindifference of the Kehilla on the other. No attention was paid to thesituation by the Kehilla until there was a public scandal and the teacherswere compelled to declare a strike and close the classrooms. The “KalisherLeben” kept on sounding the alarm, and at length the Kehilla agreed topay the Talmud Torah allocation every week, thus ensuring the existenceof this popular Institution where more than 400 children are studying andgaining an education.The question of the Rabbinate also began to move at last, and this painfulproblem, which caused prolonged tension, is no longer on the agenda, eventhough we do not yet know the finish of the matter. However, we cansafely say that we now regard the problem as solved. Let it be said inpraise of Kalish Jewry that the discussions, etc., about the Rabbinate wereconducted in a tranquil atmosphere, that the mood is calm and people arepatiently waiting for the decision of the Rabbinical Court in this matter.On this occasion we also mention the Artizans’ Society, which is doing itsbest to restore itself to health while continuing its regular activities. Hie newExecutive have rented more spacious premises, as befits the Society’s prestige.168THE KALISH BOOKEach union and guild belonging to the Society will have a separate roomfor its members in the new premises. The Executive is also doing its bestto set up a Secretariat worthy of the name, that can serve the numerousmembers. Steps are already being taken to merge those guilds and sectionsthat have been on their own until now into the Society.The Small Merchants’ Society has a very positive Balance Sheet to show.Its widely-branching activities can be divided into sections and sub-sections.First of all it succeeded in getting rid of the danger that menaced themarket travellers. The Executive devoted special efforts to the protection oftheir lives and property, and now there are no longer any disturbances atthe fairs and markets. The Executive also succeeded in removing the BrothersLarenti from the roads, where they had been terrorising the market travellersand extorting money from them. These Brothers were arrested thanks tothe efforts of the Society, brought to judgment and sentenced to six months’imprisonment. The market travellers could breathe more easily.The impoverishment of the Jewish masses, the steadily increasing unemploy-ment and absence of any livelihood induced the Small Merchants’ Society tohold a large-scale Convention of Jewish economic bodies with the participationof outstanding communal workers, in order to establish an Economic Councilwhich would remain on guard and take steps to ensure that the SmallMerchants and Workers are not driven out of their economic positions, andalso to struggle against the boycott of Jews by others.This initiative is evidence of a healthy and consistent line of activity whichis worthy of all blessing.★At the boundary between the old year and the new we part sadly fromthe one that is departing bearing with it the whole weight of worries andconcern. Yet as we stand on the threshold of New Year 5964 we are imbuedwith the ancient and constant faith in the everlastingess of Israel; and withthis hope we welcome the coming year.Kalisher Leben 37 (315); New Year’s Eve 5694, 20.9.1933KALISH IN 5694This year 5694 continued to be overshadowed by the general crisis ex-perienced by the whole world, which has so greatly influenced the in anycase impoverished Jewish masses. In our City with its “declassed” population,where 80% of the Jewish inhabitants have been transformed from lacemanufacturers to “merchants”, “businessmen” and men who live on air, thecrisis is naturally felt even more strongly. It is not surprising that thenumber of needy Jews applying for public help is steadily increasing.It certainly cannot be said that our communal worthies have shownthemselves indifferent towards the situation, or that they have not triedto improve matters. Those who took most interest in the position of ourA DECADE169pauperised groups were the Small Merchants* Society, which last year calledthe Jewish organisations together in order to set up an Economic Council tosafeguard Jewish small merchants and craftsmen from being extruded fromtheir economic positions, and withstand the boycotting of Jews.We very much regret that the efforts of the Society, headed by theirChairman Perle, were nothing more than a voice crying in the wilderness.In spite of all their efforts the Council has not come into being.As remarked, Kalish Jewry suffered last year from the grave economiccrisis, in spite of which the Jews of the city proved their patriotic feelingswhen they were called upon to contribute to the National Loan. They madethe greatest possible efforts and did their civic duty, responding to the callof the Government and participating in the Loan with their very lastpennies.The lion’s share in the success of the National Loan Campaign can beattributed to the efforts of the “Kalisher Leben”, which ceaselessly called onthe Jews to do their civic duty. We stood on the watch all the year round,reminding our readers every month to pay their monthly contribution.Mr. Minkowsky, the Chief Commissioner for the National Loan, gaveparticular thanks to the “Kalisher Leben” for the devoted and patrioticmeasures by which it helped to make the Loan a success.The activities of the Linat Hatsedek Society were renewed during 5694.All its departments are now in operation for the benefit and convenienceof the local Jewish population. It would appear unnecessary to list thedifficulties placed in the way of this important Society’s renewal of activities,which called for good will, effortful measures, and above all the regainingof public confidence. Thanks to the dedicated and unwearying labours ofthe new Executive the Linat Hatsedek has regained its former position ofhonour and esteem in the public eye.Last year the “TOZ” Society engaged in intensive activity. Apart from theregular and systematic day-to-day work in its special branches, it alsocarried out a large-scale Summer Holiday programme, and a hundred poverty-stricken and weak children were sent to summer resorts, regaining strengthin a satisfactory fashion. Each child gained an average of 3 kilos.The Municipal Elections were held during the last year in accordance withthe new elections system, which reduced the Jewish prospects of obtainingas many representatives as they would have gained under the former pro-portional representation system. In addition the election campaign amongthe Jews themselves had a very bad effect, because it became a source ofchaos such as we had never known. The inner divisions in our own society,together with the new district election system, had the result that theJewish representation in the elected Town Council was reduced to a minimum.The year 5694 registered a black page in the history of Jewish Kalishthrough the shameful denunciation of the Kehilla. The members of theopposition denounced the majority in the Kehilla, and thereby did somethingthat has no parallel in the history of Jewish communities throughout theworld. All sections of the Jewish public rejected the denunciations, whose170THE KALISH BOOKresults were very sad. Owing to the checkings and frequent examinationsthe Kehilla activities were suspended and the work of the various departmentswas interfered with. The first victims of these irregularities were the worthyJews who had become victims of the crisis and whom the Kehilla was unableto help.The denunciations also unfavourably affected the implementing of theRabbinical Court decision with regard to the Rabbinate. It is as clear as thesun at midday that in the situation that came about there was no possibilityof carrying out the decision fairly or accurately. A group of politicians andtrouble-makers who are always happy to engage in conflict refused to under-stand this fact and began a struggle against the Kehilla, seeking everyopportunity and excuse to impair the good standing of those who head it.In spite of these base intrigues and the incitement behind the scenes theJewish public believe that the Kehilla will succeed in restoring peace, for thepersonalities who head it hold Government offices and have gained the fullconfidence of our Society by their many years of public activities. This doesnot apply to a handful of professional politicians. The Community knowsthat the interests of the local Jews and the safeguarding of peace can beentrusted to the present leaders.★There was darkness round about, emptiness and chaos, division, splittingapart, while despair consumed all around. Here in addition came the distressof Jewry as a whole: Hitlerism, Algeria, the stopping of Aliya to EretzIsrael, the other decrees in that country and many many more.This is the situation of the Jewish people between the old and the newyears. But we are an ancient people who have withstood many hardships.Our faith in the eternity of Israel is not shaken, and we believe withcertainty that we shall outlive our enemies and all the evil and hardship.Now as well, in preparing for the New Year 5695, we are imbued withabsolute faith in the bright future of the Jewish People.Kalisher Leben 35 (364); 27 Elul 5694, 7.9.1934.KALISH IN 5695It is very difficult to try to sum up Jewish life in this country, andparticularly in our City, with our joys and sorrows, struggles and battles,hopes and disappointments, which can all be included in the one significantword: Chaos.This year is engraved particularly deeply in our memory on account ofthe unbearable economic crisis on the one hand and the backwardness andspiritual distortion on the other. But nevertheless it has also given rise toseveral bright spots for the despairing Jewish masses.Mention should be made first and foremost of the Small Merchants1 Society,which engages in lively and constructive activities for the benefit of its 800A DECADE171members and intercedes with the Government regarding the disturbancesagainst Jews at the Poznan and other Fairs. Its Gemilut Hassadim Fundplays an important part and has saved hundred of families of small tradersfrom absolute collapse. During the coming year this Society is planning tocelebrate the tenth anniversary of its fruitful existence. This will be a truefestival not only for the Society and its members but also for the Jewishcommunity as a whole.The foundation of a branch of ORT marks a special chapter in our history.It is unnecessary to waste words on the importance of ORT, whose functionis to spread the knowledge of handicrafts and agriculture among Jews. Yetwe have to note that certain members of the Executive wish to give thisinstitution a party colour. Now this is an absolutely incorrect approach,since the ORT Society in our town must remain just what it is everywhereelse, a broadly-based people's movement and not a market for party bosses.We believe however, that the ORT leaders, who are well aware how importanttheir objectives are, will take steps to build the Society on a lasting andhealthy foundation.Let us also mention the Linat Hatsedek Society which functions veryeffectively. We can only hope that it will continue to operate properly withall its important and useful departments for the good of the general Jewishpopulation here, and without distinction between classes and currents.Last year the Jewish population took an active part in connection withthe National Loan bearing 3 percent interest, which was proclaimed by theGovernment and very widely publicised in our columns.A deep and sorrowful impression was left by the death of Marshal Pilsudski,who was so greatly beloved by the entire population of the Polish Republic.News of his death cast a heavy cloud over the citizens and gave rise todeep sorrow among the Jewish population, which found its expression in ourpages. We gave fitting expression to the downcast mood of the Jewishpopulation here, and to our deep grief at his death.During the year that has just ended elections were held for the Seim.These did not arouse much interest among the Jewish population because noJewish candidate was presented in our electoral zones. In spite of this therewere several short-sighted leaders of Jewish parties who did not join theKehilla's Election Committee for reasons of personal prestige, but openedseparate “shops ” of their own.There was a certain development in the painful question of the Rabbinate,which has made the differences in our community so much more acute onaccount of the attitude of certain party fanatics. Yet as remarked there hasbeen some progress, and it may be hoped that this painful question will besettled in the near future to the satisfaction of the entire Jewish Communityhere.At this moment when the parting year bids farewell and the new onebegins, we stand full of hope and expectation for better times and wish tobelieve that all that is bad and corrupt will vanish with the departing daysand be forgotten. Hoping for a better morrow which must finally come, we172THE KALISH BOOKwelcome the New Year with the old and new cry: May the year with allits curses end while a year begins with all its blessings!Kalisher Leben 33 (412); New Year's Eve 5696, 27.9.1935.KALISH IN 5696The year 5696 has been a difficult and bitter one for Polish Jewry. It wasa year of harsh experiences and sad developments, economic decrees, anti-Jewish disturbances and blood-thirsty riots. All of these besides the savageanti-Semitic incitement, unbridled as it was, and the acute economic boycott,have exerted a bad influence on the three-and-a-half million Jews of thecountry, and have given rise to a mood of despair and helplessness. Theheaviest blow was the anti-Shehita decree which deprives masses of Jewsof their livelihood and all of them of the possibility of eating kosher meat.The savage boycott, which aims at depriving the Jews of a living, was feltin our City in particular. Here hundreds of Jewish families make their livingexclusively at the Fairs and markets in the vicinity of Poznan. The uncheckedincitement carried out there by the local anti-Semites has deprived them ofevery possibility of continuing to attend these Fairs, since the Poles robthem of their property and beat them murderously.In order to deliver those Jews from inevitable catastrophe a Delegationfrom the Small Merchants’ Society of Kalish appeared before General Slawoi-Skladkowski, Prime Minister and Minister of the Interior, and described theterrible situation of these market men, who are doomed to starvation onaccount of this venomous animosity towards the Jews. This appeal had agood effect. The Prime Minister promptly published urgent Orders, whichenabled the Jews to maintain their economic positions and continue to attendthe Poznan Fairs.This Delegation which, incidentally, was the first Jewish body to appearbefore the Prime Minister, also achieved the result that the local marketsshould not be placed outside the City. The Prime Minister issued suitableOrders about this matter too, and they were transmitted to the institutionsconcerned. Thanks to this a thousand families of market peddlars in our cityhave been saved, since their livelihood was in danger on account of the pavingof the New Market.Last year the Society also engaged in several festivities. These were theinstallation of the flag, the Tenth Anniversary, and the completion of thewriting of its own Torah Scroll. These festivities were very successful. Hereas well we had an opportunity of seeing the many-sided activity and pro-ductive effects of a purely economic organisation on every branch of com-munal life.This year saw the first anniversary of the passing of Marshal Pilsudski,who is mourned by the entire population, and particularly by the Jews; forwe can feel the great loss and the change in the attitude towards us thathas recently come about in the country. And so the Jews mark the anniversarywith true grief and sorrow.A DECADE173This year there was a General Meeting of the Gemilut Hassadim Society,which has already completed ten years of activities on behalf of the Jewishpopulation. It is the duty of every Jew to support this Fund, in order thatit should be able to respond to all those who apply to it requesting a loan.Here we must also mention the Annual General Meeting of the CooperativeDiscount Bank, which was schemed against this year by several individualswho wished plain and simple to smash this important Credit Institution.Yet in spite of all these attacks common sense prevailed; and the victoryfound expression in the fact that the general public and the members declaredtheir full confidence in the present Management, which has achieved so much.Mention must also be made here of the heavy loss which the JewishGymnasium sustained by the death of its Director Samuel Helling, who wasone of its founders and builders. We are consoled by the fact that he hasbeen worthily replaced by Dr. Moshe Freilich, the well-known pedagogueand educational worker, who is the right man for this responsible post.Mention should also be made of the Linat Hatsedek Society whose depart-ments, for pharmacy, dispensary and nocturnal first aid service, play so im-portant and useful a part for our Jewish population. This is an institutionwhich has to be supported by the whole Jewish public.As in the other towns of Poland the year left us something by whichto remember it. This was the Kehilla Election which to our regret so clearlydisplayed the great disunity among the local Jews. There were seventeenlists competing in the elections whereas in 1931, namely five years ago, therewere eight lists only. The only positive achievement of these elections is therepresentation of the Small Merchants* Society and the Artizans’ Society onthe Kehilla Council.The newly elected Kehilla representatives are now called upon to electthe Kehilla Chairman according to something more than purely party con-siderations. If we really want the Kehilla to be headed by a man of goodwin who is prepared to take positive action on behalf of the Jewish masses,let us not elect a tailor’s dummy but a man with a sensitive Jewish heart,who is known to us thanks to his many years of activity and his readinessto sacrifice himself for the sake of the people.If the Kehilla representatives understand this, if level-headedness is strongerthan the short-sighted instructions of the parties, we shall see a sensiblepolicy which is the fruit of a successful and cautious appraisal of the situation.That would be a pleasant parting gift of the year that is leaving us.Standing as we do at the crossways between the old year as it withdrawsand the New Year as it approaches, it is our fervent aspiration that all thedistress and suffering which have descended on the Jewish people from everyside may at last come to an end. May we see the fulfillment of the verse:4'And may all the wickedness vanish like smoke”. Filled with a firm andunshakeable faith in the divine promise of a radiant future for the Peopleof Israel, we take leave of the departing year while at the same timewelcoming the New Year of 5697.Kalisher Leben 32 (455); New Year's Eve 5697, 16.9.1936.f; ■' -t>S)?5 ■Pitfe'-WS'*'V I Nl-S;;;i|ili:i||||i, ?*>, ifr- -W-* ^sv/S,^SS^i» 6 c*iin'.v .v ;•-■ .■ ^v?'fr>* 'P r#\&'.**’. * v»■>,)».•..>$:'f > «* SJ *$%>; /.#?:&»«&vy\ :*»,^4^,. '<«(«,« •'■> W «*V.-p ise&t&t&x** i K*«*rtpK » « >W<« vO* ,'P. PPi*«*P^*<4.Vp>X W'vKtdhi. u wM*rt3 to r. ; ’-"H* 'i9&*t!lJ -;,'m"p <i p'p ’$*!*«* a*#* :*&«)*« Slit- <M#k$$hkk i .» ^JSC*0* fevl&Si.: ■ ;|:f #p::: £* ^piIkPP:PPPPv%-!:‘tu £»*«*.»j“'M” •'>■'.L-i^'-isy.; •n.--tT5j?m... is^WKp ,&'a ,-ii-ir: ,rrasa ,03i-as^ .“i»"o >i'»rts,'2-n»s »»?•»%?)! c))->3aj> t i) n £ ft d r ? ft nc ft o ■ s \ quk- t n ~~ d v r L k c j a w at? * >. a iv r k a.w^t^... .■^.^■.trfmt<,Vr-.. 1r>. ■** ’ * ..*/. *. *,,,”,,,p , * (Js«( t«M$n 4iim*Wkt\M, U.MPA KS'ARCOWA.^ 4 j» iwi-Sh^u-^ •)«W*.tfr»NW+H <• > .; . ..w ■> / ,s> ^'J^^***** -{.^..^ -X-K- w ^||II|1I|||:! WMMmMM: W^t vp pPipf IDKtSSnKlI “U?L*!S!|||||||||;;p;:;yjr* ||pplf|$i|fllillllllllliillll IIII l|ii|iliilllillfPracownsa Fater-VI HfOtftW-.M, Ko«C i^zki M ";: ;::;^2:|||::|i:;;^l||pl:Sl Mltm}■ spfeR::l|||l|;;i^:|:|| ,'. Ijllp: :i X* y*.v**v??:v£x' ^ -'"•.•>• - N,... •• ...; >?V. yy,y.-x.>y. .■*■ -«• p:;<,..>>>►.•««,; *i ■ s ■■.is ,np4igK4li4i}>34®44Sipi®5':' "■,::■ f¥;:W■ ■ ■;': ■" :':i;!P'3.;'-s | «:'<;j;p i-aafti - »sf8'*X •"» 'if ‘ '. , 5 . ‘ ' A, . v ';f || 1 ;|i||| 1 j|i|||||i|p;||iliplil:ilill IJjlli |||||i|#|J|px r ft r n n o-'~'y*e*v ■ ■ ;;-a :«Pi*-'nfl, m (M«|i|ita - > . <- CaKtiifjSt <4«\ o 5 * f-o Mnnfxrtw p' *■“' ”«>»■* - <( ';iiu He i,-v Xi t?J (■PPp>:PP " 4. 1Dos Kalisher Leben weekly newspaperA DECADE175liiiil1 > ' -V >.* i vJ‘- > ;: - . ‘■- \y-.M8B8MlHBl|fj]|l]|^^■ •%.i}0 .■illlliaaiMsThe Town Hall■mIn the Parkh***!I I 1k-.,.- :bsP^*^ '.Vi,',-v;\-.— •The River Prosna— ■; ...mmMib ~A:ft”** ‘mm% ' *8bBMBSi!A#\ f * *<4 wj * #% ■ ^ * wiMj;iHffci■.HI■ “ »y*.i 'I ■ H _. |H** *’■# 1;,f*0I Hh*\J^ *1 r■H 31 ,;IISHI P ‘i i' |*. %f&*,•p% *jHhA. <31 JBl> ” .*. - AS>jill, ™™s•Av;,’V:, > >• **Ifesl mSMM fi Im■ ■■^ypy<—^■HH(H> *^*|* ■ IjP 0 a -riMiMti * I.. yr-1. n■H■■■. ip ii-s i v-:'?jMl'■■ ■ : - : .;.;■■,..■'•■• ;;--y' : ■' ; •-r:;:V:*0%^'%•. m $0" **■* . ,_A :i«f■i■ ' :gMSpftfjjW■i 'k-'S :'-:yISfm ■$ wmm'" 13s•■■?.. i.:: -y\; .••■'•••: ■': 'isgpgg||s , -i>4- ':"•■'■V.,,PS*MBai:■ a/a ■:A».3I y .,,... . •  . ' • ■'I.--:'..r‘.-'.‘ ■.■''.y::;y-y.y•■.;:, ,'.',/ 'yyy.yr*» >j|% s,? #mW^ajmISi- 11 41f*■ .~ as. mtui■ '$ri&r .IMF ~ * : ;',,41 :'/.:>■;Bilii;ivw&ggfe■r. ■ f ' . :litiv aF *. i.'c?'#,■g^ %*V %"'': Ht^sT*'. W:’;ypHiISIilili* '*fmi:■IS?.;"fit: '?-■■■ •*sitSSiSfii ~ * * ii* "■ - 4 ■„. " :#, ': ' ® * J P f“.In^mMmmwmMBt HSH't %i.. ' ,r .. .:•••■:•■••■ '■;...■;VI,.. .%,, V,msmISSsSiSi§&&$***<f-'-'i^ . ■■'■ , .' •: ■ -• .. / ■'■'■: ' I v.^v. " •f.. ■ lMSalmWKm*. Vif1_ ■■% mmpt V*mL*d■%;:v .*5#' .: -J»i®jHtl:##• HMr-*Avenue in the ParkThe Old Market■■■SiigSl^ .:- . ■ . • . -m*^.iSfSstttni W? WSlIkM *Sii^ T>]-,d Iffe fig^SSg;ng,S.g¥lwww»8:Ili~i;'• feyyf ||% '>!j0i?' CfJfMunicipal Theatre : Two Viewsw«**JI■iftfc-.i" : . ' , : ;• "ismP.^1 f§ m0^*■bH?1■,1feyI 1JprI 4 •-.:fS$P" y.gsfef fefefe?r^:I . HH fefefefe■■ ■ ' .:■■■■•..• ■■.■■ ■- • '". .".• ■■ • ■ . :. , v fe. ■■ .' •■ : v ■ ;■ '■•:■. •■■.■'• •: • ; • (.■ : •.  ■  ■ ■fefefefe '•' :■ .-:• -' - -.■■■■JfMfef>gaps?--fe fe.fefe-fetrtiWILhiijgMUgH,,.. -■ .yyyyyvyy—yyfe . ■ • ..fe: .IlliSSlteafssi^^fefe/" 'fefefefefeMm$0Mfe : -•■•• ••■'•:••. • ■ fe. . i1—bp'.:■•■■t 'ifei:■■■:'.fefe;■51' -■1£«■fey VxjjJSB!immm■MMfe- i ^-.s.-,.. . V. -\-. - < ■' ■'.• 1 i &• 1 - o"» a fe>fsF?> .. ,»***•♦•*•»">sAfekvT, .IIlirfe ’■fesfeisiffiiIIMi •.aiiiWfcgill■Hfe -fe ' •'■•■ fe / .' .r'&y-‘ ‘The Last Trees of the Synagogue GardenA Cross-Roadsms<• * ‘ i-Hv-JHm F^SifeJrMBilfilfi1 . %M.. itH®ys".Si;.V-jm4■litlll• :•#if:11111■■ • '•m ^if1 ’,■: y\ '■ 'a#Jpr * -iMims1if mII114§MSma*#‘*K, magasattnmb:y;:h-' •■.< ^;q,.r-• : ■&$***'■ T|H■I;v;: V:,■: ; v : :; - • ' ■'  «.s:: ,«* , ^ ,®l7. <J ***^ v <««» * -__ ____ . » - ' '    ... . . . ...... .......... .... .. . _\t* ‘ v,.;* ‘ :peMpnrimnH'•. ' • ' fc , "j\I# _mr.,v- ■T-y: ■.a®Hi#1ill#■>#^ ■•■•: ..■ '.■ . jijISSlllfP^mamiiv#'Clllt: ___ ■ . . •■ ■:■ ■. - a■ ; '• '• ■ -i • ; '. -: . .:? ,,§&■■ V.V- -Babina StreetThe New MarketWk ItIllg1V V' ‘IffVv ifSipsSHSil«8||HMmnk- a;.?/'•;■L gg ■mm mJosephine Allee1 -'III:The Old Market1M11 ;visv-..*V; ,,• ■WSKBUm:: ^IIb/F-iaaawsvr. ■ |mr mmr ' Vi’. - . - • •, -■ ... •■" • ■■.■•.■••■.■■■••■■■'■•■•■pamm■- ... : • - . <-:’ :■ * v 1 5 v—' : '“f*fg;111;'.*«'Stsm'.ffl:wmm■md ap «IBBBfeBWf«aMBg., * “apiWMPMwIHfflPiff BBMEZZI 1 'li ; :' : ' .Liv. -- . . * <- ■ . ^ '• ■ v ' <* " '' • 'I88■ .- '■ .. : . . ' .: ■ ■ ■■■'■.c.f&V■1mkt ui ■ 1:-r mWm II Hlll'l g'/'fiag'gg11■ III^ rf „18 i 1H ' : ■IBS®m\ ■_ ;■9 ^i'; ttmm #*#*jHmb:,* - *•■ lilSim SMM '•**■. * -■■V HU f HH ■■■■■ft";-11I■S•sv fi■•*:•••■■■.' •■•■■:r' - . . .::H ' ' On 'KiifB ^ ^■ fa ' ^ ■=: ■■ ;.. a. .:. g,f> ••;aa® 9; V" ^,, ~,.gg«BH'StSSSSHSmk1.SSSmmmm— ■ ™';■: /;g. fa.\ ■ 'I •■■ .W/mm . mb: ■ fllfv.0- ■■t'■^ :'0 . "v'.>o.^:.- ;.r-> ;-■. ..a ■- ; :■■.'**'■ - - ■ .... a  g;sg::>The District Law-CourtsZlota and Nowa Streets-til. • , :\' ■ ■ ■ ' •. .;■• .Ir: ■ ■-•,•:••:Si'11H1Isafe:/<Ut I■$0* ;■ .Vis/■'£;&. ss ■» «■a#I ft,-SI'33;-■ ■>':ilfSifitlli"iliiS■3 ;, #|34i it&%*HCr *W(SL'Sfe. WmmBHW>. 3! 3Corner of Zlota and Warszawska Streets and the Old MarketPiskozewska Street ►HiSiWiliwSMroThe Great Synagogue and Talmud Torah. 1The Heart of Kalish. .;s - = ',nm§#;Kalish from Aboveftp FACEOF KALISH CITYTHE FINAL YEARS170K. W.THE ATTACKS ON THE MARKET-DEALERS IN GRODZISKIt is unnecessary to describe the miserable position of the Jewish smallmerchant. There is no exaggeration in the Talmudic saying: A poor man mightas well be dead. This applies to the petty merchants, the market hawkers andthe poor persecuted and tormented travellers to fairs. These three types, ormore precisely the single type — for the petty merchant is also a markethawker and a traveller to fairs — are struggling for their lives and their veryfood, exhausting themselves with toil, and all gateways to help are lockedbefore them.We have already had occasion to write more than once about the distressingconditions and trouble which the fair travellers have had to face in their dailystruggle for bread, particularly in the fairs and markets of the Poznan District.There they cannot even be sure of the small stock of goods they have withthem, nor of their lives either. But the trouble they have recently faced inGrodzisk passes all imagination. Last Thursday there was a Fair in Grodzisk.As usual Jewish merchants went there, each one with his handful of goods.They all arrived at midnight.Thirteen lorry-loads arrived in all, containing what little Jewish propertythere was. When the first lorry arrived there were cries of “Out with theJews!” When the other lorries arrived they were met by a large gang ofruffians armed with knives, bayonets, and bludgeons. A few ruffians kept guardover the lorries to make sure they could not get away, while the rest attackedthe Jews, murderously beating and stabbing men and women alike. Hie shrieksand cries of the helpless people are indescribable, but there was not even asign of a policeman.It should be noted that the Police Station remained locked up all night long.The ruffians rioted until the morning by order of their leader.One of the Jews named Feivish Messer, who lives at 14 Dobrzecka Street andis the father of six llittle children, was very savagely stabbed. The depth ofone of the wounds in his head is 20 millimetres. He is now lying in hospital ina grave condition.When the ruffians attacked them the Jews fled in all directions, men andwomen alike, abandoning their goods and seeking a hiding-place in a cellar.But when the scoundrels found that they were hiding, they hurried there andbegan to beat them with sticks and stab them. Several people from Kalish weregravely wounded. The ruffians tore the women’s clothes and beat them savagely.There was a Kalish girl among them. The scoundrels tore her clothes andwanted to drag her away. By chance a Jew from Kalish named Getreuman wasnear by. The girl shrieked: “Jew, save me!” He risked his life and got heraway from them, emerging only with slight wounds.The ruffians caught one Jew and began beating him murderously. When theJew saw that his end was near be fell on purpose and pretended to be dead.180THE KALISH BOOKThe ruffians took him and flung him into the water, which luckily for himwas shallow. After they had gone away he emerged and was saved.The ruffians now approached several of the lorries, claiming that the Jewswere hiding in them. The Polish drivers were afraid that they might actuallyfind the few who had hidden in the lorries, which would be very bad for themtoo. So they told the ruffians that they were Christians, so would they possiblypermit Jews to hide themselves among them? The ruffians inspected their papersto make sure that they really were Christians, and that saved several Jewsfrom a beating.The market-dealers all came together in one restaurant when they ran away.The ruffians went in and demanded that the owners should expel the Jews inorder that they should settle their accounts. But in the restaurant there werealso some brave fellows from Lodz, who were not cowards at all. There werealso a number of Christian merchants whose goods, which were displayed inthe market, also began to be looted. All those in the restaurant united, chargedvery noisily out into the Street and began to defend themselves in lively fashion.They caught the leader of the gang and kept him until the morning, when thefirst policeman appeared.When the Police Station was opened at 7 a.m. a delegation of merchantsmarched in, and a file was opened. It turned out that 162 people were injuredin the riots. There were many wounded, two of them gravely. These wereFeivish Messer who was wounded in the head, and Moscovitch whose leg wasbroken. Among those lightly wounded were the following: Abraham Weger,Moshe Tamberg, Shechter, Brenner, Jacob Shapiro, Rosenblum, Katz, Mera,Shlomo Lifshitz, Mr. Wolf Getreuman, Sadalski, Mrs. Tsadek and Levi.Kalisher Woch, 33; 26th Heshvan 5692, 6.11.1931.A. AVENAVITZTHE DREADFUL FATE OF THE MARKET TRAVELLERSThe world-wide economic crisis that has shaken the position of entire nationshas particularly affected the Jews who even in normal times made their livingfrom the air, facing all kinds of distress and disturbance, wandering here andthere staff in hand and earning their bread with much toil.This hopeless crisis affects everybody, millionaires, industrialists, large bankswhich go bankrupt overnight. In this confusion the Jew goes out to his bitterdaily struggle, using all his senses, exerting all his limbs, doing every kind ofhard work for the sake of his bread of affliction.There are heavy clouds on the horizon. The life of the small Jewish merchantis particularly gloomy. These petty merchants, these market dealers and fairtravellers live in a kind of hell. Most of them live in tiny crowded airlessdwellings with many children, who grow up under unhygienic conditions. OnTHE FINAI. YEARS181one wall is a shelf for goods. Some keep their goods in boxes, crumpled andscattered about. There is always noise and dashing hither and thither at home.Here the wife goes off to Lodz, there the husband hurries to an acquaintanceto obtain security on a bill of exchange so that he can get a loan of severalzloty without interest at the Gemillut Hassadim. When the sun rises all thefamily including the children come out to load the handful of wares on ahandcart. The peddlar places himself between the shafts, the children push,the wife orders, “start!” and off he goes to market.They fix the cart-cover, spread out the handful of goods and stand there allday long, looking at the neighbouring stalls and yawning. Towards eveningthey go back home. The cart is not particularly light and there has been noturnover.And so it goes on, day after day. The Treasury sends orders for payment.The husbands runs out to Joseph Moshe of the Small Merchants’ Society, andthe wife runs after. First they tell Tsomber what they want. A long timepasses. He pushes them in and he pushes them out. He tells them to cometomorrow, the Director is at a meeting in the Kehilla now. In short, youget sick and tired of everything. The handful of goods are sold at a publicauction and the peddlar goes out penniless.While the poverty at home is shrieking in every comer, the family gathertogether and decide: The brother-in-law will be a guarantor on a bill, they’llborrow some money, they’ll go to Lodz to buy some goods, and henceforwardthe “former merchant” will be a fair-goer. And they begin to prepare for thejourney.About ten such “travelling merchants” hire a cart. The wife orders: Packthe goods properly, so that they don’t get wet. They all climb onto the waggonand off they go.They travel along the high road, up hill and down dale. Through the forestsand past the fields. They pass through hamlets and villages. They are wearyand exhausted. Every hour of the journey feels like a whole day. At length,in the middle of the night, they come to a Fair somewhere in the PosenDistrict. And you can already hear the noise and tumult. The “merchants”from other towns have already arrived, and there are also ruffians who havediscovered a new living for themselves. They block the approach to the marketplace, and the merchants have to pay them a tax or compensation.And then, a little later: Hurrah, out with the Jews. They use knives, theybeat them with heavy sitcks, they break their bones and run riot. Sweatmingles with blood, the cries mount to the skies. There is no salvation. Theyrun off and hide in dark cellars. The goods are abandoned. Yet they wish tosave their lives, which are just as hopeless and free for the first murderer.That is how the small merchant lives, the man who travels off to Fairs.His is a bitter life of anguish and distress.Kalisher Woch, 43; 26th Heshvan 5692, 6.11.1931.182THE KALISH BOOKM. WARSHAWSK1COMPETITIONOne of our biggest troubles is the plague of Bills of Exchange and pro-missory notes. We are well aware of the “great” capital at the disposal ofthe Jewish shop-keeper. We are quite familiar with the “ample” credit thatthe Jewish merchant enjoys. The “reliability” of the Jewish merchant isgenerally recognised... and in this situation the system of Bills of Exchangebecomes a very harmful phenomenon. Half of the trouble is in the branchof ready-made clothing, clothing and drapery, where the shop-keeper giveshis note of hand to the wholesaler, yet that as well at a considerable riskwhich exceeds the profit. For no one can be sure that the Bills will be metwhen they are due, particularly when the term set for payment is 9 or10 months in the future.Yet the gradual infiltration of the system of payment by promissory notein the food and grocery branch is a graver and entirely abnormal develop-ment.This branch operates almost exclusively for cash. Sugar, flour and bakedgoods are all paid for in ready money, since the profit on these commoditiesis a minimal one so that the wholesaler has to be paid in ready money.To our regret, however, the purchasers are also beginning to settle theirdebts with the shopkeepers by bills.In the past cases were known where the shopkeeper bought with Bills ofExchange and sold for cash. Nowadays it is just the opposite. The shop-keeper has to pay cash while the individual customer, who has already beenbuying on credit for many weeks, settles his debt with a Bill that is due inseveral months’ time.This harmful method of trade was introduced by two or three of the localgrocery dealers whose situation enables them to grant such credits to thecustomer. The trouble is that the system is taking root in the entire branchand can undermine the existence of hundreds of grocery shops.This unhealthy development must be considered by the Grocery sections ofthe two Merchants’ Societies in town. They must both take joint measuresto eradicate the evil and make an end of the unparallelled and disgracefulcompetition.Kalisher Leben 11 (81); Adar II, 5689, 15.3.1929.THE FINAL YEARS183YED1DIATHE ONLY WAY OUTWhen we survey the economic position of the Jews with open eyes, we feelvery sad at heart. Not a single Jew can count on the passing day, and hedoes not know what awaits him tomorrow. In the past we used to be describedas “Luftmenschen”, people who live on and from air; but the truth was thatwe knew how to make a living from it; for everything round about us wasfirm and secure.Ever since the War began our situation has deteriorated completely. Theproperty that had accumulated for generations lost its value and vanished withina few years. The speculation times began. Everybody made a great profit, andthere was so much profit that the actual capital began growing less and less.When the profits reached their peak people also began to sober up. Everybodysuddenly saw that actually there was nothing left for them.Then came a time when it seemed as though life was becoming normalagain. We all began working energetically and trading energetically. But thegood time did not last. A major crisis was on its way.The reason for the crisis was the loss of the Russian Market. In Polandtrade and industry had chiefly been directed eastwards. When this market wasclosed to us all the Polish wares were flung on the local market. Every in-dustrialist, every merchant began hunting for customers and offered the bestpossible terms. Yet business was at an ebb because of the lack of turnover.How were people to make a living? They ate up other people’s property.Bills of exchange solved the problems that arose from the financial crisis. Therewas an inflation of promissory notes. And almost everybody went bankruptsince nobody has as much as a shoe-lace of his own. Here I see a man who isstill regarded as well-to-do in his own town. He is going to hunt for a loan,hoping to keep up his “position” in that way. His poverty is not yet generallyknown. He lives in a fine apartment and is well dressed in public, yet at homeeverything is black.Every able-bodied young man delivers himself by stealing across the frontierand going to Belgium, where he does any kind of hard work that the Belgiansthemselves are not prepared to do. But very few are fortunate enough toimprove their position in that way.The situation in the little towns is far far worse. People wander about therelike ghosts, their faces dark and their eyes extinguished. You can no longerrecognise the “Shtetel” which Shalom Ash described with so much artistry.In the past the young people went to the big towns where they found work,but now there is no point in going there. Cooperative stores have been openedin the villages. The peasants come to town only in order to sell their produce,and they take their money back with them to the village, where they buy allthey need in the Cooperatives. The shopkeeper in town has no turnover, but hehas to pay his taxes even when he is unable to pay. The Treasury squeezesand makes its demands, and where does it bring us? Where is this developmentleading us?184THE KALISH BOOKIt is unnecessary to say that this state of affairs leads to certain collapse,from which we can see no salvation.There are many who say that we have already seen bad times and we havesurvived them. To this I answer: Read the history of Israel in Exile and youwill see that we have chiefly been oppressed in the spiritual field. The variousnations set out to break our spirit but were unsuccessful because our spirituallevel was higher than theirs. But we did not face problems of livelihood, forwe always made a living. Trade was largely in the hands of the Jews. It mayhave been hard to make a living, true. When they closed us away in ghettoes,we waited patiently for better times and preserved our strength.But nowadays we are not suffering from spiritual oppression. The Authoritiespermit us to develop both religiously and nationally. Yet is that enough whenour wives and children want to eat? When our sources of livelihood dry up,our bodies follow. No evasion will help us now. We are in a state of despair.All our other requirements fade away. Man is transformed into a wild beastthat wishes only to stop being hungry and does not care about tomorrow.That is why the danger we now face is greater than it was in the Middle Ages.Then we were victorious thanks to our spiritual superiority. But now we arevery weak economically, and therefore we are bound to collapse.Yet the will to live, the struggle for existence, is part of human nature.Every man is entitled to live and make a living, and we Jews are also livingbeings who do not wish to give in and leave the stage of life. We wish tocontinue to exist. There is only one way out: We must help ourselves.The days have passed when the Jew was ashamed to do any kind of workbecause it did not befit him. Nowadays everything befits him and Jews doeverything. Therefore let the Jew do any work he is capable of doing — andhe is capable of doing anything — and without any excuses. Anybody whogives his work not to his Jewish brethren but to others is sinning against hispeople and himself.Let the stamp of treason towards their people be set on all those who claimto be honoured and respected Jews while their factories are working on theSabbath; and whose brethren hunger for bread while they sit at ease on theirbalconies during the Sabbath day. We face the danger that the Jewish Sabbathof which we have sung so much is going to be profaned in the course oftime whether we wish it or not, for hunger is stronger than death.Nor is it a matter of factory workers only. It applies to the household help,to the watchman of the house. Let Jews do all these kinds of work. You haveno people in the world who employ the members of another people for suchwork. Is this the practice of the Germans, the English and the French, eventhough their situation is far better than ours? Why, they certainly prefer togive work to their brethren, and they do no look for any special other people.It is our duty to give preference to the Jewish worker, for that is thedemand of our will to exist. It is time to forget the old saying that “it's goodto go to the Synagogue with a Jew, but that is all”, for otherwise there willnot be any one with whom to go to Synagogue before long. The Jewish Peopleare being destroyed and we have to rescue what we can before it is too late.Kalisher Woch 6; 12th Tammuz, 5689. 19.7.1929.THE FINAL YEARS185BAAL-DAVARKALISH MINIATURESWe Have to WaitWell, well, everybody knows how the official Institutions rush to fix some-thing up when the applicant is a Jew. You might suppose that if the Jewhas certain rights and privileges in the country his affairs will be attended toas swiftly as possible. After all, he has his rights because he sacrificed his healthfor the country! But nothing like it is the case, it turns out, most certainlyNOT. Whether he has rights and privileges or doesn’t have any, the Jew isalways treated the same way: Let him be patient and wait...A poor war invalid (it stands to reason that only a pauper has the ‘‘luck”to be an invalid) who lives in Chopin Street, was granted a concession to sellcigarettes. By dint of much toil he managed to hire himself half a shop. Theinvalid submitted an application to the Excise Department: Since so and sois renting him half his shop for the sale of cigarettes, he requests the ExciseOffice to send a Committee to the said shop in order to decide whether thespot is suitable for the purpose in accordance with regulations.After he submitted his application the poor fellow began to wait. (After all,did he have any choice?) In due course he reached the conclusion that he waswaiting too long. Meanwhile he was paying rent to the shop-owner, and theman had to make a living after all. He thought it over and went off to theOffice to ask why the matter was dragging on like that. They told him: Itwill take some time yet and you will have to wait.Gentlemen, maybe you know how long?Lemon]... Lemon]...I was strolling about in the New Market (and how long is it going to remainnew?) thinking about Jewish livings which have as much reality as snow inJuly; and the good luck of Jews in general and of the Fair hawkers in particular.I surveyed the “tables” which were loaded with “goods” that were worth sayfour times fourteen farthings, and out of which “the Jew extracts a living”,and from which the Authorities milk any amount of taxes, Turnover Tax,Income Tax, and What’s the Name of all the other Taxes?Surely, said I to myself, the miracles that are happening nowadays are fargreater than those that happened to our forefathers in the days of long ago.Such were my golden meditations at the sight of the “Exhibition of Goods”which is called the New Market. And suddenly, as though a bomb had goneoff, the air was rent apart by the chorus: “Lemon! Lemon! Lemon! Lovelywares! Ten farthings a piece...”I woke up from my thoughts and turned towards the voices, startled. The“merchants”, thinking that I wanted to buy something, swooped down on mefrom every side with their lemons in their hands. In particular there was onepretty girl who would not let me be. She had a white peasant kerchief roundher head out of which peeped a pile of pale yellow curls, and dimples in her186THE KALISH BOOK'cheeks. She pushed a fine big lemon at me and said: “Buy some good wares.Nobody has goods like mine. Buy cheap. Ten farthings each."When I had long left all those lively lemon sellers behind, I could still seein my mind's eye the young dealer with the dimples in her cheeks. In myears echoed her voice: “Lemon! Lemon! Lemon! Lovely fruit! Ten farthings..."Another NoveltyWhen I heard that there was a novelty in Kalish I dashed off to have a lookat it. My imagination worked feverishly, for I wanted to guess what it couldbe. I tried to imagine something fresh. A communal worker who had somekind of Jewish education... A wealthy Jew who contributed to Jewish needs...Or maybe one of the local preachers of morality who had decided to behave ina moral fashion... Or maybe a nationally conscious Kallish Jew who was notashamed to speak Yiddish; and other extravagances of this kind occured to me.When I reached the spot I saw a large placard which proclaimed in hugeletters: “Novelty". I pushed my way through the crowd surrounding the plateglass window of the new shop, my heart throbbing. Behold, said I, I havereached my destination. And I shall now see the novelty...And now imagine what I saw there: Stuffed fish... Fish well peppered...Fish cooked at home... Just fish.There is a novelty for you.Kalisher Woch 5 (43); 12th Shevat, 5691, 30.1.1931.8. RUBINMY CITYKalish, you are indeed a city of cities! Your boundaries are steadily spreading,the ruined streets are being rebuilt and are improving too, “skyscrapers" areappearing, plate-glass windows are flashing, there are large, many-colouredelectric signs. The map of Poland has no reason at all to be ashamed of you.So I always think to myself when I go for a walk. Yet in spite of all theefforts to make our City look like a metropolis, in spite of the development andthe appearance, our city lacks the melodious dynamism, the rhythm and tumultof the streets and squares of the big city.It is almost impossible to believe that in these multi-storeyed buildingsscattered over so large an area there is a population of seventy thousand souls.There is little movement in the streets. Everything is slumberous and apathetic,no less than in the little country towns.In our city there are public halls, cafes, fine cinemas and other places wherepeople can enjoy their leisure in the evening. But all of those places areempty, and everything is boresome.THE FINAL YEARS187The public are not alive, they waste their time. They spend their eveningsalone with their own selves, out of the natural habit of people whose time haspassed, of young men from country towns who have nothing to do in theevenings except to play dominoes. The difficult economic situation has set itsstamp on everything. Mostly they go to the cinema on Friday evening andSaturday evening, when some money is still to be found in their pockets. Allthe week round there are few who go there. Don’t we have some better andmore pleasant way of spending the time after work is over during an ordinaryweekday?I sit in a fine well-lit cafe. The marble-topped tables stand like silent wit-nesses of the hard times. Here we miss the regular visitors who used to fillthe place with a friendly comfortable atmosphere. No, the public is not alivetoday. Patiently it consumes the difficult hours of its evenings, waiting forbetter days which may possibly come with the Spring.It is ten o’clock in the evening. Where can everybody be? Is it possiblethat the centre of the city can empty so completely and so early? What hashappened to the regular strollers taking their ease along the Pilsudski Boule-vard?My friend offers me a philosophical explanation. This is a characteristicresult of the crisis we are experiencing. The porters of the houses lock theentries at ten o’clock, so people hurry home in order to save the few farthingsthey might otherwise need to pay for having the door opened.I laugh aloud but he insists:“And you have to laugh. It’s a very miserable joke. I know many people likethat.”There is ample light from gas and electricity in the street, shining on thedead and empty pavements. At long intervals a noisy car dashes past with aresounding blare of the horn, reminiscent of the existence of what was oncecalled “life”. It comes from who knows where and must doubtless be hurryingto some place or other.Like passengers whose ship has sunk at sea, the carriages wait at the streetcorners. But there is not a person to be seen. The drivers yawn widely, gapingaloft at the cloudy skies and tease one another from time to time in their ownspecial drivers’ slang.One young fellow whose blood is hot within him cannot bear to remain onhis seat. Down he comes and starts dancing with some old josser, as much asto say: “Well, my lad, if there isn’t a customer, then to hell with them andlet’s dance at least!”Their boots beat hollow on the pavement. It is eleven o’clock at night. A taxipasses by and the carriages look even poorer than before. The drivers mustreally envy the motorised magnate very much indeed.A couple of drivers spread their arms and beat themselves over the shouldersto warm up. They are cold and miserable and give the impression of trying tobeat the melancholy out of themselves. They must surely be longing for thedays when they used to drive faster than eagles to the railway station, thereand back.Kalisher I^eben 111 (123; 14th Adar 5690, 14.3.1930188THE KALISH BOOKOBSERVERON THE BRIDGE OF KALISHI stand on the Zlota Street Bridge looking down on the Prosna and I seea vision: How good if the Municipality were to widen and deepen the riverhere, strengthen the banks with concrete, build arched marble bridges, paveBabina Street and Nadwodne Street, and cover the walls of the houses withmarble. How enchanting it would be, when the sunshine would be reflectedfrom here by day and the moon by night? Why, this would be a little Venice!Or another scene: A fine Saturday evening with the moon shining bright.Young Hassidim coming out of the Shtieblech after their Melave MaTka (Speed-ing-the-Sabbath festivities). They go to the bank, sit down in gondolas, rowthe length of the streets and sing one melody after another, the tunes spreadingall over town. Pious women light Close-of-Sabbath tapers in the windows,the gondolas are also lit up and the lights are reflected on the hill and in thewater under the shining moon.Gradually Jews gather on both banks of the Prosna. Their happy mood riseshigh. Everything is well arranged, thanks to their Municipal Representativewho is here among the musicians. The chief player holds a little Psalmbookand sings: “They that go down to the sea in ships” “The sea saw andit fled”; and “Then Moses sang”. And the Choir sings songs of the departingSabbath, and the songs and talk go on till after midnight, and the proud partingwith a final “A good week”.So my vision went. Suddenly I remembered that the Municipality intendsto block the branch of the Prosna that runs along Babina. In general it hasmore important budgetary worries. And back I come to the grave Jewish situa-tion.Across the Bridge scurry Jews with worried faces. One is hurrying to paya bill that has already protested, another to look for a loan without interest,and a third to beg for an execution order to be deferred. Near by stand Jewishporters beside hand-carts and coils of rope, waiting for work. Jewish driversstand beside their broken-down carriages with their lean and hungry horses,waiting for a journey or “someone”. Beside them stand Jews buying and sellingold clothes, worn shoes, a broken alarm clock. A little further along sits aJewess selling soda water and peas. Opposite stands a Jew shouting: “Buybeigels, chocolate and sweets!”My eyes survey the scene and I feel like asking: Is the stream of historygoing to sweep all this away sooner or later? And what will remain here then?Kalisher Leben 38 (120); 11th Kislev 5690, 13.12.1929.THE FINAL YEARS189KATR1EL STEINDURING THE FIRST WORLD WARI was nine years old when the First World War broke out. My parents thenlived in Kalish where they owned a “Restaurant”. I was educated in Blaszki,with my grandfather Reb Yoel Wangczewski of blessed memory. He wasknown there as “Black Yoel”, and was a well-to-do and respected Hassid,who engaged in communal affairs. He was a member of the CommunityCouncil and of the Municipal Council, and always sought ways and meansof helping his people.I remember how such dreadful words as “War” and “Mobilisation” werehanging in the air. The chief thing done by the soldiers who passed throughthe little town was to steal liquor, drink themselves drunk, pour the restout on the ground and set it alight. Several shops were burnt down. WhereKalish lay, on the horizon, there was something grey like smoke rising upinto the sky.At last my parents arrived after all kinds of adventures and mishaps.My father related that on the first day the townsfolk looted the railwaystation. The Russian soldiers had already withdrawn, and the city was leftwithout any rulers or protectors. So the Jews welcomed the Germans asredeemers, particularly since they spoke German and could understand oneanother. The German soldiers willingly purchased from the Jews and behavedpolitely.Suddenly there was a storm of bullets. Machine-guns could be heardchattering all night long. The men said Psalms and put heart into thefainting women. Quiet was restored only in the morning. The Germansput up posters declaring Martial Law, and giving permission to go out andpurchase food during three hours. Between the shots people peeped outlike mice from their holes.My grandmother Rachel, may she rest in peace, hired a cart with twohorses and went off to Kalish in order to fetch back the members of myfamily. But they had already left the town. All the property they tookwith them was loaded on a baby carriage. Meanwhile the Germans lootedthe shops and sent the goods to Germany. By the Sabbath most of theJews of Kalish had fled to Blaszki. Rabbi Kanal announced to all thetownsfolk that this was an emergency that deferred the Sabbath, and allthose who had vehicles went off to Kalish to fetch the refugees back.The little town filled up with refugees who were housed in the Synagogueand all the public institutions. The large Square was also full to overflowing.Many found refuge with their kinsfolk. The rest went on to other villagesand small towns.That Sabbath the Germans mishandled eight hundred Jews who werecollected from all the city. They were ordered to count to ten and told thatthen they would be shot. This trick was repeated several times without any190THE KALISH BOOKshooting. The last time a messenger arrived with a letter of reprieve forthem.Part of the dwellings of the city were destroyed, but the industrial sectionwas less affected. Some say the reason was that the machines were Germanand the purchasers still owed money to Germans for them. In Blaszki itselfthey ruled firmly but without any cruelty.One Winter morning in 1918 young Poles marched into our courtyard incivilian clothing, with rifles on their shoulders. What is this? I asked, andthey answered: Nasza Polska! (Poland is our!s!) I had gone to sleep as aGerman citizen and woke up as a Polish citizen. They went over to theGerman soldiers and demanded their arms. The Germans, who had claimedthat they were going to conquer the world, very quietly handed over theirweapons. The Poles also stripped some of them of their uniforms and boots.When an ultimatum was served on the garrison, the Germans decided tofight a last battle and trained their artillery on the Church. On that SabbathRabbi Kanal headed a Deputation and requested them not to destroy thetown, whose Jewish inhabitants were certainly not responsible for what hadhappened.That was the end of German rule after the First World War.L. SHUREK-HALEVION THE ISLANDThis happened in the year 1925. Since all these years have passed it isgood to revive the scene of the events in my imagination. It was the Islandwe knew so well in the Prosna.Let us stand facing the bathing cabins, our eyes towards the Prosnacurrent coming from Piewonice. To the right is the floating bridge by whichwe passed over to Prochowski, who was a tall and very decent Christian.From him we used to hire boats and kayaks. About a hundred metresfurther on stood a little booth, with a jetty for better boats beside it.Two hundred metres further along the right-hand bank going against thecurrent could be found Kazimierczak’s Restaurant, which was at the serviceof the boatmen.From Kazimierczak’s restaurant the way leads to the Cross. Here thebank is very pleasant with high grass and shady trees, and it is easy toreach the boats. At this point the river is deep and wide, and many peopleused to come to bathe here, naturally free of charge. Near the bank stooda wooden cross, and so this bathing beach was called the Beach of theCross.Now let us return to our starting point. On the left was the magnificentwaterfall, and next to it a narrow bridge enabling people to pass to the bathingTHE FINAL YEARS191cabins and in later years to the Stadium. Behind the bathing cabins stretchedthe great meadow, in which natural pasture grew. This was the place wherethe army conducted its training, and where there were also Horse Racesand the athletic exercises of the Kalish Sports Clubs.At the end of the meadow the Prosna becomes quite shallow for about ahundred metres, and has formed the Island we know so well, opposite theCross.And now to the story proper.Several hundred young fellows devoted themselves to the Talmud at theKalish House of Study. Most of them belonged to poor families who ate onregular “Days” with the worthies of the Community. They used to eattheir breakfast together in the cellar at the corner of Zlota and GarbarskaStreets, where they were provided with a bran soup, cabbage borsht and aslice of bread.Between three aud six of them used to sleep in one hired room, whilesome of them slept on the benches of the House of Study. Those were theconditions under which they studied Torah for its own sake.Now Kalish had good swimmers, but it should be noted that excellentswimmers in no small numbers were to be found among the Yeshiva ladswho lived under the miserable conditions we described above. Almost everyafternoon when study was over the lads went to the river bank in orderto swim and play in the water.I remember one nice-looking young lad named Aaron who came from theneighbourhood. He could tread water. Sometimes he would fold his armson his chest, smoke a cigarette and keep still in the deep water. From thebank we could not see any movement on his part. Some of the lads usedto go as far as the Cross because bathing was free there.One summer day after exercising in the meadow a number of us wentto the Island. All of a sudden we heard yelling and shouting. The Yeshivalads were bathing not far away. A large crowd of young Christian scampshad flung their clothes into the water and then began to fling the ladshemselves in. We dashed over and intervened.I was the oldest of our group and I knew the local street slang very well,so I tried to turn the whole thing into a joke. But I did not succeed. Oursituation grew steadily worse. I knew the Polish temperament well fromexperience, so I began in this way: “Look, there are only a few of us here,and there are hundreds of you. Aren't you ashamed to attack us? You chooseone of your fellows to wrestle with me and put me on my back. Then you'llbe the honorable winners, or maybe the other way round”.I should add here that in 1922 I had taken a course in Boxing with theWarsaw Maccabi, under the guidance of a Hungarian Jew who was anexcellent trainer. I had regularly watched all the wrestling matches, andhad not missed even one of them. I had also won the boxing championshipof D.O.K., Poznan.The young Poles approved of my suggestion and burst out roaring and192THE KALISH BOOKdancing savagely, yelling: “You’ll see what a goulash we’ll make of thisJew!” And they chose a hefty young fellow as their champion. Their voicesmounted to the skies.In brief, within less than a minute I had sent the fellow flying over myhead and brought him down. He remained sitting, unable even to yell. Therewas silence. His friends led him aside. I stood tense, waiting for developments.A handsome young Pole, well built, came over and asked me if I wouldbe prepared to wrestle with him as well. I answered that his proposal wasnot in the agreement, but still I was ready if he wanted it. On the otherside of the Prosna stood many Poles, yelling: “What are you playing atwith the Jews over there! Kill them and have done!”My new rival was a better sportsman than the other, and also demonstrateda greater degree of culture. A large circle was marked out. The first victimhad already recovered and helped to keep order. This encouraged me, for Iwas beginning to regret my tough tactics and the success that had resulted.The second wrestling bout began. During the first few seconds neither ofus allowed the other anything, and the match was conducted according toall the established principles.All of a sudden the other fellow hit me in the nose. “What this?” I asked;and he answered: “We are going to box.”There is nothing much to tell. My Jewish sense of honour woke up andmy blood began to boil. I started to pummel him mercilessly. Blood beganto flow from his nose, his eyes, his mouth. Now I began to feel sorry forhim.There was no guessing the continuation. My victim was already completelyfinished. I did not wish to end the fight as drastically as I had finished thefirst one, so I played with him a bit. He fell and then rose to his feet. I didnot exploit the opporunity, but he refused to give in.The yells grew louder and louder. They were no longer shouting “Kill thatJew!”, but “Don’t give in!” They wanted to encourage him with theircries.But then he fell flat on his back. The Poles could not bear that. To thisday I do not know how many louts between the ages of thirteen and nineteencame dashing at me with thin soft branches that had been prepared inadvance, and began whipping at me. My blood began running down my faceand from all parts of my body. I saw that I was in a very bad situation.I could not defend myself and could expect the worst to happen. Honour isa very honourable thing, but now I had to get away. Where? To break thering, jump into the water, and there I would again be strong and secure.I hit out with my arms and kicked with my feet, and broke the ring andreached the water.By the bank I saw several boats with oars. Now I can teach them alesson, thought I to myself. The grandson of Reb Benjamin Hayyim Wolko-witch doesn’t leave debts unpaid. I grabbed an oar and began to swing itround my head. Once again blood began to flow, but now it was their blood.THE FINAL YEARSidsA ring formed again. I stood in the centre swinging the oar like the vanesof a windmill.I was like an animal at bay in the forest, standing wounded and bleedingsurrounded by dogs that want to bite but are afraid to, with a few tryingto get behind and hit there from time to time. My position was a littlebit better, but far from satisfactory.At this moment there came shouts: “Help! Help! Help! Man drowning!”The attention of the mob was diverted to the drowning man. All of themran to the bank and I was alone at last, without needing to defend myself.I felt fine. I knew I had emerged the victor.Meanwhile hundreds of people were standing on both banks of the Prosnaand the shouts did not cease. “Hein! Hein! Over there! Help! Take a boat!Help!”I stood about fifteen metres from the river. The yells awakened me frommy thoughts. I ran to the water. Several people were already swimming.Two of them wanted to save the drowning man. A boat set out from theother bank, wih several youngsters and a sergeant.As I learnt afterwards, one of the rescuers was already dragging thedrowning fellow ashore when the latter suddenly gripped his rescuer andthey both began to go down. The rescuer succeeded in getting loose, butnow the other two were afraid of the drowning victim. At that moment Isaw a few fingers above the water.I dived in and swam to the drowning fellow under the surface, seized himand came up together with him. I held him with his face upwards and madefor the shore with the other arm, as I had been taught.Once again came the shouts, this time: “Bravo! Bravo! A real champion!”Half-way ashore the boat caught us. The Sergeant pushed an oar over tome, and in that way we reached the bank. They stretched the drowningfellow out on the pasture and began getting the water out of him. Withina very short time he began to breathe properly and came to himself.One of the men there, a municipal official, then turned to the crowd withthese words:“Gentlemen! As a Catholic 1 feel very bad am quite ashamed at what Isaw here today. I was bathing at the Cross and saw all that happened onthe Island. Just imagine, the drowning man is a Catholic and a poor swimmer,and he risked his life and wanted to cross the Prosna in order to help inbeating up peaceful citizens who have done nothing wrong. You all sawwhat happened. It was this gentleman, who is a Jew and whom you attackedunfairly and beat till he bled, — he risked his life to save the drowningman. Now because of that I request of you that henceforward there shouldbe no attacks on bathers on the Island. Otherwise bathing will be entirelyprohibited there.”After that the lads from the House of study continued to bathe on theIsland for several years, and nobody interfered with them.194THE KALISH BOOKM. PACKENTREGERTHE NEW YEARIn a chilly twilight during the month of Ellul the sound of the Shofarbursts from the House of Study and spreads tremulously through the Jewishstreets. Reb Mendele Baal-Tokea (the Blower of the Ram’s-horn), a squatHassid with a tufted reddish beard, is testing his Shofar in preparation forthe New Year. In the corridor of the Great Synagogue the aged Cantor,Reb Noah Zaludkowski (or Reb Noah Klager as they called him in town), isteaching his choristers a new version for the awesome “Unetaneh Tokef”Prayer, and for “Upon the New Year this is inscribed”, and also a newmelody for the Cantor’s personal prayer, “Behold me poor in deeds”. Thesweet voices of the lads ring out like silver bells through the twilight hourand spread far and wide.On the pavement nearby Jews pause, Jews with beards and earlocks,wearing black silk kapotas and black Jewish peaked hats, listening to theprayers that go to the heart.Slowly and deliberately the town is preparing for the Days of Awe.Through the heat of the day, immersed in Godfearing thoughts, slowly pacesReb Itshe the Slaughterer, passing along the Hospital Alley. He is a loftyJew with a pink and fleshy face surrounded by a reddish beard going downto his middle, and a woollen scarf round his neck. His slow and thoughtfulpace is evidence that this year he is preparing to sing the Morning Prayersin Synagogue. The woollen scarf is there to safeguard his voice, lest itshould be affected by some draught, Heaven forbid, that night make himhoarse.Wandering cantors and Hassidic prayer leaders have come from distanttowns and villages m order to be tested in readiness for the Services in themany synagogues. They have been waiting a whole year for these Days ofAwe.In the Great Synagogue and the smaller Synagogues the sale of seats isgoing ahead already. Wealhty Jews and everyday Jews have already providedthe places for themselves, their wives and children. In the plate-glass windowsof the stationery shops all kinds of many-coloured New Year Greeting cardsare signalling the passers-by. The shops have filled up with purchasers, allselecting their Greetings.Every day the railway is taking a different group of Hassidim, who aresetting out to spend the festival days with their particular Rebbes. Thecoaches are full of long-bearded and earlocked Hassidim wearing black robes.As is his fashion year after year, Reb Leibish Hersh the Booksellerappears in town during the days before the New Year. A tall withered-lookingJew with a short little goat-beard, dressed in a torn and dirty kapota,wearing muddy old kneeboots, he sells fringes, prayer-shawl bags, Prayer-books and Festival prayer-books. Everybody knows him. When the Con-gregation leave the House of Study each of them does a good deed andTHE FINAL YEARS195buys something from him. Leibish Hersh is smiling. His goods are beingsold, and please God he will be able to go home the day before the NewYear, with a good profit.The Eve of the Festival approaches. At the dawn, as day comes grey onthe horizon, a dense dust-cloud rises on the long earthen trails. Out ofthese clouds suddenly and simultaneously appear the waggons of peasantscoming to market. On their ladder-carts the peasants have brought vegetables,poultry, ducks and geese for the Jews of the city. Now they reach theMarket-place. The old peasants come stiffly down from their seats, hitch upthe horses, hang a nose-bag round the neck of each and light up their longpipes, which are stuffed with home-grown machorka. Little by little thenoises of the market begin. Horse neigh, cocks crow and geese cackle. Awhite mist hovers in the air and rolls along the ground. From the cart ofone peasant comes leaping and flying a white fowl with a red comb, beatingher wings and fluttering down to the ground. The peasant runs puffing tocatch her, but she evades him between the carts and waggons. At length hegrasps her by the leg.Now the Jewish housewives appear in the market, carrying white wovenbaskets in order to purchase a fowl or goose. They puff at the feathers andfeel the fat with their fingers. Quite often the transaction doesn't come off.Just as the housewife is about to pay the peasant his price one of themarket women snaps up the bargain from under her nose. The housewifestands her ground, yells her fill, and goes on to another peasant to buy abargain there.It becomes late. The market grows empty all of a sudden. The last of theshopkeepers closes up his shop and fastens it with iron bars. The apprenticestake the new clothes from their masters' workshops to the homes of theworthy householders; those new clothes that have been specially preparedfor the festival. Of course they expect some beer-money. Jews go off to themikveh with bundles of underwear under their armpits.The sun slowly moves westward. Its last gleam lights up the windows.A silent melancholy fills the Jewish streets and alleys as they await theDay of Judgment.Jews with scoured heads, beards and earlocks, still wet with the mikvehwater, wearing their black kapotas, have already begun pacing slowly towardsthe Synagogue. Ligts have already been lit in the houses. Little flames quiveryellow and their pallid radiance spreads into the street.In the streets of the Jews everything is silent. There is an awesomesolemnity in every corner. Silently, like a shadow passing, through theSynagogue Alley moves Mordechai Heir the Water-carrier, a short Jew withan astonishingly camel-like head planted like a block of marble betweenhis broad shoulders. His large black eyes are melancholy, and a thin littlebeard sprouts on his chin. He also wears a new kapota, and on his legsare shining knee-boots smeared with pitch. He stops every householderin the street and wishes him a Good Year. The Jews greet him in returnand say: “Reb Mordechai, beg for a good year for all. of us! And may younot need to carry water to the houses in your old age!"196THE KALISH BOOK“Amen!” answers he with a God-fearing look on his face.From the Hospital Alley comes Moshe the Fool with a large winter-hatcovering his head and his ears, great knee-boots on his legs. He hurriesalong panting and sweating, shouting hoarsely: “Jews, pray for a Good Yearfor all of us!”Night descends on the city. From the illuminated synagogues and Shtieblechcome the chants and melodies of the Evening Prayer. Jews are praying infervent devotion, begging for the atonement of transgressions. And after thePrayers the whole great assembly bursts into the streets, men, women andchildren, all wishing one another a Good Year. Long-standing foes make itup, and forgive one another.Next day the sun rises high. Girls with well-braided plaits walk throughthe streets. Jews wearing their prayer shawls stand in the synagogues,praying. Here and there the Shofar can be heard, together with the warmappealing outpourings of the Prayer Leaders. In the Shtiebel of the Shoe-makers stands Yankel the old cobbler covered head shoulders and body byhis prayer shawl, beating his fist against his chest like a hammer “for the sinthat we have sinned.” When he reaches the verse, “do not fling us awayin old age”, he bursts into bitter lamenting tears, as though the greatcalamity were already taking place.The tears pour from the dim eyes of the old man as with his hands raisedon high he repeats the words, “Do not fling us away in our old age.” Andhis tears roll one by one down onto the open pages of his yellow-leavedPrayer-book.H, SOLNIKTHE NINTH OF AV IN 1914For several days the air has been heavy with signs of War. The faces ofthe Russians seem to be veiled in mystery. There is lively movement in allthe Government institutions. They are packing up, vacating the premises.The railways are carrying everything away. Silently and secretly. The officialswork and run to and fro diligently. No citizen hears a sound from them.Everything is wrapped in deepest secrecy.There is a hurried mobilisation. Parents moan and groan, brides and youngmarried women sigh from their hearts. Pale startled young men part fromtheir families as tnough they were ascending the gallows. Confused andperplexed they look back again, dropping another tear and calling, “Bewell!”People murmur something as they hurry to the Banks to take their moneyout. But the Banks are closed. They refuse to pay. Heavy burdens pressdown upon each heart.Everybody is buying food. People are hoarding. The hurried alarmed folkTHE FINAL YEARS197can feel that something is approaching. Nobody trusts anyone else. There isno more credit. Do you have cash? Buy and pay. Everybody has an unvoicedfear of the morrow, of the passing day, of the approaching moment.We live on the frontier, and are on the verge of War. “What is going tohappen to us?” — “Oh, stop it, nothing. You pass the threshold and gointo the room without excitement. The parlour is a long way from thecorridor.”People think a great deal but do not know what they should do next.Thoughts are as heavy as lead. A true nightmare.“What's the news?” everybody asks. There are guesses. Hints. Peoplewhisper a secret in your ear: “The Russians have withdrawn.”“What! Just abandoned us without any defence?”★Sunday, the Ninth of Av. A confused mood. The sad familiar melody.The quiet moans of the God-fearing congregations and the light-heartedmischief of the boys.We stand together on the pavement of the Old Market, the snow-whiteteacher Sinai Blei my be rest in peace and I. It is an hour or two after thesinging of the Lamentations. The shops are closed. It is Sunday, the Ninthof Av, and there is a grave-like silence.Thoughts of the Ninth of Av mingle with war thoughts. There is nosign or trace of a policeman or a soldier.“Where have they all gone?” Old Blei asks me.“It's really queer, frightening, there is something in the air”, I answer.“There is a new epoch coming. Will it be for the better? No one can sayyet.”Out of the Breslau Street (now Pilsudski) a soldier pedals a bicycle intothe market place. About ten metres behind him comes another, then anotherand another and yet another.For a moment all the senses seem to blur. Germans? Yes.Slowly and steadily they pedal, glancing to either side. Behind themmarches a large force, all armed, at a quiet and rather terrifying pace.From the pavement opposite us a number of people welcome them by wavingtheir hats.We gaze at one another. What has happened? Out of sheer astonishmentwe stand as though frozen, not uttering a word. Our hearts tell us thatsomething great is taking place before our eyes, tidings of a threshold thathas been crossed.Home! Some secret sense commands us.That silent entry into the town, with light furtive thief-like paces, hasdepressed us and awakened harsh forebodings. Nor do they keep us longin our expectancy.198THE KALISH BOOKMEIR PACKENTREGERMY EYES PERCEIVE YOULike a Priest preparing to serve in the Temple I remove the shoes frommy feet when I come to speak of Kalish my birthplace. My very fingersweep when I remember what Hitler’s hordes did to our fathers, our mothersand our children. My ears still hear their weeping, the entreaty of themartyrs being led to the slaughter.I can still perceive you, Kalish my city. The streets, the alleys and theclosed-off entries. The Houses of Study and the Synagogues. The Old Market,the stalls and the shops. The streets of the Jews and the Jews chasing andtoiling for a livelihood. The hawkers tossing about at night in covered cartsas they go to the markets at Kozminek and elsewhere. The burly carriagedrivers taking passengers to the Railway Station. Here they are, quarrelling,one dragging a passenger from another, fighting with shafts tugged fromthe carriages, hitting one another over the head. Blood flows. There is acommotion, then silence again. They have made it up, reached an agreement,and then drink together as though nothing has ever happened.Now I hear the shouts of the beigel sellers proclaiming their wares: *‘Freshegg cake! Ten groshen each! Jews, buy fresh cakes without holes!” Andhere comes the voice and melody of Torah, from the Old House of Studybeside the Great Synagogue. A Yeshiva lad sits swaying and studying hisTalmud text. His voice vanishes in the noise of the street and its tumult.The hawkers are louder than everything else there is. And now comes thechant of the Talmud Torah boys: “Vayedaber — and He said... Adonoy —God —... leMoshe — to Moses...”These are the pictures that still quiver so clearly before my eyes.GERSHON WROCLAW8KIDAILY LIFEWhen I look back on the last years of the city I see Endek men standingin front of the entries to Jewish shops and preventing all Christian customersfrom coming in. The market has been divided: Here Christians, here Jews.The boycott is at its height. The first to be broken are the small merchants,the peddlars, those who travel to the Fairs who are not permitted toenter the markets in scores of towns within the Poznan District.When the Fairs are closed off the Jewish craftsmen, particularly thelittle men, find themselves with nothing to do. The Endeks put up theirnotices even in the Municipal Park: Entry to dogs and Jews prohibited.We enter in groups, we fight them in the Park and round the shops. Yet howcan we help? There is a spirit of gloom all over those days.THE FINAL YEARS199Yet it had not always been like that. I remember other times which bringa smile to the lips and sometimes a twinkle in the eye. There was a kindof tranquil innocence about the life of the Jews, as I see them again with theeyes of a young boy.Here are the alleys, open and concealed, scattered here and there. Thereare only Jews in the streets. The only non-Jew is the Shabbes goy, the gate-keeper. Further on is the wooden bridge. There are couples strolling, ap-parently innocently, but they have secret intentions. You can see it in theireyes. Strolling would be good and pleasant if only the non-Jews didn't settheir dogs on them. The couples turn around and enter the Park.The Park was a Paradise for those feelings of love which had to findrelease, and things happened there which did not lead to the slightest sus-picion of even one single Jewish maiden...And now come voices from the House of Study. My eyes rest on the standwhere I once helped my father when he prayed as leader of the Congregation.And do you remember? Once upon a time a foreign painter came and paintedthe Whole House of Study, free of charge.As for the House of Study itself, it is an absolute market-place betweenthe afternoon and evening prayers. They discuss everything. Politics, trade,who is rich and who is poor, and what's happening in general. After themid-day meal on the Sabbath Jews fill the House of Study, their voicesringing as they study Midrash. But after study they begin a comprehensiveand careful discussion of communal affairs, of the Mikveh to which my mothersent me to immerse a glass, and whose special scent then filled my nostrils.And I also see young fellows studying most melodiously and loudly whilebetween the pages of the Talmud text are hidden letters which were certainlynot written by any male hands.When the Sabbath was about to begin the town became very happy. Theshop-keepers locked the doors of their shops and hurried off to welcomeQueen Sabbath. The father went off to the Mikveh with his sons while themother and the daughters cleaned up the house, polishing the lamps, the sootypots. There is a fresh smell everywhere.Father has brought a guest home from the House of Study, and loudlyhallows the Sabbath. The voices of the Jews and their melodies can be heardall over the town, while the fragrance of food spreads far and wide.After the afternoon sleep of the Sabbath the fathers examine theiroffspring to see what they learnt during the week, while the mothers sitwith the “Tse-ena Ure-ena", the Women's Yiddish Pentateuch, on their knees;some reading it and others simply glancing at it now and then.As the Sabbath ends the girls take possession of the street, with the ladsafter them. The world goes on after its old-established fashion.All this has departed, together with the picturesque individuals whose verynames are enough to bring a way of life back to you: Feivish Poiker,Leibish Hoiker, Joel Piatek, Mordechai Smatek, Mendel Trik, Moshe Bik,Leibish Brand, Yehiel Tanz, Abraham Koch, Mendel Fluch, Michael Floi,Joseph Shtroi, Mordechai Ston, Moshe Han.200THE KALISH BOOKMordechai Ston the grave-digger used to frighten everybody, yet even worsewas his son-in-law who could joke only with his knife. There is no lightwithout shadow and no Community without its bad and its fools. And ifMoshe was asked who died today he would answer: One man and twoJewesses.All that innocence and all that innocent badness has been destroyed. It isas though it had never existed.BENJAMIN ZVIELIOPPENHEIM HOUSEThere was a special style of life about Oppenheim House which stood atthe corner of Pilsudski Street and Pilsudski (formerly Josephine) Boulevard;a two-storey corner building with Jewish shops all round it.Here on the corner was Reb Shlomo Herszkowicz’s delicatessen shop called“Zloty Rog.” Next to it was the iron and building-materials store of RebEliezer Lipshitz, and nearby the textiles shop of the Brothers Braun andthe Kollektura of Weltfried, the Orbis Travel Agency and the drugstore ofSolnik, a brush shop and the Sausagery belonging to Beatus, a clothes shopand, at the end, Daum’s Pastry Shop.On Sundays when all the shops were closed in front, commercial lifecontinued behind, in the courtyard. The neighbours, who often used to helpone another out with a loan, used to sit at the back doors between customers,chatting about Torah or the latest news, or reading the Haint, Moment orNasz Przeglond. Up above on the second floor, all along the gloomy corridoorsrunning from end to end of the building, were wooden doors leading toprivate rooms, offices, and workshops. Here is Dzialowski the glazier, littleand hunched, who is always uttering wise sayings and quoting the words ofour Sages of Blessed Memory. Here is a portmanteau maker, a sign painter,and a barber looking for new customers.At the end is the door leading to the Mizrahi Synagogue and Club, withits two large rooms. On the Sabbath Day it was always chockful, and itsCongregation included outstanding figures who held official positions in theKehilla, or were exceptional by reason of their own personalities. Amongthem was Reb Eliezer Oppenheim, owner of the house and the timber storein the courtyard, the almost permanent head of the Mizrahi; the testy RebMordechai Hacohen Shapira and Reb Moshe Krakowski, both of themscholars and enlightened after their fashion; Reb Shlomo Herszkowicz ownerof the “Zloty Rog”, with whom every important person visiting the townstayed as a matter of course; the aged Reb Shmuel Weltsman who ownedthe large book store in Ciasna Street and who was a historian and biblio-grapher, always busy writing his book on the History of the Kalish Com-munity. And here is Reb Simeon Widewski, a fleshy man who is bothlearned and wealthy; the modest and gentle Reb Feivel Lipshitz who is anTHE FINAL YEARS201expert Hebrew grammarian and scholar; Reb Alexander Ziskind Moses thecrippled son of the Rabbi Reb Welvel Moses, who reads the Torah on theSabbath and boils and erupts at every imagined or actual misdeed; RebShlomo Kalman Parzenczewski who allocates the order by which the Congrega-tion are summonned to the reading of the Torah and then says the relevantblessings; lame Reb Joel Sitner who always proclaims every event andevery action; and last, but by no means least, Reb Mordechai Mendel Wein-traub, a Hassid who loves the Land of Israel with every bone and sinewin his body. He has a hoarse voice and shares in countless prayer quorumsall the time. Ever since he visited Eretz Israel he sits at the third close-of-Sabbath meal in the twilight, singing Sabbath melodies to Sephardi tuneshe heard in Jerusalem. Between the Afternoon and Evening Prayers on theweekdays he produces the Haint or the Moment from his pocket, goes overto the Bema and reads an article on the Land of Israel aloud, as thoughthose were the words of the living God. When it is time to collect for theJewish National Fund he is always hard at work making sure that theprescribed amount should be raised.And here is Reb Joseph Moshe Fisher and his brother Reb Getzel, RebJacob Hyman, Reb Israel Braun who sings the Additional Prayers (Mussaf)on the Days of Awe, and the short and lively figure of Rabbi Jacob Littman(Avtalion), a fiery arotor and the head of the Tahkemoni School.On Sabbath and festivals the shops in Oppenheim House are closed andlocked, but in the Mizrahi Synagogue they gather and sit like brethren overa glass of liquor. To one side is a little wooden barrel, and the pump producesfoaming beer whose sharp tang spreads all through the Synagogue.I can still hear their voices ringing in my ears.JOSEPH SIERADZKITHE OLD BRIDGE IN KALISHKalish lies on the banks of the Prosna, and as along ago as the year1264 Jews were dwelling on both sides of the river. Indeed, ancient Jewishhouses are still standing here and there, including worn old paving stones.Long-established householders lived in Babina, the Jews’ Street.Over the water hangs an aged wooden Bridge, which is the chief arteryof Jewish life in town. On the one side of the river are old and new houses,while on the other are the butcher shops, the fish-market, the vegetablemarket, the Kehilla building, the Mikveh, the Jewish Hospital, the littleSynagogue of the tailors and many Jewish religious Societies. On one sideis a pharmacy and on the other an inn. From the time it was built untilthe time of our destruction this Bridge saw the life of the Jews in Kalish.If any trouble came down on the Jews and there were riots the Bridgewas broken. As soon as things became quiet it was repaired.202THE KALISH BOOKAll kinds of boots have crossed the Bridge. Here passed the conscriptsin the Russo-Japanese War. In 1905 the Cossacks crossed it, in 1914 theGermans, in 1918 Haller’s Poles whom they called the Hallerchiks, and in1939 Hitler’s brutes.And here is a day of Jewish life in the Kalish of the past. From thelittle wooden houses slowly shuffle elderly Jews with bushy beards andlarge prayer-shawl bags under their arms. On the Bridge they meet, andenter the Hospital Synagogue for prayer. These are butchers, waggoners,tailors and cobblers. They are the first on the scene in the early morning.Business is also done on the Bridge. A wealthy butcher sells meat to poorbutchers. They shake hands on it and do their trade by word of mouth,according to a margin of profit. And the fish-sellers do the same. Carts fullof meat and fish cross. On this side of the Bridge stand the lean horses andthe wizened waggoners, and on the other, in a long row, the porters withropes looped round them and hand-carts. All of them are waiting to earna few coins and keep their households going.On the Bridge also stand the unemployed, bakers, shoemakers, tailors,hat-makers; and it is indeed sometimes called the Labour Exchange. Fromtime to time a small factory-owner or a master craftsman comes and chooseshimself a few workers for the day. The others go on with their arguments.One group wants to emigrate, others want to stay here and struggleshoulder to shoulder with the Polish workers. These call for a revolution,those for gradual improvement. All of a sudden somebody mounts the Bridgeparapet, flings Communist leaflets among the unemployed and shouts: “Wedemand work and bread, down with the Capitalist Governments, long livethe Revolution!” Another lad has tied a little red flag to a stick, and thereyou have a demonstration all cut and dried on the Bridge. Off they marchtowards the Town Hall. The Police disperse the unemployed with rubbertruncheons and tear-gas bombs.Then the Bridge is taken over by members of the underworld. Theirown private trials begin as they start thrashing one another. After that theymake it up and go off to the inn near the Bridge to have a drink together.And now come the hawkers with the sacks, who make the rounds of thecourtyards shouting: “Old clothes! Old clothes!” On either side of the riverthey spread out the “wares” they bought in the courtyards, and sell themto the tailors and the hatmakers. This is also a way of making a living.Here stands a youngster next to a large basket full of flat hard cakes,hoarsely proclaiming from morning to evening: “Hot egg-cakes, hot egg-cakes!” A woman sells cold water in glasses. A little old crone sells hotpeas from her bowl. And now suddenly appears a black waggon with blackhorses, slowly driven across the Bridge by a Jew with a long white beard.Those summoned to weddings and funerals have to cross the Bridge becausethe Synagogue stands nearby. Jews accompany the departed as far as theSynagogue. There they wash their hands and then go back to daily life.Towards evening the Bridge is taken over by the ordinary people, theneedle-and-thread fellows and their like. They come out of their close roomsTHE FINAL YEARS203to breathe a little fresh air. The children play in the dirty gutter, and thewomen sit along the banks, talking from shore to shore. The men standbeside the parapets and discuss politics. The Kalish match-maker hurriesfrom group to group, tall and long-necked, suggesting matches. The Bridgeis his anvil. Here he has hammered out many a successful match. Youngmen and women meet on the Bridge, and along it pass peacefully more thanone couple who wanted to get divorced.It grows dark. The porters disperse. Jews cross the Bridge for the EveningPrayers. Mothers call their children home and the children don’t want to go.The mothers promise that they will let them come tomorrow as well.Someone brings a big torch to the Bridge, lights are lit and Jews say theblessing for the Moon. And now the Bridge is deserted. The moon lightsup houses with closed shutters. The Jews of Kalish are sleeping after theirexhausting day’s toil. And the Prosna flows quietly beneath the Old WoodenBridge.When the Nazis entered Kalish in 1939 and annexed it to the Third Reich,they took all the Jews of the city away by that Bridge. Those Jews whowere unable to walk were taken across the Bridge and exterminated. Afterthey had destroyed the last Jews of the city they fetched Jews from othercities and countries and ordered them to block the branches of the river withthe debris of Jewish homes, synagogues, gravestones and so on. They burntthe Bridge.There is no longer any Jewish life in Kalish. Every trace of the Jewshas been erased from the surface of the earth. With the lives that werelost and have vanished, every memory of the old wodden Bridge of Kalish hasalso been lost.J. HOLZTHE CAFE GOERSThe picture of Jewish social life remains incomplete if we do not mentionthe cafes and restaurants, those who went there and sat there and theatmosphere they established. The Jewish public, the intellectuals, the middleclass and the class-conscious workers all spent pleasant hours in the cafes.Current affairs of any kind, from a chat about fresh news to scandal allthe days of the year, which the observant Jews gets rid of after his prayersin Synagogue or Shtiebel or in the corridors leading from them, providedthe material for caf§ conversation. All the local sensations spread fromthese tables as a rule.There were certain cafes where Jews concentrated. For the greater parteach of them had its own particular style and clientele.After the First World War the best known was the Mayer Caf£ whosecakes were renowned. It was situated in the main Market, at MilsteinHouse which was built after the War. In those days it was the meetingplace of the Polish gentry, the Polish and Jewish middle class and the204THE KALISH BOOKprofessional men and intellectuals. As through a mist I can see the largeplate-glass window and the darkish hall beyond. My father used to takeme there. If my memory does not mislead me it was a male institution.I do not remember women at the tables. It would seem that the presence ofwomen in cafes was not yet acceptable to people of good taste.On market days when the squires and estate-owners of the neighbourhoodused to gather together, there was far more noise outside the cafe thaninside. Agents and factors, chiefly Jews, used to wait for them outside.Those Jews would glance in to find the men they were looking for. Religiousconsiderations and the withdrawn and distant attitude of the Poles did notpermit them to sit together with their Jews at the tables.At that time there was also the Shaub Cafe which was similar, apartfrom the billiard tables which also attracted Jewish youngsters. Until theSecond World War the most successful cafe was the Udzialowa, in WiszniewskiHouse on the Josephine Allee. This was the meeting-place of doctors, lawyers,engineers, industrialists, businessmen and a large group of snobs of bothsexes. Many of them had regular tables here, their own social groups andmeetings at regular hours. The coffee hour, with or without milk, was from12 noon to 2 p.m. The ladies usually arrived first, and the men came in ontheir way home from work. Between 5 and 7 it was the same thing, exceptthat people sat around longer, there were more people and in general themood was livelier.The most crowded time was Sunday, before noon and in the early afternoon.The regular habitues included people who provided a kind of permanentbackground. Here you would find Dr. Alexander (Olesh) Danziger with hiswife Maria Janka, the oldest daughter of Reb Bezalel David Halter. Thiscorpulent old man with his tranquil face, constant sense of humour andconsiderable shrewdness, used to attract many people to his table. BronekSilber (Dzims), the impresario of the revues and representative of the “Musewith the tucked-up dress”, was a treasury of jokes and japes, and his namewent ahead of him throughout the neighbourhood. And here you could seeElvira Holz, who never grew old, surrounded by her circle of admirers.The Udzialowa Cafe was the place for the lawyers, among whom ZygmuntNeuman was outstanding for his humour and liveliness. Here too the lawyersMieczyslaw Danziger, J. Perkal, Leon Sitner, J. Prager, Stanislaw Frenkeland Kacenel were regularly to be found. The engineers were represented bythe architect Leon Tzomber, member of the Town Council on behalf of theJewish Artizans, Stefan Pinczewski, A. Fisher, Jacob Holz and KazimierzDanziger. Leon Danziger, Manager of the Merchants’ Bank and member ofthe Town Council, was also a regular visitor.At 12 noon the millers came in, namely: the Brothers Leon and MoritzKowalski, with their representative Moniek Semiaticki, Fisher Gottfried,Nowak and Scheinfeld.The Lace-making industry was represented by Jacob (son of Isaac) Adler,who had been paying court for decades to Xenia Seidorf (known as Sidonia).The merchants are displayed by Leon Semiaticki, Chairman of the ZionistAssociation and of the Cooperative Bank. He usually comes together withLeon Szubin, the Bank manager.THE FINAL YEARS205There are usually a couple of doctors to be found here. Among them willbe Drs. Trachtenberg, Plotsky, J. Beatus, Lubelski and Zeid. The youngerones include Berek Goldstein, Pabek Neuman and others.The only non-Jews regularly found here were the particularly courteouswaiters Andrzei and Leon. The atmosphere was Jewish. Conversations touchedon all possible subjects from international affairs to verbal onslaughts onothers. There were also certain tables reserved for certain subjects. Duringthe six week-days the Poles were a distinct minority here. On Sundaysthey were as much as half, for then they brought their families with them.Entirely different was the Cafe George at No. 3, Pulaski Street. Thiswas the cafe of the young folk, first of the members of Hashomer Hatzairand afterwards of all the other Youth Movements from right to left. How-ever, the Hashomer Hatzair were always a majority. They had discovered the“institution” in 1920 and made it their own. The cafe cannot be thought ofwithout “Auntie”, who ruled the roost there. This elderly spinster wasalways grumbling, but was very fond of those who came regularly to hercafe. We grew up and became mature before her eyes, and afterwards wevisited her as husbands and wives and fathers and mothers of families.Here the activities of the Movement were planned, as was Aliya to EretzIsrael. Here we began our first flirtations, assignations, casual and moreserious love affairs.Auntie knew who had been there, who had gone out, and when he wouldbe back. She was a post office for various purposes. She knew exactly whatto give each visitor and never made a mistake. In those days the constantvisitors included Abba Seife, Shlamek Buzhwinski, Duciu and Lutek Krassucki,Olek Poznanski, Genia Krassocka and others.Guests included the active Maacabi leaders whose club was not far away.When they returned from the club they would enter the cafe. Amongthem were Heniek Oppenheim, Mottek Oppenheim and his wife Marina neeTemkin, M. Jarecki, Zeif and others.When I entered the Cafe George after the War in 1945, Auntie receivedme most cordially and asked me whether I still liked a “Stepanka” with mycoffee. Her professional memory had survived and defeated the War.ALEXANDER POZNANSKIWE ARE TAKING STEPSAnybody who wishes to know how far we Jews are from true autonomycan do no better than read the Regulations governing the Elections to theCouncils and Executives of the Jewish Kehillot. And if anyone is interestedin the powers and possibilities of action of the Kehilla, let him attentivelyread the Minutes of the recent sessions of the Kehilla in Kalish.We entered the Election campaign enthusiastically. Many of the deeds ofthe Kehilla Executives until now were shameful, and we wished to makean end of them.206THE KALISH BOOKThe Elections ended with the victory of the Progressive Jews. The Councilmembers elected are people who in the course of their communal activitieshave proved that they know the functions of a Jewish representation quiteclearly, and are capable of overcoming all the obstacles on the way towardsa secular and democratic Kehilla.With the same dedication as was evinced by our supporters during theCampaign, we have now gone to work in the Kehilla. But to our regretthe activities of the recently elected bodies are being slowed down by thethird party. (And when we come to speak about interferences in activity,let us not forget those quarrels of a personal and party character whichburst out and have become permanent even among us ever since the Nine-teenth Zionist Congress.)The election of the Executive — the actual controller of the Kehilla —which should have been completed at the First Meeting of the Council hasnow been deferred to the second month under Articles 14 and 64 of theElections Law; and there is no end in sight. People who have already beenapproved as Council members are found to be ineligible. It is absolutelyimpossible to understand the steps taken by the Authorities, and the effectof these measures on the Jewish Community are painful. When the Kehillaliberates itself from the burden of the Executive all its activities in respectof current needs are brought to a standstill. The Old Executive should havegone long ago. Do they expect any initiative at all during the transitionperiod?The Block which I represent had to face a choice: Either to do nothingand await explanatory letters, confirmations, elections and so on or, inview of the tragic position of the Jewish population, to ignore all formalitiesof procedure, take over the administration of the Kehilla and begin working.We chose the second alternative. That is the reason for my urgent proposalat the last meeting of the Kehilla, regarding Winter Relief. The Councilfound my proposal of real interest, adopted it unanimously and resolvedto carry out the programme and elected an Organizing Committee.Will the Council succeed in providing relief in this difficult economicsituation of Jewry? Most definitely and certainly! The will to live of theJewish Community is powerful, and it will not fail at this tragic moment.We cannot rely on any help from the outside. Therefore let everybodyrespond gladly and willingly to the summons of the Kehilla. Our Self-helpwill determine the fate of many Jewish families. Do we have to seek themeans to awaken Jewish generosity?You, worker at a job or Jewish craftsman, will you refuse to contributeone day's work for your hungry brother? In spite of the boycott will you,Jewish merchant, refuse to aid your starving brother who was also a merchantonly a short time ago? Jewish mother and housewife, will you not savesome of your meagre food at least once a week, so as to contribute whatyou can spare to the Relief Committee?I am convinced that the first Relief Action of the New Kehilla will becrowned with success.Kalisher Leben 35 (458); 28th Heshvan 5697, 13.11.1936.THE FINAL YEARS2071. HOLZ19, CIASNA STREETDedicated to the pi'ecious memoriesof Abba and Bella Seife.In accordance with the meaning of its name in Polish, this was really anarrow street which always had a smell of sewage. On either side of thestreet stood houses of two or three storeys. They had no style whatever.Sometimes they were ugly, crumbling with old age and the dust of genera-tions, and the plaster peeling off.What caught the eye in these houses were the broad double gates throughwhich the peasant carts used to rumble to find a resting place, particularlyon Tuesday and Friday market days. Behind the gateway was the “heart”of the house, that is, the courtyard surrounded by all kinds of buildings andwings.In “our” house there was a courtyard that was just like a lengthy pipepaved with shapeless cobble-stones, in which ran runnels of sewage. It tookconsiderable skill to cross these runnels, particularly during “floods” causedby rain or simple overflow from cess-pits.On the left-hand side of the courtyard was the workshop of Biezwinski,a locksmith who was wellknown in the city. On the right was a successionof apartments in the wings, standing one behind the other and full of poorfamilies, each with any number of children. These inhabitants engagedsome in petty trading and some in selling all kinds of trifles on the stallsof the Municipal Market. At night they often used to sleep on their littlecarts in order to go off to markets in the neighbouring villages and smalltowns early in the morning. There were also two Shtieblech of differentHassidic groups in this courtyard. On festival and Sabbath nights theirmelodies used to compete with one another, and strangely enough the com-petition often blended well.At the end of the courtyard, in a building which had formerly served as afactory, was the Hashomer Hatzair Club. The entrance and staircase wereperfect archaeological specimens. The wooden stairs were warped and drywith age. They creaked and groaned at every step and functioned by sheerforce of habit alone; while the peeling walls rounded off the melancholyscene.A high door with a rusty lock in it was the entrance to the club whichcarried the picturesque Russian name “Izba” (Cabin). We were young then,so we paid no attention to the entryway, the stench and the ugly surroundings.We were busy reshaping the world, and our eyes were raised on high allthe time.The big room was actually a hall in which the ceiling was supported bymany pillars, as in every such room intended for machinery. At the end,behind a wooden screen that ran the width of the chamber, were two tinyrooms. One served for the Secretariat and for meetings of the local leadership,208THE KALISH BOOKthe other for the meetings and activities of the groups. The problems withwhich we dealt were grave and difficult. The arguments and debates werelively and tempestuous. We were indeed young.The walls were decorated as the times required, changing according tofestivals, holidays and Zionist events. The photograph of Herzl was nevermissing.There was a feeling of cleanliness and beauty in there. Whenever youcame you would find either Hasia, Yutka, Genia or else Rhuda with a broomin her hand. It was noisy and cheerful. There was always a great deal ofhubbub. There was dancing, particularly the Hora, sometimes until verylate at night.We also had a wall newspaper with notes and remarks on current affairs.It always caught the eye with its beautiful arrangements and its drawings.I also remember the slogan “Hebrew speak Hebrew” set out with the aid oflittle electric lamps.We were well organised, between four and five hundred youngsters of bothsexes, full of high standards and ideals. It was a most intense and stormyperiod in our lives.There is no going back to that period. But one may and can refresh one’smemory.BLUMA WROCLAWSKI3, NOVA STREETThe house in which I was born, grew up and lived until the outbreak ofthe World War was like any other house. And yet there was somethingspecial about it which makes my heart ache.There were dozens of inhabitants in the house, and apart from the non-Jew they were all Jews. Who was he? The janitor, of course. Each tenanthad his private world and goings on, and together they constituted a panoramaof Jewish life.To the right of the gate there was a large shop selling second-handclothes, which belonged to Pazanowski. The enormous courtyard was full ofstables and cowsheds. On Fair days the courtyard would fill up with waggonsbefore dawn. Farmers would bring geese, poultry or butter. The inhabitantsof the house would go down to buy the goods. Artisans used to live in thehouse; factory workers and a water-drawer. There was a bakery in thehouse, a pastry-cook’s shop, a laundry. The Rebbe of Zychlin lived there, itwas near the big synagogue.A water pump stood in the centre of the courtyard. The water-drawer,Moshele, was a short, thick-set man with crooked legs. He would lift hiswares pail by pail, and pour them into the barrels of his clients.THE FINAL YEARS209There was a traditional atmosphere about this courtyard. On Fridayevenings it would become very quiet. All the tenants who had been rushingaround every day to make a living, now seemed to have changed their veryimage. Suddenly they turned into Jews praying to God, wrapped in theirPrayer-shawls.The days before Passover were happy and noisy here. The children wouldlight a bonfire, and there was no end to their delight. Women would throwparcels of Harnetz (leaven) from the windows to be burnt. The childrenwere delighted to fulfill the Commandment.But as the hour of the Seder drew nearer the courtyard became very still.Everybody would be sitting around with a grave air, trying to impart acertain splendour to the ceremony; and anyone who prolonged it deserved tobe praised.Once the Passover was over the grey days returned to the courtyard;worries and problems, making a living, taxation, various hardships. Thiswent on till the Feast of Succot.There were sixteen booths to adorn the courtyard, and one of them wasparticularly impressive — that of the Rebbe of Zychlin. The Rebbe wouldonly enter his Succah after all the other Jews had settled in theirs. I canclearly recall his impressive figure in his silk kapota, his white socks, theShtreimel on his head. He would chant the Kiddush in a loud voice, andall the inhabitants of the courtyard would cry “Amen” after him.On Yom Kippur, the fear of the Day of Atonement could be felt in thecourtyard. At the time of the lighting of the candles rivers of tears wouldflow from the eyes of the mothers. Voices were heard mourning and weeping.When the meal was over the fathers would bless their children arid go downto pray. Next day they would stand wrapped in their white shrouds, prayingand weeping all day long.But their prayers were not heard. One day in September 1939 Gestapo mencame and took all the residents of the courtyard at No. 3 Nova Street, oldpeople, women and babes in arms, to the buildings of the Shrier market.They walked with small parcels on their backs, driven by Nazi whips. It wasthe beginning of the end.M. B.A LAG BA’OMER MARCHIn the early hours of the morning, groups of young people could alreadybe seen wearing their uniforms, hurrying to the premises of their variousorganisations.At seven o’clock precisely all the youth organisations had already gatheredat the starting point in the large courtyard of the Zionist Organisationbuildings, at No. 21 Josephine Boulevard.By 7.15 they set out on their journey, headed by Mr. David Wolkovitch.The “Hashomer Hatzair” Band played marches. It was an impressive trip.210THE KALISH BOOKThe line weather and the sunshine contributed to the very effective paradewhich passed through the Josephine, Pilsudski, Warzawska and Turek streets,towards Winary. The following Youth Movements took part in the trip:Histadrut Zionit, Hehalutz Hamerkazi, Hashomer Hatzair, Hebrew Gymna-sium, Hehalutz Hatzair and Gordonia.In the ForestOnce they reached the Winary Forest, the various Movements parted.Each had its own corner of the forest, in which it set its tents and organisedits own plan, as had previously been arranged.An outsider would have noticed that discipline and order prevailed inall the camps of the youth movements. There is no better proof that thefact that the Hora dance was not sufficient for them, though the man inthe street tends o believe at times that it is all they do. Oh no. NationalZionist work is carried out among them, and is of immense value. Theychange the character of the Galut Jew from its very foundation, in bothphysical and mental aspects. They prepare him for a life of freedom asagainst his fettered life today. This sort of educational activity can onlysucceed if it is begun while the children are still very young.In a number of the camps speeches were made on current affairs, andparticularly about the closing of Aliya to Eretz Israel. Y. Litman of BritTrumpeldor and H. Palach of Hehalutz Hamerkazi addressed their listeners,making impassioned speeches. They pointed out that the closing of the gatesTHE PINAL YEARS211will be of no use, for we shall continue to immigrate and penetrate throughthe cracks.All day long the road to the camps was busy. Carriages, cars and bicycleskept bringing visitors. Many “pilgrims” were drawn to the forest at Winary.The guests are estimated to have numbered several thousand. This publicwas varied and belonged to all sections of the community. The majoritywere the parents of the young members of the Youth Movements. They werenow given an opportunity of seeing part of the work of the Movements towhich their children were so devoted.The March Back to TownAt seven o'clock in the evening all the Movements prepared to march backto town. As soon as the order was given, they started homeward.The marchers were in high spirits and never stopped singing. They wereaccompanied by a large audience all the way.At eight o'clock in the evening they approached town. About two kilometresaway they were awaited by hundred of people, whose numbers grew constantly.The public cheered the marchers and threw flowers at them. The roadsthrough which they passed were crowded with people. Everybody watchedthe marchers with a sense of pride and satisfaction. They passed throughBabina Street, the New Market, Ciasna, Nova, Zlota, Pilsudski Streets andJosephine Boulevard to the courtyard of the Zionist Organisation.At the end of the ramble an impressive parade took place, and the variousMovements then went off, each to its own premises.Kalisher Woch 10, 23.5.1930.R08HEMLAG BA’OMER RAMBLESIn their customary fashion, the Zionist Youth Movement have kept uptheir tradition of rambling out of town this year as well.At seven o'clock the Brit Trumpeldor left to the sound of their Band,displaying their blue-white flag, along the road to Lissa, wearing theirbrown uniforms. They were joined by the Brit Trumpeldor youth of Stawiszyn.Mr. Grausalz headed the youngsters who made a very nice impression.At about the same time Hashomer Hatzair, Hehalutz Hamerkazi, Gordoniaand Hehalutz Hatzair left for their traditional march to Wolitza (Lissa).This march had many participants and the column was a long one. Theywalked to the sound of the bugle and the drum. Although very small childrentook part, the marching was exemplary. In the morning the weather wasnot very fine, but this did not affect the proud and steady marching of theyoung people. It is interesting that they pick out the Lissa forest for theirtrip, although it is six kilometres away from town.212THE KALISH BOOKWhen the hikers reached the forest, each Movement marked off its ownarea with string, put up tents and set out to carry the plans which hadbeen prepared previously.The youth enjoyed themselves, engaging in sports activities and games.They also discussed current affairs, under the guidance of older members.Visitors kept coming to the forest all day long, and the youngsters withthe blue National Fund boxes called on them to donate.The first to return at dusk were the Brit Trumpeldor. Their Band beganplaying as soon as they approached the town. In town itself a large crowdof parents and children awaited them, and the streets were full of spectators.An hour later the second set of marchers arrived. Its members carriedtorches and sang Halutz and Shomer songs. As soon as they approached thetown their Band began playing, and continued until they reached the HashomerQuarters.Kalisher Woch 18, 15.5.31.BAR-SABATHE HERZL ASSEMBLY AT A HASHOMER CAMPThe Twentieth of Tammuz. A real hot summer day. The sun has beenbeating down since dawn and it is very hard to bear the heat. The skyis crystal-clear, no clouds mar the pale blue horizon. Nature must be pre-paring herself, putting on her best holiday garb in honour of this holyoccasion. The camp is noisy. A hundred kfirim (“Lion Whelps”) are hastilygetting ready in couples. The atmosphere grows tenser and tenser.Then suddenly — silence. Attention!The bugle blows a half-note, then spreads sadly. The blast ends in a longcall — today is the anniversary of HerzFs death.One minute more and a great band of Jewish children, wearing whiteshirts and Shomer ties, stand ready for parade, the leaders at their head.The flags are down at half-mast, waving in the wind. — Attention!The Head of the Camp reads the Order of the Day. The Hebrew wordsare pronounced in the Sephardi fashion, echo in the silence of the Polishcountryside.For a split second you can imagine to yourself that you are in EretzIsrael.It seems as though Herzl, the figure standing on the balcony of theCongress House in Basle, must be looking down on the youngsters whohave gathered in this place, and smiles his gentle, fatherly smile.The children’s eyes are bewildered, pensive, dreaming.THE FINAL YEARS213“Am Yisrael Hai! Amcha Yisrael Yibaneh!” (Israel is alive, Your Peopleof Israel will be rebuilt.)An enthusiastic Hora dance is the response to the Order of the Day.The circles of dancers move as though they are in a spell.“Shomrim Yivnu Hagalil” (Shomrim will build up Galilee!) The wordsrings out for the first time in the forsaken Polish village.The driving-force of the youth can be felt, the iron will is there.“Anu Nivneh Yehudah! Anu Nivneh Hagalil!” (We shall build Judea! Weshall build up Galilee!)Evening. The sky has grown dark. Newly harvested sheaves of rye liearound in the field. A row of cherry trees can be seen in the background.On the border between the field and the row of trees, Herzl’s picture hasbeen set on a special stand.Sheaves have been placed on either side of the picture, and agriculturalimplements are laid before it.Everything is lit up by two campfires. They throw a rosy glow on thepicture and on the “Whelps” who pass in a file.Hundreds of Jewish children march past without a sound, turning theirheads to the noble face of the leader.The tune of “Tel-Hai” is quietly played on the violin. The sad notesharmonize with the surrounding.Then suddenly — an explosion.A white flame bursts aloft in the field. The “Kfirim” have lit the bonfirewhich has been prepared for this purpose.A moment later they have all gathered round the bonfire, and the Headof the Camp begins his speech.He reviews the generations of Jews in the Diaspora and speaks of thosewho fought in the past for the Freedom of Israel; the Hashmonaim, theMaccabees, the martyrs who went to the flames in Spain, Benjamin ZeevHerzl, the Pioneers, the Shomrim. He ends by saying that the 20th of Tammuzhas turned from a day of mourning into a day of rejoicing. Rejoicing forthe achievement of creation throughout the years, for each footstep thatbrings us closer to the aim set out by the leader.The bonfire bums higher. Its flames are very high.This is the gift of youth: Arms entwined, heads set back, shirts areout of pants and skirts atwirl — they are dancing. Dance! Dance withall your heart! Dance with body and soul! “Mi Yivneh? Anu Nivneh!” (Whoshall build? We shall build!)Sparks from the bonfire. There is a red moon in the sky. The hours moveon. It is already midnight, while these children of Israel still dance theirvictory dance on the 20th of Tammuz.Kalisher Woch, July 1929.214THE KALISH BOOKMICIA JEDWAB-KATSIRTHE GYMNNASIUMFor many years the main and side entrance to the Gymnasium were inthe gloomy tUnnel-like gateway. Wooden steps led to the two upper floors.Most of the class rooms faced onto Kilinski Street. The scenes in thecourtyard were more interesting. The courtyard was large, paved andsurrounded by tall buildings'. We spent the breaks in the open air. On marketdays part of the courtyard was full of peasant carts. The unharnessed horsescheerfully chewed their hay and oats. The scent of the hay told us aboutthe clear air of the fields in the distant villages.The first floor was arranged like a proper school: Class rooms, a hallfor the breaks between lessons, the Teachers' room, the Principal's roomwhich we used to pass almost on tiptoe. At one end of the corridor on thesecond floor were class rooms, while there were private apartments at theother. The poor tenants always grumbled and rebuked us about our badbehaviour. They could not understand how studying youth could yell andsing during the breaks. But in its final years the Gymnasium bought upall those dwellings.The Jewish Gymnasium at Kalish was the property of the Jewish Societyfor Secondary Schools which was headed by Dr. Braude. The language ofinstruction was Polish. We usually began the school year with prayers atthe Synagogue in Krotka Street. Two by two we used to march there throughBabina Street, at the beginning and end of the school year and also onThe Gymnasium BuildingTHE FINAL YEARS215Polish national holidays. On those occasions we marched through the mainstreets and aroused the admiration of the Poles.The School Committee was largely Zionist, and that set a stamp on theeducation. The Matriculation Examinations were usually conducted in a verysolemn atmosphere, but that was not the case with the Examination inHebrew, which was characterised by a cheerful national spirit.The head was Mr. Helling, whose principles determined the school spirit.Most of the teachers came from Galicia, which was the cultural centre ofPoland in those days. Each one is worthy of mention, but I shall restrictmyself to Mr. Zimmer, the youngest of the teachers and the one closestto us in spirit. He left his post at the Gymnasium and proceeded to EretzIsrael; and that strengthened the spiritual ties between us.My own teacher was Mr. Bakalar, an excellent pedagogue and the one-time secretary of Bialik, who imbued us with a love of Zionism andHebrew literature. Thanks to him we came to love Bialik and Tschemichovsky.On his initiative we wrote a letter to Bialik and received a reply whichwas framed and graced our Hall. Bakalar led us into the world of idealswhen he told us about his Zionist activities in Pinsk, where he was born.They used to set out in boats on the river Pripet, and there they organisedtheir Zionist activities, which were prohibited by the authorities. He wasproud of each one of us who went up to Eretz Israel as a Halutz or astudent. It may be largely thanks to him that all the surviving membersof his class have gathered together in Israel, although the War scatteredus in many countries.I cannot mention all those who fell, but must speak of Judith Lefkovitz,or “Drina” as we called her. Her father was the Gymnasium Dentist and anactive member of the Committee; a Zionist from Lithuania, who gave hisdaughter a Zionist education as well. Drina was a thorough-going idealist.She completed her studies at the Warsaw Institute for Jewish Studies andalso completed her studies at the University, and then returned to Kalishin order to teach in the Gymnasium, from which she kept in touch withthose of us who had already gone to Eretz Israel. She fell as a heroinewhen she slapped the face of a Nazi while defending her Jewish self-respect, and became a symbol of the young Jews educated in the nationalspirit at our Gymnasium.W. K.THE JEWISH THEATRE AND AMATEUR GROUPSThe first group of Jewish actors, who came to town in 1908, was“Landsman’s Troupe”. Those were the years of the reaction which followedthe 1905 Revolution, and the presentation of Yiddish dramas on the stagewas forbidden. Permission to appear was achieved thanks to bribery. Theadvertisements announced that this was a German-Jewish theatrical troupe.But sometimes the Governor himself came to the Theatre and found thatwhat was being spoken on the stage was not German at all. When thathappened no excuses helped, and the audience had to disperse.Scene from a Play.Under the German Occupation Yiddish performances were allowed, andJewish actors used to appear in town. After the Liberation of Poland thewell-known and popular Leizer Levin, who was generally known as “Geler”or “Ginger Levin” engaged in the Theatre as his hobby. He continued tobe active in this field until the outbreak of the Second World War and usedto bring us excellent theatrical groups such as “Vikt” and “Young Theater” aswell as well-known actors.The first group of amateurs was founded in 1912 by the actor Rakow,who also served as its producer. In 1915 a Dramatic Circle was establishedby Ephraim Zimmer, Moshe Jedwab, Zalman Gottfreund and Jacob Reich*who presented Gordin’s “Brothers Luria”. In 1917 Mondze Klechewsky andGinger Levin revived the Circle as part of the Turn Verein activities. Theypresented King Lear, The Brothers Luria, Shulamit, etc., and had at leastthirteen amateur members, who were later joined by three younger people.Following the expansion of Jewish communal life in the Polish Republic,dramatic circles were founded by all the parties and in the Schools forFurther Study associated with the Arbeiter Heim. Peretz Hirshbein thedramatist visited Kalish in 1920, when three Dramatic Circles presentedhis plays.The Poalei Zion Amateur Group was managed by W. Jacobovitz and D.Neugarten and had at least ten acting members. The plays presented included:Bimko’s Thieves, The Broken Hearts, Hertzele the Aristocrat, Shlomke theCharlatan, and The Slaughter by Gordin. The Bund Circle was managed byStark and Matuszak.In 1925 the “Sambation” and “Azazel” Little Theatres were very successfulin Poland and the establishment of a Little Theatre of the kind in Kalishwas proposed. The organisers were Tenzer, Leszczinsky and Sieradzki. Byagreement with Jacobovitz and Neugarten of the Poalei Zion Amateur Groupit was decided to ask the poet Moshe Broderson to undertake the artisticTHE FINAL YEARS217direction of the new Theatre. Broderson came to Kalish, met the amateuractors and accepted the post offered. Jacobovitz, Neugarten and Kaplanwere to be the stage-managers.That was the start of the “Comet Amateur Little Theatre”, The firstprogramme was given the familiar Kalish phrase “Was well ich hoben darfun?”(What’s in it for me?) as a title. The text was by S. Rubin and the musicby the Conductor Krotianski, while part of the material was written byMoshe Broderson.The performances were very successful and were repeated eight timesin all. Broderson was enthusiastic about the execution. The second pro-gramme was entitled “Lomir sich iberbeten” (Let’s make it up) and thethird “Hallo Charleston”. Texts were provided by Broderson, Rubin andKaplan. The “Comet” also went on tour and was very successful in Poznan,Turek, Kolo, Sieradz, Zdunska-Wola and Wielun.Actors of the “Comet” troupe were: W. Jacobovitz, Z. Neugarten, W.Shlomowitz, H. Englander, H. Jachimowitz, H. Rosenzweig, L. Rabinowitz,Nissenbaum, W. Lubelski, A. Leder, Helfgott, Beckermeister, Tondowska,Scher, Berkowitz, etc. But in spite of the material and moral success thereceipts were not enough to cover the outlay on Orchestra, Conductor,Costumes, Scenery, etc. The Troupe broke up in 1928. Some of the membersleft town, several of the women started raising families, etc. But Kalish folkwill continue to remember their “Comet”.HEHALUTZS. R. describes the changes within the centuries-old community of Kalishwhich led the younger generation to find their way to various youth move-ments including HEHALUTZ immediately before the First World War andduring the two decades that followed. Aliya to Eretz Israel began to bethought of in 1924, when many young people registered to proceed to theHomeland on foot. However, a major crisis came about in 1926 and 1927,and many of those who had gone to Eretz Israel came back bitterly distressedand disappointed. Yet those were the years which marked the beginnings ofHehalutz, whose members started off by studying Hebrew and singing Hebrewsongs. Apart from Hashomer Hatzair this was the only Youth Movement inthe city which called for actual Aliya under all conditions.The new group had no Club of their own but met every evening in theMunicipal Park. At one time they also used to gather at the Poalei ZionClub, and afterwards in the Hashomer Hatzair quarters; but the meetings inthe Park, held in all weathers, remain unforgettable.When the late Daniel Levy joined, the Kalish Hehalutz was transformedfrom a sentimental group of youngsters into a serious body aiming atand preparing for Aliya, going through the full channels of Hachshara.Hehalutz never became a mass movement in Kalish, but it exerted con-siderable social and public influence. It provided the channel through whichmany young people from Kalish and elsewhere proceeded to Eretz Israeland became part and parcel of the new life there.MAP OF THE CITYKey to Numbers:1. Bus Station; 2. Hotels; 3. Adam Asnik Secondary School; 4. Post Office;5. Holy Mikolai Church; 6. Local Historical Society; 7. “Orbis” Offices;8. Franciscan Church; 9. Parking Places; 10. Stanislaw Church; 11. Kolegiataand “Dorotka” Tower; 12. Municipal Theatre; 13. Municipal Museum.Change,s in Street Names:First of May Square — The New Market Nowotki Street — Nadwodna StreetSrodmiejska Street — Wroclawska Street Heroes of Stalingrad Square — The Old MarketDzierzinski — Nowa Street Freedom Boulevard — Josephine BoulevardTHE FINAL YEARS219BARUCH TALLTHE CITY REMAINS SOLITARYBefore me lies the map of the City of Kalish. At first sight it is a simpleplan: dust a few lines criss-crosing one another, other lines that are more orless parallel, with circles and segments of circles here and there. Only thetownsfolk will know how to decipher this map and breathe the spirit oflife into it.In the centre of the city stands the new Town Hall, which was erectedon the ruins of the building that the Germans destroyed in 1914.From the early hours of the morning the building is thronged with citizensand residents who come to find a birth certificate, pay taxes or hunt up anaddress.In the corridors can be seen Jews in their traditional dress holding roundlittle “Jewish hats” in their hands, waiting for some spokesman or counsellorwho can help them reduce the burden of taxes.The clock in the Municipal Tower strikes the hours according to whichthose shops in the Town Hall Square which is called the Old Market areopened or closed. On festival days and national holidays crowds gather here,a military band plays and speeches are delivered from the Balcony of theTown Hall.Three lively streets have their beginnings at the Town Hall Square. Thefirst is Wroclawska or Breslau Street. After its first half it is known asGornoslonska Street. Here are to be found the handsomest shops in the city,cafes, Banks and an iron bridge over the Prosna. Halfway along is thestarting-point of the Josephine Boulevard, and at the cross roads on thecorner is the Exchange. There you see merchants and middle-men, buyingand selling goods, foreign currency and land. The great majority are Jews.The corner is like a beehive, people seem to be milling round aimlessly, butin actual fact many make a living here.On the Sabbath the whole appearance of the street changes. Most of theshops are closed and locked, while the Exchange also seems to have vanished.This street leads to the Railway Station. There are few busses and poorroads. The railway line is the main link between Kalish and other cities.A single bus-line leads from the Old Market to the Railway Station, butfew people make use of this means of transport. Most of the residents go tothe station in a carriage or a “risorka” (a horse vehicle taking passengers ata fixed rate along a fixed route). Most of the carters are Jews, and thecentral station for the risorkas is in the “Ross-Mark” or Horse Market.The second street starting from the Square is Zlota or Gold Street whichcontinues as Nowa or New Street as far as the Maikow Fields. This is thespinal cord of the Jewish Quarter.In this street lies the Great Synagogue with the House of Study behind220THE KALISH BOOKit. All the shops belong to Jews. During the six week-days the streets arethronged with merchants, customers and simple idlers standing at the streetcorners discussing ways and means of making a living and politics, andwhispering the latest news to one another... Here there really is a small-scale *‘Jewish Commonwealth”, living, breathing and working according tothe rules it has set itself.On Sabbaths, festivals and other regular seasons the street is quiet. Earlyin the morning the householders can be seen wearing their prayer-shawlsunder their coats as they proceed with measured paces to the Synagogue orto one of the many Shtieblech to be found in the district.In the afternoon lads and lasses wearing Sabbath or festival garb comeout to stroll or meet, to attend a lecture or a discussion at the HashomerHatzair Club in Ciasna Street or the Left Poalei Zion Hall across the road.The residents know one another, rejoice in one another's joys and share intheir sorrows. A wedding in the street makes the neighbours happy whilea funeral, far be it from us, grieves them one and all.To be sure, Jews live in all parts of the city but this street, together withBabina, Ciasna and Chopin Streets which cross it and are inhabited by Jews(the only Poles being the janitors), are the heart of Jewish Kalish.The third street is Kanonicka Street, where most of the inhabitants arealso Jews. Halfway along it is an aged building that looks as if it is aboutto tumble down. It contains the offices of the Kehilla or organised JewishCommunity. Next to it is the Mikveh or Ritual Bath Building.The Church of Holy Mikolai somewhat disturbs the harmony here. It isnot the habit of the Jews to walk along the pavement next to the Church.Kanonicka Street leads to the New Market, at the centre of which is theFire Brigade Building. The bells ring. There is a fire in town. From everyside large and small, old and young come dashing. “Es brennt!” (Fire! Fire!)Voluntary Fire Brigade members arrive, harness horses to the engines. Thereis ample commotion. It has happened more than once that by the time theBrigade arrives the fire has burnt itself out and nothing but charred andsmoking walls are left.The New Market is the place at which hundreds of Jewish peddlars maketheir living. They bring their goods by hand-cart early on Tuesday andFriday mornings, and arange their stands in level lines along the centre ofthe Market-place.Peasants from the surounding villages fetch their produce: Butter, cheese,eggs and chickens. Jewish housewives go about between the stands, feelingat the chickens, bargaining and buying what they need for the Sabbath.The peasants put the money in their hip-pockets and disperse among thestalls. From the Jewish peddlars and hawkers they buy clothes, shoes, capsand kitchen utensils. The 4‘mutual trading” goes on until noon. On Fridaysin the winter the Jewish peddlars do their best to clear their stalls early andhurry home for fear of profaning the Sabbath.Between the Babina and Nadwodna Streets there once slowly flowed aTHE FINAL YEARS221branch of the Prosna which crosed the Nowa and Zlota Streets, passed alongKanonicka Street and reached the Municipal Park. After the Nazis exiledthe Jews of Kalish they blocked this branch and paved its banks withgravestones from the Jewish Cemetery.The “Jewish” section of the river has vanished from the map. Togetherwith it, as though symbolically, has come the termination of the Communityof thirty thousand Jews who lived in this part of Kalish for so manygenerations.People who have visited the city during recent years relate that it standsas before. Poles have taken possession of the Jewish homes. Only buildingswhere the plaster is falling from the walls still stand as memorials for avibrant Jewish Community that has been exterminated.When a son of Kalish looks at the map, he sees once again, with theeyes of his spirit, the streets and squares of those days; the Jews walkingthrough those streets on weekdays and Sabbaths. His heart sorrows andhis soul grieves for the Jews of Kalish who have been cut off, and forthe City where they were abandoned.222THE KALISH BOOKTHE ORGANIZATION OF IMMIGRANTS FROM KALISH & DISTRICTIN ISRAELThe people of Kalish were always very sociable, and wherever there were afew persons from Kalish, they would organize. There is a tradition that in thedays of the Turks, there was a Hatzer (Courtyard) of Kalish Jews in the OldCity of Jerusalem. Menahem Shklanovsky records that when he came to Jeru-salem for Passover 1924 he stayed at the home of Moshe Haim Waxman. TheKalish townsmen gathered there, and discussed the possibility of organizing.In 1925 Gad Zolty, Isaiah Leib Sowa, Menahem Shklanovsky, Moshe Yitzhakiand Shmuel Toporek, all from Kalish and Blaszki, met at the home of the lateEliyahu Berlinsky in Manshieh, Jaffa, and set up a Kalish Club. They used tcmeet each evening and arranged Cultural evenings, as well as assisting membersto find employment. People from Sieradz, Turek and Warta also used to attendthe meetings and gatherings. This Club functioned till 1928.In 1929 there were further immigrants from Kalish and the Society organizedonce again. The oldest member, the late Hirsch Weitz, used to help members ofthe Society. It was a time of unemployment and the shop of Nahum Shurekserved as an address and meeting-place. One day about fifty members met atthe home of the late Moshe Goldenberg and decided to start a “Society of Immi-grants from Kalish for Mutual Assistance”. The Government approved the So-ciety, which began with an initial Capital of fP. 10.— and began granting loansof a Pound or half a Pound. The yearly turnover did not exceed £P. 100. Mem-bership fees were fixed at 4 piastres a month. At a later date it was decided toraise them to 5 piastres. A new immigrant was given £P. 2 to help him buy abed and the very basic necessities. The Committee looked after social cases.General meetings were held in various places.Meetings and gatherings of part of the members were usually held in privatedwellings. The Committee applied to the Kalish Kehilla and asked them to allo-cate some money in support of the local relief activities of the Society. TheKehilla allocated a sum of 1,000 zloty and informed the Society that 500 zlotyhad been sent. For some reason the money was never received. The Committeetried to obtain help from townsfolk in the United States, but received no reply.Apart from the actual Committee, a Council of Patrons also existed. It wascomposed of: The late Joel Solnik, the late Joseph Mamlok, and the lateRaphael Meir Shklanovsky.When the Society expanded a Collector had to be appointed, and the late JacobWartski was appointed to this post. In December 1932 shares of One Pound weresold to members who bought them on an installment plan, and, also to touristsfrom abroad.In 1934 the Committee decided to raise the membership due to 50 mils. Asthere was no fixed address, the Society decided on the homes of a number ofmembers, which would serve as its meeting place and address for the paymentof dues. Activities continued as before.ORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS223We can learn just how small were the resources from the following figures:The turnover of the Mutual Assistance Fund amounted to £P. 22 in the year1931; in 1932 — £P. 13; in 1933 — £P. 53.All activities ceased during the 1936 Disturbances as well as the Second WorldWar. In 1945 former members resumed the activities of the Society. The firstmembers to begin were: J. D. Bet Halevi, the Chairman: Mendel Sieradski,Treasurer; Yehiel Heber, Secretary; Eliezer Birnbaum and Menahem Shkla-nowsky.When the first of the European survivors arrived, they needed help. The sumsprovided in those days were: £P. 5; £P. 7.5; £P. 15. Six hundred members werethen registered. A Ladies' Committee was also formed for special relief work.These were Mesdames: Bet Halevi, Avrunin, Birnbaum, Shklanovsky, Maroko,the late Leah Sieradzki, and the late Hanna Gootschell. Memorial servicesbegan to be held for the martyrs of the city.In 1946, upon the arrival of the first immigrant ships in Cyprus, the Committeemobilised for special relief work and co-opted Mesdames: Bet Halevi, Birnbaum,Avrunin, Shklanovsky, Maroko, the late Hanna Gottschell and the late LeahSieradski. The ladies collected food and clothing and sent parcels together withmoney to Kalish immigrants in Cyprus and the survivors in Poland. The Cyprusrelief work continued until the immigrants came to Israel.That year, the reconstituted Kehilla in Kalish asked for ritual and religiousobjects. A few members met at the home of the late Joseph Mamlok, and sentPrayer-Shawls, Phylacteries and Mezuzot with the assistance of the Committee.During the years 1946—1949, including the War of Liberation, most of the mem-bers were busy in defence work of various kinds. But they continued theiractivities and helped to organise branches in Jerusalem and Haifa, as well asassisting the new immigrants who came to the country.Early in 1949 the Chairman of the Impartial Kalish Relief in theUnited States, Mr. Joseph Arnold (Aronowitz) arrived in Israel. At a JointMeeting of the Committees a Central Committee was elected, consisting of:Eliezer Birnbaum, Haim Mendel Naparstek, Mendel Sieradzki, Shimshon Green,David Sinaderka, the late Shlomo Shimshoni, the late Fania Rogozinsky andAbraham Zohar. It was then decided that all money coming to the country fromabroad should be sent to the Central Committee which would distribute it ac-cording to the following key: 3 shares to Tel-Aviv, 2 to Haifa, 1 to Jerusalemand for the rest of the country. The same key was used for Central Committeemembership. Monies from the local collections were to remain with the variousbranches, which were to send detailed reports to the Central Committee. At thesame time the Gemilut Hassadim Fund began functioning again, and was namedfor those who fell in the War of Liberation.The wish to commemorate the martyrs began to make itself felt. In 1950S. Avrunin and M. Shklanovsky proposed that a special Forest be planted inmemory of the dead of the City. In May 1954, even before the Jewish NationalFund announced the planting of the Forest, a Circular was sent calling for theallocation of 50 dunams for the purpose. The sum of IL. 500 was borrowedfrom the Gemilut Hassadim Fund as an advance payment to the JNF. In Feb-ruary 1952 the Forest Committee was elected, consisting of Messrs. S. Avrunin,224THE KALISH BOOKAbraham Zohar, M. Shklanovsky, M. Sieradzki, G. Wroclawski, and Meir Maroko.Each member was called on to plant one tree in the Kalish Martyrs' Forest. Atthe same time we contacted fraternal organizations in the USA, and they alsocommenced activities.In May 1952 collections began in Israel. Mention should be made of the maincollectors: Esther and Shmuel Avrunin, Leah and Eliezer Bimbaum, Blumaand Gershon Wroclawski, Abraham Zohar, Gad Zolty, Moshe Yitzhaki, Sho-shanna and Meir Maroko, Neha and Haim Mendel Naparstek, Melech Shurek,Yonah and Menahem Shklanowsky, Leah and Mendel Sieradzki.In March 1953 Joseph Arnold, Chairman of the Forest Committee in theUnited States, visited Israel. He informed the Society that he had donated 1,000trees to be planted as a Wood in the name of the Aharonovitch and Sandziewskyfamilies. This Wood was to form an inseparable part of the forest in memoryof the Martyrs of Kalish and District.In April 1953, close on one hundred members went out to plant trees in theForest. The inhabitants of Israel planted some 20,000 trees while those from theUnited States planted an additional 10,000.In November 1953, Mr. S. Avrunin went to the U.S.A. on a family visit andmet the Committee for the planting of the Forest in Memory of the KalishMartyrs. With the help of Kalman Aharonovitch he met the late Gedalya Yoffe.He persuaded him to leave a sum of money in commemoration of his name andthe name of his wife. The Fund for the Forest succeeded in raising a sum of$4150 in the United States until November 1954.In 1954 the Committee visited the planted area and found that the trees werenot growing well. In April 1955, Walter Morris and Kalman Aharonovitch,members of the Forest Committee in the United States, visited the forest to-gether with members of the local organisation, and found that the conditionof the trees had not improved. It was decided that a protest should be sent tothe JNF. In 1958 a final meeting was held between the JNF representatives andthe Committee, who demanded a new site for the Kalish Forest. After prolongedand exhausting negotiations, the JNF agreed to allocate another planing areato the organisation. The site was to be chosen by the Forest Committee.In April 1958 the organisation applied for and received permission to erecta Memorial Stone in the Forest. The cost amounted to IL. 900. In 1960 it wasunveiled. Care of the forest was then passed on to the Committee of the Orga-nisation, and Mr. S. Avrunin was elected as representative to the JNF. In 1961it was decided that the square in front of the Memorial Stone should be ex-tended, and Mr. Joseph Arnold made a personal contribution for the purpose.Money was also donated by the Committee of the Kalish Organisation inAustralia. The extension was carried out by the JNF.In August 1961 members of the Organisation went to the Forest with theirfamilies. The excursion was filmed, and the film has been shown on variousoccasions.In 1952 the Jerusalem branch fixed 22nd of Sivan as a Memorial Day (beforeNational Memorial day was fixed by the State). Several hundred members wentup to the Vault of the Holocaust on Mount Zion and unveiled the tablet com-ORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS225memorating the Martyrs of Kalish and the neighbourhood. The late Rabbi JacobAvtalion delivered a eulogy.In 1953 the Israel Legation in Warsaw received a Torah Crown, a salver anda hand, through Kalman Sitner, now of Kibbutz Ein Shemer. These werebrought to Warsaw by two men from Kalish. Upon his arrival in the countryAbraham Friedman of Kalish brought two Torah Scrolls with him. These werehanded to the Organisation. One was donated to a Synagogue in MarmorekStreet, Tel-Aviv, by the Organisation of Kalish and District. The second Scrollwas donated to the Haifa Branch. That same year Simeon and Batya Green lefton family business to the United States. The Committee gave S. Green a missionconcerning help to new immigrants from Kalish arriving in Israel.After meeting in different house of committee members week after week,the members decided that a Home should be found for the Organisation andit was resolved that a Club of the people of Kalish and the neighbourhood shouldbe erected. Here is an extract from the Protocol Book:226THE KALISH BOOK“At the meeting of the Committee of the Organisation of Kalish and theDistrict, held at the home of Mendel Sieradzki on September 1st., 1955, it wasresolved that a ‘Kalish House’ should be constructed. All members voiced theirreadiness to donate money and raise funds for this Kalish House. The buildingis to serve as a Culutral Centre and Museum, and shall have a Hall for meet-ings and for the Committee of the Organisation. Meir Maroko was electedSecretary of this undertaking.”A Building Committee was chosen. Meir Meroko, Eliezer Birnbaum, GadZolty, Avraham Zohar, Menahem Shklanowsky were the members. A circularwas sent to the Committee of the Organisation in the United States. At firstthe local members were not certain that we would be assisted by the UnitedStates members, because of the Martyrs’ Forest. The first to be convinced wasMr. Joseph Arnold, who donated the sum of IL. 2,000. The founders in thecountry and in the United States, as well as individual members, donated throughthe Relief. In 1955 the Building containing the Kalish House was erected bythe initiative and help of our member, Eliezer Birnbaum. It was dedicated withimpressive ceremony, in the presence of guests from the Diaspora.We would like to mention the Israeli founders:The late Rabbi and Mrs. Jacob Avtalion; the late Hannah Gottschell; the lateFania Rogozinsky; Esther and Shmuel Avrunin; Leah and Eliezer Birnbaum;Ruth and Mordechai Bloch; Joseph Gottschell; Bluma and Gershon Wroclawski;Haya and Avraham Zohar; Haya and Gad Zolty; Ruhama and Moshe Haimo-vitch; Sarah and Moshe Yitzhaki; Shoshana and Meir Maroko; Neha and HayyimMendel Naparstek; Bella and Moshe Shurek; Yonah and Menahem Shklanowsky;Leah and Mendel Sieradzki, who are happily all with us at the time of writing.From the estate of the late Gedalya Yoffe a request was received for com-pleting the Kalish House and establishing a Library in his memory and in thatof his wife. Members donated books as well and there are now over 650 booksin the Library. At a meeting of the Organisation Committee Mr. Joseph Arnoldwas elected Vice-Chairman of Kalish House. Mrs. Paula Arnold was electedHonorary Chairman of the Ladies’ Committee for construction of the building.In 1956 Rabbi J. Avtalion passed away. At a meeting held after his deathit was decided to plant a small forest of 500 trees in his name at the RabbiGold Forest, on the way to Jerusalem. In 1957, Mr. Joseph Sieradzki and hisfamily came to Israel. Together with them they brought another Torah Scroll,salver, hand, two wooden crowns and a Shofar, which had survived from theKehilla of Kalish. These religious articles were not in a good condition andexpenses were involved in bringing them over from Poland. Leah and EliezerBirnbaum undertook all the expenses involved in the repair of these articles,and dedicated the Torah Scroll in memory of their parents. The Scroll and thevessels were given to the Synagogue in Marmorek Street in the name of theSociety of Kalish and its District.The Gemilut Hassadim Fund and the Hannah Fund have developed very well.The Hannah Fund was started by the husband of the late Hannah Gotschell,Mr. Joseph Gotschell, on the first anniversary of her death, with a donation ofIL. 8,000. Her sister, Mrs. Esther Malka Ziegel, donated the sum of IL. 1,000,ORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS227and the Birnbaum family donated a further IL. 200. The yearly loan turnover inthe Hannah Fund amounts to IL. 22,000. The turnover of the general GemilutHassadim Fund indicates the extent of activities: 1956 — IL. 1,222; 1957 —IL. 8,502; 1958 — IL. 11,411; 1959 — IL. 15,147; 1960 — IL. 18,228; 1961 —IL. 20,566; 1962 — IL. 25,567. In 1959 the General Meeting elected Mr. DovZilonka to the Financial Committee.On 22nd Sivan a yearly memorial is held at the Kalish House for the Martyrsof our city. A memorial plaque has been put up in the House with the names ofthe founders and donors. In 1959 a meeting of one-time Kalish members of“Hashomer Hatzair” was held there, sponsored by Dr. Saul Zalud. In 1961 ameeting of Graduates of the Kalish Hebrew Gymnasium took place thereIt was decided in 1957 to contact members in the United States and Francein order to issue a Memorial Book for Kalish and its martyrs. Material, pic-tures and information from people who had lately arrived in the country werecollected. This material was sent to the United States.However, the work did not progress there. It was then decided that theactivity should be shifted to Israel. At a meeting with certain members fromKalish, namely Baruch Tall, Dr. Saul Zalud and Joseph Holz, it was decidedto put out a Kalish book, which was to contain all material dealing with theCommunity and the neighbourhood. A special Committee would see to thepublishing of this book, and a special Budget would be provided for it.In 1959 the following members were elected to the Publication Committee:Baruch Tall, Chairman; Abraham Zohar, Secretary; Dr. Saul Zalud,Treasurer; Joseph Holz, Collector of material; Gershon Wroclawski; EliezerBirnbaum; Mendel Sieradzki; Menahem Shklanowsky, Secretary of Organisa-tion. The Committee contacted members in the Diaspora and requested the returnof material from the United States. The Book Committee in the United Statesagreed to publication in the country, and material began to arrive. At the timeMessrs. Yitzhak Kletchewsky and Yehiel Greenspan of France were visitingIsrael. They gave the Committee the material which they possessed about thecity. While the material arrived from the United States, material was also ga-thered in Israel. Evidence was taken from survivors of the Holocaust, and theCommittee set to work.Members suggested including Arthur Szyk’s Edition of the Statute (or Privi-leges) of Kalish. In 1960 Leah and Eliezer Birnbaum went to the United Stateson a visit and were empowered to bring back the material. Eliezer Birn-baum contacted members in the United States and began to search for the workof A. Szyk. Abraham Bandel devoted himself to this, with all Committeemembers headed by the Chairman, Joseph Arnold. When the pictureswere discovered in the Jewish Museum in New York, the members helped finan-cially. They also undertook to ensure that the work would be printed only inthe Kalish Book. The Birnbaum family brought the illuminations to Israel.Shmuel Brand, the graphic artist, was co-opted to the Editorial Board and isresponsible for the attractive and artistic design of the work. Ninety-five percent of the material has been written by people from Kalish and it has beenprinted at the “Avalon” Press, by Yaakov Krzepicki of Kalish and Meir Anavi(Traube) who helped in the layout.228THE KALISH BOOKEvery year a gathering of Kalish folk is held in the different towns. The Tel-Aviv gathering is held during Passover; the Haifa gathering at Tabernaclesand Jerusalem during Hanukka, the Feast of Lights. On the Memorial Day forthe Holocaust, there is a traditional pilgrimage to the Martyr’s Forest of theKdoshim. Members from the whole country participate. In 1962 a “MattanBeseter” (Secret Relief) Fund was established at Kalish House, to assist needymembers in secret. The major part of the Fund comes from the donations offriends in the United States. The Committee has assisted sick members finan-cially, has looked after their welfare and encouraged them. In 1965 there wasa special Drive at which IL. 7,000 were collected.In 1962—1964, after several decades in the United States, the family of Havaand Israel Shurek, who were active in the U.S. Kalish Organisation, arrived inIsrael. The Roth family, as well as Nahum Lenchitsky, who were active mem-bers of the Organisation in Australia, also came to settle here. They promptlybegan to help the Organisation in Israel.In 1966 a General Meeting was called. In accordance with the Regulations, anew Committee was elected with a Council of 25 members. The following Com-mittees are appointed by the Council: Financial Committee, Relief Committee,Cultural Committee, Kalish House Committee, and Audit Committee.Council of the Tel-Aviv Organisation of Kalish and District LandsleitStanding, 1. to r.: Gad Zulty, Nahum Linch, Yonah Shklanovsky, Melech Shurek, DovZielonka, Moshe Yitzhaki, Hava Shurek, Shmuel Avrunin, Eliezer Birnbaum, MeirAnavi, Shoshanna Anavi, Yitzhak Nissenbaum, Moshe Haymovitch, Moshe Rubinstein.Seated, r. to 1.: Hela Rosenfeld, Leah Birnbaum, Menahem Shklanovsky, Baruch Tall,Abraham Zohar, Esther Avrunin, Gershon Wrotzlavsky, Ruth Linch.Not in the photograph: Abel Rosenfeld, Mendel Sieradzki, Arieh Kviatkovsky.ORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS990THE COMMITTEE OF KALISH LANDSLEIT IN JERUSALEMIn 1944 all persons from Kalish living in Jerusalem and the surroundingswere invited to a General Meeting in order to organise and elect a Com-mittee. More than one hundred persons participated and elected the FirstCommittee, consisting of the late Shimshoni, Chairman; the late Heiman; thelate Dr. Noah Braun; and, happily still with us: Dr. Solnik, Klein, NoahBimko, Mrs. Doha Bet Halevi and Mrs. Masha Lavi.The Committee was required to organise economic and social aid inabsorbing the new immigrants who began to reach Eretz Israel from Kalish,first in the Army of General Anders and later from Cyprus. The early stepsof the Committee consisted chiefly of collecting and sending clothes toCyprus, providing financial support for those who needed help on arrival, andhelping them to find work and housing. One of the Committee's mostimportant measures was the Mutual Assistance Fund in Jerusalem whichprovided loans when necessary for newcomers to make their first arrange-ments in the country.In 1952 a national Convention of Kalish Townsfolk in Israel met inJerusalem. Those present went up to Mount Zion and lit candles in memoryof the Kalish victims of the Holocaust, unveiling the tablet in memory ofthe Kalish Community which was one of the first to be set up in the“Martef Hashoa” or Vault of the Destruction. On this occasion there was adiscussion of ways and means of strengthening the Organisation and pro-viding more help for newcomer's from Kalish.The Memorial Ceremony on Mount Zion was recorded and sent to theOrganisation of Kalish Landsleit in U.S.A.Activities of the Committee MembersMention should be made of the productive activity of all members of theCommittee, who worked as devoted volunteers to help all who needed helpduring the first period after their arrival in Israel. Special mention shouldbe made of the Piotrkowski family who served as an example and modelfor the others. Mrs. Piotrkowski in particular was the vital spirit of thelocal Committee.Meetings were held between Kalish Landsleit in Jerusalem and variousguests from abroad who came to visit the country. The Jerusalem Com-mittee was particularly active in planting the Forest in memory ol the KalishMartyrs in 1955, as part of the Martyrs' Forest in the Jerusalem Corridor.When the Memorial for Kalish Jewry was set up in the Martyrs' Forest in1960, the Committee played a very active part; particularly the Chairman,Mr. Carmeli.230THE KALISH BOOKDuring recent years activities have decreased because some of the originalCommittee Members have left Jerusalem, while others have passed away andhave not been replaced by new arrivals.On 9.6.1966 a General Meeting of Kalish Landsleit in Jerusalem washeld with the participation of members of the Central Committee and theCommittee for the publication of the Kalish Book, who came from Tel-AvivAfter a Memorial for the Kalish Martyrs a Report was given on the activitiesof the Book Publication Committee, and the methods of distributing itamong who come from Kalish.Committee of the Jerusalem Organisation of Kalish & District Xandsleit\ to I.: Zvi Lavi, Noah Aloni, Judith Carmel, Moshe Carmel, Michael Klein, JosephRosenbaum.ORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS231THE KALISH LANDSLEIT ORGANISATION IN HAIFAThe Haifa Branch of the Organisation was founded in 1925 and the firstCommittee members were: Samson Green, Arie Nussbaum, Zvi Knobel, andElijah Winter. The chief purpose of the Committee was to help people fromKalish and aid them in finding work. Activities were interrupted in 1936 andwere renewed only in 1944, when the reports of the destruction of PolishJewry began to arrive. Messrs. Samson Green, Elijah Winter, Fishel Katz,Yehezkiel Salz and Fingerhut decided to help Kalish survivors. Together withMesdames Batia Green, Bracha Knobel, Leah Salz and Renia Katz theCommittee collected clothes and money which were forwarded to Kalish andreached their destination.A Mutual Assistance Fund was also founded, which aided immigrantsfrom among the survivors to the sum of IL. 7 each. Pauline Arnold visitedEretz Israel at that time, and her contribution encouraged activities.In 1947 larger numbers of survivors began to arrive in Haifa. TheCommittee Members received them and helped them with money and work.In 1950 Messrs. Israel Friede, David Sinaderka, Naphtali Ziege, Judah Kott,Mrs. Brandwein and Mrs. Parzenczewski joined the Committee, while Messrs.Fuerstenberg, Baum and Meizner served as an Audit Committee. A GemilutHassadim Fund was founded the same year and with the assistance offriends in the United States it was enabled to loan IL. 50 per family. With theassistance of the National Committee of Kalish Landsleit the amount of theloan had been increased to IL. 500. Monthly assistance “in secret” is alsoprovided where necessary.Committee of the Haifa Organisation of Kalish & District LandsleitStanding, r. to I.: Ezekiel Saltz, Simeon Baum, Israel Friede, Moshe Fuyara, SamsonGreen, Elijah Winter, Fishel Katz.Seated, I. to r.: Shoshanna Beeher, Bella Katz, Bella Winter, Sarah Fuyara, LeahBaum, Leah Saltz.232THE KALISH BOOKMISSION TO POLAND, 1946To my Wife PaulineJoseph ArnoldIn April 1946 the Relief called on me to go toPoland in order to extend aid to the Kalnh survi-vors. On 5th May I flew to Paris where the WorldConference of Polish Jewish Federations was beingheld. I participated actively in the deliberations,and talked in detail with the delegates fromFrance and Poland. The urgent need for immediaterelief became perfectly clear to me.In Paris i visited the Orphanages which werehousing the World War orphans. I went there inthe company of the Jewish artist Naum Aaronson.I shall never forget a talk with a seven-year-oldorphan. When I asked him how he was. he answer-ed: “Yes, everything is good, the teachers aregood, I don’t have to be afraid of the Nazis anymore... But what use is it all if I haven’t got my father and mother ?”I held a special meeting about the Relief with the Federation of Jewish Orga-nisations, which was headed by Marc Jahrblum. Since the sums allocated bythe Relief for Paris had already been used up, I added 30,000 francs of myown. During my two visits to Paris, where I stopped on my return, I visited theForeign Ministry where we were promised 5,000 entry permits for Jewish emi-grants from Poland.Apart from my mission on behalf of the Relief I also served as the re-presentative of the American Federation of Polish Jews. When 1 arrived inWarsaw on 20th May I attended a meeting of the Central Committee of Jewsin Poland where curent affairs were discussed. At this meeting I presented thecontribution of the American Federation of Polish Jews for the Children’sHomes in Poland, amounting to 4 million zloty. After I visited two Orphanagesin Otwock and saw their condition I added to the contribution on behalf of theRelief.With a heavy heart I visited Kalish. I think I must have been one of thefirst Jews from Western countries to have visited the city after the War.I arrived in the middle of the night, did not sleep at all and went out into thestreets as soon as it was light. To tell the truth, the city had hardly been touchedcompared with other cities in Poland. But Jewish Kalish had been almostentirely destroyed. I was received by the tombstones of our parents, with whichthe Germans paved the streets. Indeed, it was a dreadful feeling to tread on thetombstones of parents and ancestors whose graves had vanished. The Polesall around were walking freely, while I hesitated to put my foot down for fearthat I might be obliterating the name of a Jew who had lived here; he himself,his father and grandfather...I wanted to visit the Old Jewish Cemetery, but it had vanished. They usedthe tombstones to pave streets and buttress the banks of the Prosna. Nor hadthe New Cemetery escaped. About a auarter of its tombstones were still inplace. The rest had been desecrated.ORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS233Before this shock was over I was shaken when I went out to search for somesurvivor of my own family. Nobody was left. I wandered through the streetstrying to find some Jewish communal building that was still standing. TheGreat Synagogue was a pile of ruins. The large House of Study had vanishedwith the Hospital and the various Kehilla Institutions. Poles were living andworking in the surviving homes and workshops. The people had revealed thehiding places of the Jews to the Germans and had been given their reward.They had murdered and had also inherited.I met a handful of Jews who had come back to the city in the hope of findingsurvivors of their families. They had found nobody at all, and now they werewandering around mournfully, planning how to leave the soil of Poland forever,soaked as it was in Jewish blood. They were afraid to demand their propertyback for fear of re-awaking the fury of the Poles.One Jew told me that he had entered the former home of his parents. Therehe found a Polish family who stared at him as though he had come back fromthe dead. “What, are you still alive? And we thought the Germans had clearedthe Jews out of Kalish. What a pity!” When I heard this story I kept awayfrom the Bakery of my murdered parents, which now belongs to Polish owners.But I did find a grain of consolation in the story these Jews told me aboutmy sister Hannah Rackman. Before she was shot she slapped the face of aGerman officer who tried to take her only child from her.When I visited Kalish I found 290 starving, ragged and tattered Jews there,without any means of livelihood or work. And from whom could they ask foralms? Between 30 and 40 of them lived in a single room and slept on thebare floor. Luckily 900 parcels of clothes and food had just arrived in thosedays from the Relief, and another 70 from the Aid Committee in Eretz Israel.These two shipments had really given life to them.I immediately established contact with the Local Committee in Kalish. Atseveral meetings we discussed Relief programmes, Jews who wished to emigrateand those who proposed to remain. I gave the Committee the contribution ofthe Relief, and help activities began at once. The Committee bought two housesthat very day. In one large house they opened a Relief kitchen, a Hostel forthe homeless, Cooperative Workshops and cultural institutions. Workshops wereset up in the other house.However, it turned out that plenty of building materials were needed torestore the houses we had bought. I went to Dr. Koszutski the Mayor, whopromised to supply the necessary materials. Then he described the distress ofthe non-Jewish population to me, and I thought it advisable to make a contri-bution to the Municipal Charitable Fund as well.We viewed the help in setting up workshops and cooperatives as an importantstep towards making the surviving Jews productive once again. When theybegan to manufacture and earn a living again they would find it easier to forgetthe horrors, and at the same time they would prepare for Aliya to Eretz Israelor emigration to some other country if they so desired.Next day I set out for the New Cemetery, which Is some distance from thecity. Although it was not the month of Ellul many joined me, and we travelled234THE KALISH BOOKin a long procession of carriages. With me I had a large wreath on behalf ofKalish People in the United States. After the “El Maleh Rahamin” prayer Isaid a few words to my companions, and promised that we would not forgetthe martyrs and would help those who had remained alive. The common graveof the Kalish martyrs had been dug by Jews after the liberation of Poland.Masses of the Jews of the city had been shot by the Germans in the neighbouringforests. When the Jew came back from their hiding places and slave campsthey brought the murdered martyrs to a Jewish grave.Upon our return from the Cemetery we held a meeting of all the Jews intown. I asked for their opinions and requests, in order to get to know what,they were thinking. A few of them spoke. In all their words I could hearuncertainty, fear of the morrow and a desire to live. How sorry I am that Idid not note down their words! For it would have been a very interestingdocument. What most of them said amounted to: “Jews of America, get usout of here. We cannot live here, we cannot breathe. The air is poisoned withAntisemitism. We want to go to Eretz Israel, but if that’s impossible we shallemigrate to America.”There were a few who proposed to remain in Poland, for terrifying reasons.“We are tired of being fugitives and wanderers, and we know how hard itwould be for us to start a new life in Eretz Israel. So we want to live the restof our lives in the place where we find ourselves.”In my reply I said: “Our help will branch in several directions. We shallhelp every man who wants to go to Eretz Israel and every man who forpersonal reasons wants to go to some other country. And we shall not abandonthose weary ones who propose to remain here.” I felt the necessity of allocatinga considerable sum to building a Wall round the Cemetery, the only Memorial ofa flourishing community that had been destroyed.Within a few days the number of Jews in Kalish rose from 290 to 1060.The new arrivals were Kalish Jews, mostly from Lodz, Cracow and LowerSilesia. They had heard that a Kalish landsman had arrived from the UnitedStates and came to receive and give greetings from and to relatives and friends.A certain number were repatriates, who had only just returned from SovietRussia. Most of them stated that they had no intention of remaining in Kalish.They had only come in the hope of finding some kinsfolk still alive. When theywere disappointed they wished to run away wherever they could; as long asthey could get a considerable distance from the common graves.It was clear that many more would be added to this thousand during thecoming months, and I told myself that we must not rest until each one ofthose who had been saved had found a place in Eretz Israel or some othercountry. But meanwhile these Jews would be spending weeks and monthsin Kalish, and how could they live in a city where the hatred of the Jews couldbe felt? So I interviewed the Chief of Police and in the name of former in-habitants of Kalish who were now in the United States I requested safety andprotection for the survivors. The Chief of Police promised to ensure the safetyof the Jews.I ended my visit to the city with a contribution to the local Red Cross onORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS235behalf of the Relief. Then I proceeded to Lodz through Zdunska Wola, whereI found a Jewish community of 190 souls, and helped the Local Committee asbest I could.In Lodz I found another 190 people from Kalish, all in direst need. The Fundsof the Relief were already exhausted, so I had to take a loan in order to provideimmediate help for those who wished to proceed at once to Eretz Israel or toother countries, or to remain in Poland.I met the representatives of the writers and journalists in Poland. And theyalso needed urgent help to ease their distress. In Lodz I also met a Delegationof the Borochow Kibbutzim, directed by the Left-wing Poalei Zion men JosephRotenberg and Abraham Kagan. At the time the Kibbutzim provided a placefor repatriates and agricultural training centres, preparatory to Aliya to EretzIsrael. They asked me to visit at least one of the Kibbutzim in Lower Silesia,but to my regret I was unable to do so. This Kibbutz bears the name of theheroic Abraham Diamant of our town. They also required considerable aid.Shaken to the very roots I left Poland and proceeded to Stockholm. With theassistance of the World Jewish Congress I made contact with twenty peoplefrom Kalish, some of whom had been brought there from Bergen Belsen bythe Red Cross immediately after the collapse of Germany, while others hadcome from other camps thanks to the head of the local Branch of the WorldJewish Congress even before the defeat. Hillel Storch had ransomed a “consign-ment” of Jews at a very high price and with the help of a local physician.I learnt that rescued sons of Kalish were to be found in the Hospitals, but tomy regret it was already impossible for me to visit them. I promised themthe help of the Relief, and the promise was kept as soon as I returned to U.S.A.Some of them proceeded to Eretz Israel while others emigrated to other coun-tries.On my way back I stopped in Brussels in order to redeem a Jewish childfrom a Christian house; but when I arrived I learnt that the child had alreadybeen redeemed. At the Brussels Office of the W.J.C. I recognised the Directorsof the Left Wing Poalei Zion Children’s Home, headed by A. J. Kibbel of Kalish.I also met with the camp survivors of Austria, among whom there were alsoseveral Kalish people. For them I left the last Two hundred Dollars of my ownthat I had with me. The official funds had already already been expendedlong before.And I returned to the United States with a clear sense of the debt that isowing to these survivors.The Financial Report of the help given by the Relief in the course of mymission is as follows: Paris Orphanage — 500 suits of clothes, 200,000 francs;Kalish people in France — 1,200,000 francs; Children’s homes in Poland —250.000 zloty; Aid Committee in Kalish — 9,500,000 zloty; Kalish MunicipalCharity Fund — 25,000 zloty; Wall built round the Cemetery — 1,000,000 zloty;Sieradz folk — One hundred Dollars; the Zdunska Wola Committee — 500Dollars; Borochow Kibbutzim — 400,000 zloty; Kalish folk in Stockholm —800.000 zloty; Children’s Homes in Brussel — 10,000 francs.236THE KALISH BOOKTHE STORY AND ACTIVITIES OF THE NON-PARTIZANRELIEF IN U.S.A.The First World War saw our home town Kalish demolished. Most of thebuildings had been shelled or set on fire by the Germans. The Jewishpopulation fled, and the economy of the town was entirely destroyed.In the years 1919—1920, v/hen the refugees returned to their town, theyfound its rehabilitation a very difficult task. Only those people who had noalternative and were unable to emigrate began rebuilding their homes undervery difficult conditions. They laid the new foundations for commerce andindustry. But there were large sections of the population, particularly amongthe youth, who could not see opportunies of making a saisfactory livingand decided to emigrate. Those who did not have relatives in the UnitedStates or money for a ticket emigrated to Germany and with great difficultyestablished themselves there. A few joined the Halutz Movement and emigratedto Eretz Israel. But the majority of those who left chose to emigrate to theUnited States. And so it came about that between the years 1921 and 1924there was a considerable immigration of Kalish Jews to the United States.The social integration of the newcomers was difficult. It is true, of course,that each person established contact with the existing Societies and FraternalOrganisations according to his individual preference and social flair.It appeared as though the activities of the Organisations of formerKalish residents were insufficient for the “newcomers”. In 1928 the idea offounding a new Society for Social Aid was aired. This Society was also tolook to the old home town, which everybody regarded as their source andorigin.The Society for Social Assistance (Ferein fuer Socialer Hilf) was foundedat a Ball given by Branch 244 of the Arbeiter Ring (Workers’ Circle), in 1928,when the young new immigrants came together. They decided that foractual social welfare (sickness and unemployment) they would remain inthe Organisations they belonged to. The new Society, however, would dealwith cultural assistance to institutions in the Old Home.Before leaving Kalish we had witnessed the rise of secular Jewish schoolsand the financial difficulties which its founders, etc., faced. We thereforemade up our minds to devote all our assistance to these institutions, andwe were not in touch with other organisations. Our first President, JosephAronovitch (Joe Arnold), stated at the time that the Jewish school alsoserved as a soup kichen for hungry Jewish children. It was there that thechild received a glass of milk, a roll and a plate of soup; for where thereis no bread there is no study. All the members of the Committee agreedwith him.The Society supported all secular Jewish schools in Kalish, no matter whattheir parties, for close on six years.In 1934 we decided to extend our activities. There was a permanenteconomic crisis in Poland. Jewish artizans and market travellers were beingORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS237pushed out of their unsteady employment. The Jewish labourers were alsoout of work and tried their luck at peddling, or else depended on assistancefrom elsewhere. The various professional societies and the managements of theJewish schools asked us to extend our assistance.At the close of the Day of Atonement we gathered at the shop of JoeArnold. The following took part: Mendel Mansfield, Yohanan Yaakov Heber,Shmaaya Wartski, Yehuda Aharon Brockman, Wolf Zivush, Peretz Walter,Sam Oscar and Leizer Zolty. It was unanimously decided to found a non-political Aid Society of ex-Kalish folk whose name would be: UmparteisherKalisher Relief (Non-Partizan).We suggested that an impartial Committee be founded in Kalish, whichwould contain all trends and professional societies. This body would receivethe relief funds from us. The people of Kalish agreed to our suggestion andthe Committee was active unit! the outbreak of the War.During the first twenty months of our work we mainly assisted kinder-gartens and schools, some of which were attended by the children of oursisters and brothers. By the beginning of 1936, however, we extended ouractivities.Our organisational basis grew wider. All the landsmanschaften of NewYork and the vicinity joined us. We also established contact with othermutual aid organisations which existed in Kalish. We assisted the MarketTravellers Section which was affiliated to the Society of Small Merchants,and founded the Gemilut Hessed Fund of the Society, the Moshav Zekenim(Old Age Home); the Society of Artizans; the Societies of the Weavers,Porters and Coachmen. With our aid the Society of Food Workers with itstwo sections of Butchers and Bakers set up co-operative workshops for itsunemployed members. In the years 1936 and 1939 we also sent food andparcels to help needy families at the Passover.Once the Jews really began to feel the organised economic boycott of thePolish reactionaries, a company was formed in town for the encouragement ofcraftsmanship and farming among the local Jews. We immediately responded totheir plea and helped bring a change to the dislocated sections of society.The four years preceding the Destruction were years of considerable as-sistance in all fields of life in Kalish. We wish to enumerate the organisationswith which we were in touch, and the names of the persons who contactedus in the names of these organisations:1. The Society of Food Workers: Hillel Englander, Chairman; AvrahamDiamant, Secretary; Fishel Sieradski, Treasurer; Hirsh and Joseph Klein.2. The Society of Artizans in Poland9 Kalish Branch: Dov Neuhaus,Chairman; B. Arkush, Secretary.3. Gemilut Hassadim of the Kehilla: H. I. Grzybowski, Chairman; YaakovKatz, Secretary.4. Mo$hav Zekenim Home: Maria Zuker, Chairman; Ben-Zion Wartski,Treasurer.5. Gemilut Hassadim of the Small Merchants Society: A. L. Brzezhinski,Chairman; H. Boiman, Secretary; Joseph Heber, Treasurer.238THE KALISH BOOK6. Market Travellers Section of the Small Merchants’ Society: Hayim Perle,Chairman.7. The United Distribution Committee for Aid Funds from America:x\braham Wolkowitch and Yehiel Tenzer, Left Poalei Zion; Michael Eisenberg,Bund; Hayyim Perle, Small Merchants’ Society; Zelig Kempinski, Artizans;Israel Mansfeld, Knitwear.8. The Society of Lace Worker's: Yehiel Tenzer, Chairman; Sam Wol-kowitch, Secretary; Eliezer Wartski, Kasriel Lev, Aharon Joseph Wolko-witch.9. The Society of Transport Workers: Avraham Tobias, Chairman; ShaiaMarkovitch, Secretary.10. The Society for Craftsmanship and Farming among Jews: AdvocateJoseph Perkal, Chairman; Dr. M. Trachtenberg and S. Feiner, Vice-Chairman;Dr. S. Perlstein, Secretary; S. Kass, L. Tubin, Y. Lustig, H. Perle, A. Pos-nanski, Selig Kempinski.We also supported the Joint, U.J.A., HIAS, Red Cross, etc.We assisted Jews expelled from Germany whom the Polish Governmentrefused to readmit and who were kept in the Zbonszin camp. Some of themwere from Kalish.During the War we did not suspend activities and supported the generalWar Funds and the Jewish Assistance Organisations: Joint, HIAS, ORT,Passover Aid, .The Federation of Polish Jews, The Red Cross, the JewishWar Appeal, etc. We assisted the Kalish folk who reached Teheran withthe Polish Army, through the World Jewish Congress. We realized thesignificance of our help from the numerous letters we received from them.When the war was over we found out that our Kalish brethren weredispersed all the world over and were in great need. Our brethren in France,who had been fairly prosperous, were now displaced persons and homeless.Many of them came back from Germany, from hiding-place in France, fromthe Maquis. There were Jewish children in Christian homes and in monasteries,and homes had to be found for them. Polish Jews, too, began swarming toParis; among them Jews from Kalish. People from Kalish, who had justemerged from underground bunkers, travelled hither and thither on im-migrant ships together with partisans and people from the camps. Some ofthese immigrants were taken to Cyprus by the British. Transports of Jewsreurned to Poland from U.S.S.R., entirely destitute.There was no time to waste on methods of assistance. The members ofthe Relief Committee were then: Joseph Arnold, Chairman; Milton Mansfield,Peretz Walter, Becky Prashker, Lottie Lishow, David Tiger, Leizer Zolty,the late Pinhas Greenwald, Israel Glovinsky, I. I. Heber, Hershel Arkush,Israel Diamant, Kalman Aronovitch, H. Okonowsky and Y. Shurek, Secretary.We realised that quite apart from immediate help, we had to provideconstructive assistance; and for this purpose we must rely on progressiveforces in the countries where our brethren were residing.In 1945 we announced that we were starting a drive of $25,000. That yearwe sent parcels to France and Belgium. When the town of Kalish was liberatedORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS239we sent ordinary food parcels, Passover parcels and clothes to our brethrenthere.When the first representative of Polish Jewry, Dr. Joseph Tannenbaum, wentto Poland, we sent Kalish the first $3000. And we immediately began pre-paring for the trip of our own envoy, namely our Chairman Joseph Arnold,one of whose tasks was to organise constructive assistance.Joseph Arnold's trip to Europe has a special article devoted to it inthis volume. On our behalf, he distributed a total of $41,000 in Poland,France, Sweden and Belgium to organisations and private persons. We wouldlike to note two outstanding points in his activities on this trip: In Polandand France special organisational institutions were set up for our townsmen,whose function was to prevent political feuding and personal misunder-standings. He also saw to it that some of the money was used for con-structive purposes: namely, the Co-operative workshops which were then setup, and the pioneer Kibbutz named after Abraham Diamant. Indeed, histrip was acclaimed both among our own people and in the circles of thePolish Government.The assistance we gave refugees in Cyprus merits a special chapter. Apartfrom the considerable financial help we maintained a lively correspondenceto encourage them in their national purpose.We began activities in 1947 with a deficit of $ 13,000. The days of wartimeprosperity were over for us, but we maintained activities in all fields.We continued supporting people in Displaced Persons' Camps in Germany,Austria and Italy, and in the Kalish Institutions of France and Cyprus. Atabout the same time a group of refugees reached Oswego, New York. Wesent them some assistance and also a special delegation: Joseph Arnold,Israel Diamant, Max Smollin and others.Here we wish to quote some figures on our activities in 1947: We sent$4,000 to Poland; $800 to Cyprus; $1,700 to France; loans to people wholeft the camps — $450. To camps and Training Kibbutzim in Germany andItaly we sent hundreds of parcels to a value of $ 2,500.For this purpose we had the help of the 4‘Ladies Auxiliary" of the Relief.They helped a great deal in local activities: Preparing for major appeals;collecting advertisments for our Yearbook; preparing our traditional jointfestival celebrations. Their activities contributed a great deal to the successof the occasions, and added a charm and beauty of their own.In 1955 the activities of the ex-Kalish townsfolk in Israel were resumedand the renewed society of “IRGUN OLEI KALISH VEHASEVIVA" wasestablished. The Relief responded to a request from the Organisation andimmediately helped them found a Gemilut Hessed Fund which is still activeand has branches in Tel-Aviv, Jerusalem and Haifa. We regarded thesefunds as very important, for we were aware of the hardships an immigrantmust encounter at every stage of absorption in a new country.During this period the idea of commemorating our destroyed Kehilla wastaking shape. This, it was decided, was to be done by the erection of a240THE KALISH BOOKbuilding in Israel which would serve as a social centre for all Kalish folkthroughout the world. The Relief initiated a meeting of all friends andorganisations. Sam and Golda Prashker suggested holding a gathering attheir home and expense. The participation fee was $ 100, and the entireincome of $25,000 was donated to this purpose. To our great regret, the plancould not be carried out immediately owing to the needs of rescued brethren.But a few years later the house was indeed built in Tel-Aviv, with theactive assistance of the Chairman, Joseph Arnold, and many members. TheKalish House in Tel-Aviv has now become the focus for all our activemembers and all visitors to Israel.The Relief responded to a request by the Organisation to plant ten thousandtrees in Israel, in “The Forest of the Martyrs of Kalish and its Vicinity”;a section of the large Martyrs’ Forest which the Jewish National Fundplanted in the hills of Jerusalem.The Relief has been publishing a Year-book since 1942. This containshistorical material and current reports of its own activities and those oforganisations of Kalish folk in Israel and elsewhere. The first editors ofthis Year-book were : The late Jacob Kaner and the late Shmuel Margolis.It is now being edited by the writer Menashe Unger.The Relief Committee, the Committee of the “Kalish Martyrs’ Forest” andthe Committee of “The Kalish Book” hold a yearly memorial service for thedead of the city. This service brings together all ex-Kalish residents in theUnited States.The Relief takes part in the activities of the Committee for the “KalishBook”, which will serve as memorial to the creative work and lives of theJews of Kalish.The Relief holds a banquet each year, which brings the people of Kalishand their friends together again and enables them to spend an evening in theatmosphere of the Old Home. During this banquet there is fund raisingfor the funds of the Relief.These varied, productive activities have been possible thanks only to thedevotion of many ex-Kalish folk in the United States. Each individualdedicates his time and money to the aid work and regards his activities asa holy task. For lack of space we are unable to name all of them. We shalltherefore only mention the most active members of the Relief, who havegiven life and soul to these good deeds for many many years: JosephAronovitch (Arnold), Chairman; Pauline Arnold, Jacob Arkosh, HershelArkush, Sam Oscar, H. Okonowsky, the late M. Beatus, Abraham and FellaBedel, Glowinsky, the late Pinhas Greenwald, the late Z. Gollawsky, YeshayahuGoldberg, Israel and Sadie Diamond, the late Yohanan Heber and his wifelong may she live, Shmaya Wartski, Moshe Walter, Samuel Wittkower,Perez Walter, the late L. Zolty, I. Sachs, the late David Tiger, the late H.Yoffe, Mrs. L. Lishay, the late M. Mansfield, Max and Marie Smolin, Mrs.Piedzanek, the late Noah Perle and his wife Frania long may she live,Sam and Golda Prashker, Wolf Tsivush, A. S. Klaper, the late N. Kahn,Sam and Janet Oklade$k, the late Michael Kempin, Shmuel and Yasha Roth,Israel and Hava Shurek. Throughout these years, the secretaries of the or-ORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS241ganisation have been: Paul Walter, Kalman Aronovitch and Israel Shurek.We are happy to have some of the original members still continuing withthe good work to this very day. They are: Joseph Arnold, president; AbrahamBandel, Chairman; Pauline Arnold, Secretary; Sam Oklade|k, Financial Sec-retary; Peretz Walter, Israel Diamond, Treasurer. Members of the Executiveare: Jenny Oklade$|c, Max and Marie Smolin; Yasha and Shmuel Roth,Hershel Arkush; Sam Beyrack; Sadie Diamond; Nahum Medina; Jacob Levy,Ludwig Walter, Paula Bandel.The idea of commemorating the memory of the Martyrs of Kalish struckroots in our hearts. When the Israel Knesset called for trees in memoryof the murdered millions we too responded. At the same time the Appealof the Organisation reached us. This is why a large United Committee wasset up for planting “The Forest of the Kalish Martyrs.”The committee members in New York were: Joseph Arnold, Chairman;Sam Beyrack, second Chairman; Kalman Aronovitch, Secretary; Moris Walter,Treasurer; Lena Friedman, Secretary; Israel Shurek, Financial Secretary;Hershel Arkush, A. Bandel, M. Duel, I. Diamond, M. Friedman, Shia Gold-berg, A. Krotowsky, A. Lubelsky, A. Miedzinsky, S. Okladek, Mrs. S. Piedshank,Samuel Roth, S. Rakowsky, H. and I. Shurek, M. Smolin, S. Weingarten,P. Walter.The following bodies promised their support: Kalisher Bruder Ferein,Isidore Pile, President; Kalisher Young Men's Arbeiter Ring, Branch 241, H.Klarman, Chairman; Kalisher Independent, Waxman, Chairman.The Committee started its activities on January 18, 1953 by sending outletters and circulars to ex-Kalish folk in America. Meetings were held, bothlarge and small, both public and in the private homes of members; andspeeches were held explaining the cause. The members donated willingly.At the Memorial Meetings the fund raising went on, and the results weresatisfactory.The ex-Kalish folk in America took part in the planting of the Forest aswell as the Memorial Services held in Israel. Members of the delegationswere: Joseph Arnold, Morris Walter, Kalman Aronovitch, Sam Bayrack, IsraelDiamant, Paul Walter, Hershel Arkush and others.One of the commemorative actions is the Kalish House in Tel-Aviv. Apartfrom its being the World Centre for Kalish Jewry, the house will containbooks, pictures, documents and anything pertaining to the Kalish Kehilla.An additional activity is the publication of the Kalish Book. Let us mentionthat the initiative came from Polish and French Kalish folk. Yehiel Grinspanof Paris and Itzhak Kletchewsky began to collect material, picures anddocuments and wrote articles on the social institutions of the town. Grinspancontacted members in the United States, and was assisted by the membersSaltzman, Makowsky and others.In 1957 joint steps were taken by the Kalish Societies in Israel and theUnited States. The Committee organised activities, held meetings and gather-ings, maintained constant contact with Book Committees in Canada, France,Brazzaville, Uruguay, Australia, and in particular with the Israel Committee.242THE KALISH BOOKIt also assisted in locating data, pictures and the publication rights of theworks of Arthur Szyk. The Committee has helped in raising funds for thepublishing of the book.These three enterprises are an important contribution to the memory ofJewish Kalish.In conclusion we have summed up the varied activities of the Relief duringthe past thirty years. These have been like a message to all our dispersedbrethren. The facts and figures show the sense of brotherhood in individualsand our public.Before the deluge of blood we found creative joy in our work, throughrehabilitating cultural and educational Institutions. After the Holocaust allouf efforts were concentrated on assisting those who survived the gas-chambers and the camps. When the war ended we set out to help the fewsurvivors, and tried to do the best we could.At the same time we remained true to the principle of the revival of thepeople of Israel, and helped the immigrants, the pioneers and the defendersof the State of Israel.We proudly conclude that during days of sadness and joy we stood togetherwith our people. Our welfare activities may be noted as part of the totalassistance activities that followed the Holocaust. We make our contributionin all urgency and loyalty.KALMAN ARONOVITCH:KALISH IMMIGRANT SOCIETIES IN THE U.S.A.Like all immigrants from Eastern Europe who began to arrive in theUnited States during the Seventies and Eighties of the Nineteenth Century,the Jews of Kalish came to knew the meaning of loneliness in their newhomeland. There were various reasons for their departure from their oldhome-town: Economic crisis, Polish animosity, unwillingness to serve in theTzar's army, etc. Once they were in the New World, they missed theirfamilies and homeland. Integration in the new country was not easy. Manyhoped that their stay in the new land was only temporary, and that oncethey managed to save a few dollars they would return... But as the yearswent by, and the chances of return grew fewer, these “greenhorns” beganlooking for townsmen who were better acclimatised, in order to provide oneanother with mutual aid of all kinds.In those days life in New York was very difficult. A man had to work14 to 16 hours a day in order to make a living. At times he even had tocarry his machine on his back in search of work, which was not alwaysplentiful. Even people who had been labourers and artisans in EasternEurope found it difficult to get used to the conditions of the sweat-shop,which were very different from the conditions they had been accustomedto in their former homes.ORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS243It was this need to find a foothold and support which gave rise to thefirst Landsmanschaft in the United States. To our great regret there areno documents dealing with the first Kalish Society. The majority of itsmembers have already passed away, and the remaining few do not recall thedetails. There is, however, more information about the later societies.The Kalish LodgeWe have found out from former Kalish residents who have been livingmany decades in the United States that the first association of people fromKalish was founded in 1870. It was named "American Kalisher”, and lateron, "Kalisher Lodge”. This association was formed in the style of secret fra-ternal lodges, and was conducted with all the ceremonies of the secret lodges.When a meeting of the "American Kalisher” was opened, "Outer Guards”were placed in front of the entrance. They wore a strange uniform. "InnerGuards” were placed in the hall. When a stranger wanted to attend themeeting, the Outer Guard informed the Inner Guard by signalling throughknocks at the door. A crack was then opened and the stranger's desire wasbrought to the attention of the president. If the president agreed to his entry,the Guards led the stranger round the table in the centre of the room, beforehe was conducted to the officers of the Lodge. Admission of new memberswas accompanied by ceremonies and oaths.This association did assist the Kalish Jews to a certain extent.The Kalish Bruder Ferein (Fraternal Union)This Society was formed in Harlem, New York, in 1887, when most of theinhabitants of Harlem were Jews. In 1962 the Socieyt celebrated its 75thanniversary. The society maintained contact with the Kehilla in Kalish andfrom time to time sent donations which were intended for welfare purposes.They had their own synagogue, and to this day possess two private cemeteries.The wives of the members formed a branch of the society by the nameof "The Kalisher Sisterhood”, and were active in the mobilisation of help forpeople of Kalish in the United States and in the old homeland.Of the founders and active members we know of Zigmunt Galewsky thePresident, Pile and others, most of whom have passed away. The activemembers today, are: Wittkover, Kauffman and others. Most of the presentmembers are second and third generation Americans, and to our regret theyshow little interest in other persons of Kalish origin, either in the UnitedStates or In Israel.The Kalisher “Progressive Young Men”That first meeting of the Society took place in 1904 at the home of AbrahamWolkovitch, in Second Avenue, New York. In 1909 Wolkowitch and his familyreturned to Kalish. He was killed in the Warsaw Ghetto with his wife andhis sons, Sam and David. Abraham Wolkowitch was an active member ofPoalei Zion and took part in the social life of the city and in communitywork.244THE KALISH BOOKMost of the members of the Society were young people, many of whom hadescaped military service. Some of them were political refugees who had fledfrom Siberia or the Tzar's prisons. They included members of the Bund, SocialDemocrats, members of S.S., P.P.S., Zionists and Poalei Zion. These youngmen were unable to integrate in exisitng societies because of their opinions,so they formed their own society.The founders were: Sam Berke, Abraham Weiss, Moshe Walter, Kuyavski,Joe Kott, Jay Prashker, the late N. Kahn, the late Glatstein and others. SamSegal was their secretary.The purpose of the Society was: Supporting each new immigrant fromKalish, asisstance in finding work, and sending aid to Kalish. When the num-ber of members of the Society grew it was suggested that they join theArbeiter Ring. On April 11, 1911, the Society joined the Arbeiter Ring asBranch 241. The secretary was then Sam Kauffman.Arbeiter Ring, Branch 241In its new image the Society went its own way. Its members leaned to-wards Zionism whereas the Arbeiter Ring was then very much under theinfluence of the Bund. The leadership of the Branch did its best to includenational and Zionist issues in its lecture programme, in addition to issuesconcerning Socialism. The Branch also supported various Kalish institutionsand sent help to schools there.During its first years the Society numbered over 200 members. Eventuallythe membership grew smaller until there were only thirty old members in1961. After the death of its secretary, Chaver Glatstein, the branch unitedwith the Lodz Branch, and today goes under the name of “Lodzer KalisherKreis Branch Numer 36”.The United Mutual Assistance Committee of Kalish OrganisationsAfter the First World War the United Mutual Assistance Committee forKalish Jews was founded in New York.All the organisations which then existed in the United States joined thisUnited Committee. The latter sent out a public appeal to all ex-Kalishers inAmerica to support their townsmen. The answer was $3,000, which weregiven to the emisary of Polish Jewry, Dr. Rosenblatt of Lodz.An Inter-Party Committee was formed in Kalish for he distribution of theRelief funds, and was active till 1930.Kalisher Independent SocietyAfter a few years a number of members, headed by Sam Berke, JosephKott, Max Meiner and other members of the Progressive Young Men, left theArbeiter Ring because of ideological differences of opinion. They formed theirown organisation which they named “Kalisher Independent Society”. Theirsecretary was Philip Weiss. In 1940 they took over the cemetery at MountMoriah in New Jersey. They organised cultural activities, lectures and trips.When the Relief was established in New York, they joined its Committee.ORGANIZATIONS & INSTITUTIONS245The Society is active to this day. It takes part in Jewish social activitiesand supports them. It also supports HIAS, the Histadrut, the U.J.A., the JewishNational Fund, etc. The second and third generations still participate in thiswork. The following members still continue to be active: Sam Berke. MaxMeiner, Joseph Brilliant, Roth and others. They are headed by the personswho founded the Society some thirty-odd years ago. The active public worker,Sam Berke, acts as President.Kalisher Social FereinIn Winter 1928 a group of ex-Kalish people founded the Kalisher SocialFerein. Most of the members had immigrated after the First World War.The initiators and founders were: Peretz Walter, Yehuda Aharon BrotmanWolf Ziewush, Joseph Aronovitch (Arnold), Yaakov Yohanan Heber andothers. These, together with their wives, met at the home of Joseph Arnoldfor prior discussions and in 1929 the Society was officially founded. At first theynumbered 15 persons only, but in due course they grew to 100 members.The aim of the Society was the support of secular Jewish schools in Ka-lish, the Borochow School and others. They laso set up a Mutual Loan Fundfor assisting needy members. It should be remembered that a year or twolater a major economic crisis began in the United States. Many members werein dire need. The Fund sold shares of $ 25 each, and every shareholder wereentitled to receive a loan.The Society also held a theatrical performance in the cellar of Joseph Ar-nold's home, entitled “The Man beneath the Table". The benefits from thisshow were sent to Kalish. Wolf Ziewush and his wife, Noskievitch of Zdunska-Wola and others, took part in this show.In 1935 the Society terminated its independence and became Branch 265 ofthe Internationaler Arbeiter Orden (I.W.O.). Apart from relief work there werealso cultural activities: Lectures and meetings with authors and culturalworkers.After the Second World War a number of members demanded that theyshould withdraw from the Order. In 1955 the Government closed down theOrder and the Social Farein became independent once again. It has retainedits character and functions to this very day.The Social Farein is represented in the Relief and supports it, and its mem-bers have been active in it since it was first founded. The Society has itsown cemetery at Mount Lebanon in New Jersey, as well as its private SickFund.Kalisher Un Umgegent Landsmanschaft Fun Nei GekumeneAfter the destruction of Europe, new immigrants from Kalish and the vici-nity began to reach the United States. They were people who had escapedfrom the camps and gas-chambers, and also partizans and exiles from Russia.All these newcomers needed the assistance of the Relief. Their common fate —they had lost families and relatives in most cases — made them seek one246THE KALISH BOOKanother out in order to pour forth their hearts and help themselves in inte-grating into the new life. Kalman Aronowitch gathered these members to ameeting on January 14, 1951 at the Borochow Centre, 216, East 14 Street,where a founding committee was elected. Its members were: Kalman Arono-witch, Joseph Lubelsky, Sam Krakowsky, Avraham Krotowsky, G. Meisnerand others. The committee decided to found a society which was named "Ka-lisher un Umgegent Landsmanschaft fon Nei-Gekumene” (Newcomers fromKalish and the Vicinity).The aim of the Society was: Maintaining social contact, upkeep of thetradition of the older Societies of Kalish, active participation in the work ofthe Relief, and assisting national and cultural Jewish life in the United States.Monthly meetings were held for discussing various subjects, a tradition ofHanukka parties was established, and the Banquet of the Society was set forPurim. On this occasion funds were collected for the U.J.A. and Israel, andwere forwarded through the Relief. The Society also took an active part inconnection with the Martyrs' Forest and the Kalish Book. Sam Rakowsky, theChairman, G. Meisner, the Secretary and the committee members L. Mintz,M. Weintraub, R. Wolnikov, A. Yachimowitch and others, were particularlyactive in these respects.At one time there were differences of opinion among the members. Someheld that the Society should restrict itself to being a fraternal organisationwithout taking part in national activities. In 1960 a group of members sug-gested that they join the Arbeiter Ring. This suggestion was taken up andthe society became "Arbeiter Ring Branch 361”. Upon the union with theArbeiter Ring a number of members left the Society. The Branch now hasa few dozen members. They meet regularly and hold their annual banquet onPurim. The Chairman of the Branch is J. Lubelsky and the Secretary is G.Meisner.Kalisher Non-Partisan Belief Committee in U. S. A.Standing, r. to 1.: Max Smolin, Mary Smolin, Yadzia Roth, Ludwig Walker, PeretzWalter Secretary, Nahum Medine, Abraham Bandel Chairman, Fela Bandel, SadieDiamant, Samuel Roth, Frania Perle.Seated, L to r.: Sam Berke, Israel Diamant Treasurer, Paulin Arnold Secretary,Joseph Arnold President, Samuel Okladek Financial Secretary, Jeanette Okladek,Jacob Levy.Not in the photograph: Hershel and Regina Arkush, Rebecca Walter, Sarah Heber,Ida Berke. Helen Levy.Organisation of Kalish District Landsleit in AustraliaStanding, r. to 1.: Shalom Margolis, Yidel Shmerling Chairman, Gedalia KwiatkovskySecretary, W. Stollman, Sala Kwiatkovsky, Issac Jacobovitch, S. Moskoviteh.Seated, 1. to r.: Paula Brooks, Leah Levy, Max Levy, Max Brooks, Aryeh Kwiatkovsky,Ruth Linch, Nahum Linch, Sala Shmerling.Not in the photograph: Ezekiel Joseph Margolis.248THE KALISH BOOKKALISH TOWNSFOLK IN AUSTRALIAThere is no information about Kalish townsfolk in Australia at thebeginning of the Twentieth Century. It is true that the first immigrantsarrived between 1900 and 1912, but their influence was not felt at all inlocal Jewish life.It was in 1927 that a number of people from Kalish arrived, chiefly byway of Eretz Israel. During those years the economic, cultural and spiritualconditions were very difficult. Each man sought for his townsfolk in hisloneliness. Between 1927 and 1939 about ten families arrived direct fromKalish. Closer contact between the Kalish townsfolk was immediately esta-blished.A' ismall group of ?andsleit headed by Feivel Yedwab, the oldest of thesettlers, established the Kalish Landsmanschaft in 1944, with the purposeof assisting those townfolk who were still alive. When news was receivedthrough the Jewish Agency and other sources that there were still livingJews in the city we took steps to obtain entry permits for them, andreceived 150 in the course of hree months. At the same time we sent largequantities of food packets, clothes and blankets to Poland through the HIAS.Not all the Jews of Kalish made use of the permits. Some of them settledin Sweden, America, Israel and elsewhere. For those who came to joinus we provided as much help as we could. If we take the difficult materialsituation of the first Kalish people in this country into account, we canrecognise how much effort was involved in their help.When the Jewish Committee ceased activities in Kalish our help alsostopped. We had some money in hand, so we sent it to the Red Magen Davidin Tel-Aviv.The Kalish townsfolk displayed no particular activity after that until 1949,when a new wave of immigration began bringing with it fresh needs andfunctions. Activities were then renewed. Newcomers were helped to find work,homes and loans. With our aid almost all of them succeeded in settling down.We still continue to receive requests for entry permits, and the Committeecomplies as best it can.There are now many Kalish townsfolk in Australia, chiefly in Melbourne.The Kalish Centre in Melbourne is known for its communal and culturalactivities. Towards the end of November every year more than a hundredtownsfolk meet for a Commemoration Evening. Every year a large partyis held, which serves as a social meeting and increases the resources of theCommittee. The Centre also participates in the activities of the United Appealto which it devotes a special evening party. Over the years family partiesand joint rambles and hikes have been held. The General Meeting electsthe Executive and the Committees for Immigration, Relief, Help in findingapartments and work.The Melbourne Centre has also helped to set up a Landsmanschaft inSidney which, it may be added, is the only one of its kind in that city.Within a brief period of time it has already infused a spirit of life into thesecond largest Jewish Community of Australia, where communal and culturalactivities were almost non-existent.We are very interested in all Jews from Kalish, particularly those now inIsrael. We maintain contact with the survivors remaining in Kalish and withthose wandering all over the world.TheHOLOCAUSTTHE HOLOCAUST251THE END OF THE COMMUNITYby Dr. Moshe Gross (Henryk Zeligowski)In memory of my parents Rachel and Bernard,my sisters Devorah and Madzia,and my nephew JakobKALISH10.1939 — 8.9.7.1942Hospital — Jew Camp — Labour CampAfter the Germans occupied Poland in October 1939 they began to imple-ment their plans for the extermination of Polish Jewry by pillaging usof all our property and exploiting our strength to the very last. But theyproceeded to do so step by step. Pending complete extermination they set outto make maximum use of us for their War Effort. They began by ascertainingthe amount of Jewish property and restricting Jewish liberty.The JudenratTheir first step was to establish a Judenrat (Jewish Council) whose seatwas at the Community Offices. Its members included: Luzer Mitz, Frankel,Katzinel, Advocate Perkal, Dr. Seid, Dr. Lubelski, Magister Rotzeig, theCantor of the “German” Synagogue, Gustav Hahn, etc. A large staff of officialswas promptly recruited to secure maximum promptitude and accuracy. Adetailed register of the Jewish population of Kalish was prepared, withprecise data about property and numbers of old people, sick, children,craftsmen, intellectuals, physicians and lawyers.New orders, censuses, lists, demands for war compensation to be paidin paper money, gold and jewellery quickly followed one another. Fromtime to time the representatives of the Judenrat were summoned to theGestapo offices in Jasna Street, and always returned with new proscriptionsand orders.Jewish shops and factories were repeatedly robbed and looted in broaddaylight. However, the collection centres at the Municipality, Police andelsewhere were never full because trains loaded with Jewish property de-parted for Germany every day. Work, crafts and trade quickly came to acomplete standstill. Wealthy people buried their valuables as best theycould in the earth or in walls; or else they sold them and fled from thecity, hoping to find things better elsewhere. But most of the populationwere poverty-stricken and simply resolved to put up with the oppressionand persecution and wait for the end of the war.Every day a number of young men were requisitioned for labour. There werefew volunteers, and so the gendarmes would complete the quota by frequentmanhunts. The Jews were required to empty Jewish shops, clear away ruins,clean the streets, restore destroyed buildings, clean barracks, police stations,252THE KALISH BOOKGestapo offices, etc. Sometimes they were required to bury those sentencedto death and shot in the Jewish cemetery. Treatment of these Jewish workersin Kalish was precisely the same as elsewhere. Once, for instance, theGestapo ordered us to jump about on all four and bark at the tops of ourvoices. On another occasion we had to punch one another as hard aswe could, and anybody who was found cheating was generously assistedwith rifle-butts. The Germans treated the members of the Judenrat in asimilar fashion, and their numbers rapidly diminished. The only ones leftwere those who had no opportunity of running away, and others who foundthe activities desirable in various respects. Many of the younger generationmade up their minds to cross the frontier.We gradually grew accustomed to such daily sights as shearing off thebeards of old Jews, street-chases for forced labour and kidnapping for the“Shelter”. The latter was in the Municipality and was generally dreaded.Those taken there were beaten until they fainted. Young Jewesses wereoften taken there and ordered to undress, to the delight of drunken gendarmesand soldiers under the guidance of the notorious Mayor Grabowski, a bestialsadist. He played a major part in the destruction of the Jews of Kalishand the vicinity. For several years he was the chief instrument of the Gestapoand the equally satanic Gesundheitsamt (Health Office) and faithfully andefficiently carried out all orders received. In this he was assisted by a largeband of officials of various origins.In general there was a state of sheer confusion and alarm which the Germanswere interested in maintaining, and they may have started many rumoursfor that purpose. Thus early in November a rumour spread from mouth toear that a Ghetto was to be established in a very small area. This led toa prompt movement of the population to the indicated quarter, away fromthe centre of the city and the major streets. On 15th November tenants incertain streets were given a few moments to pack up, and were led underguard to the monastery. Within a few days the tenants of scores of housesin various parts of the town were uprooted in this way. The confusionincreased when the order to wear the yellow badge was published.The Market HallOn 20th November entire streets were cleared with the aid of severalhundred gendarmes from the vicinity. A few moments were allowed forpacking belongings, and them everybody had to get out into the street. Withina very short while we were marching in threes under the guard of armedgendarmes. Then we found ourselves within the crowded “Market Hall”where there were already many thousands. In another few moments themass of people were being kicked and forced back with rubber truncheonsso as to make room for newcomers.Money and jewels that had not been very well hidden had already beenpillaged in the course of “searches for weapons.” Packed as tight as herringsin a barrel, we could not even sit down. We trod on one another andkicked one another, amid oaths and cursing. The little children wept, thebigger ones shrieked, the grown-ups shouted, people began fighting about ascrap of pavement or a lost bundle. Sick people moaned and the dying1HE HOLOCAUST253groaned, while above all rose the roaring of the drunken gendarmerie.During that endless night it was rumoured that we were to be sent to workin Germany or to the General Government. But actually this was only thefirst large-scale action, and nobody could foresee what was to follow.Sure enough, the first groups were taken out next day and led underguard to the station, where they were packed like herrings in trains settingout for Warsaw, Rzeszow (Reisha) and elsewhere in the East. But otherswere brought to take their place. Many people decided that it was impossibleto remain in Kalish, and requested and received permission to go direct fromtheir homes to the railway station.I. THE JEWISH HOSPITALThe authorities permitted patients, those suffering from contagious diseases,the aged and crippled, to be housed in the Jewish Hospital for the timebeing. This hospital was set up early in November in its former buildingby order of the German Chief of Police and the Gresundheitsamt. Dr. Seidtook charge. Both the building and the equipment were in ruins. Jewishjoiners, plumbers, mechanics and painters engaged in the restoration workwhich progressed well. The public contributed money, linen, bedding andkitchenware. The Jewish doctors contributed the medical equipment. Bedswere brought from all over town and the first ward was opened. Yeteach family preferred to keep its sick at home. But after the first transportspeople realised that hospitalisation enabled the patients to remain in Kalishfor the time being, and they clung desperately to this last hope. So thewards and even the corridors filled up.The patients were treated by Dr. Seid, Dr. Plotski, Dr. Lubelski and Dr.Devora Gross-Shinagel. The remaining Jewish physicians showed less interest,either because they were preparing for flight or else were afraid of acceptingany responsibility whatever.After Dr. Seid left on 20th. November my older sister, Dr. Gross-Shinagel,took charge. Drs. Beatus and Gath and Mrs. Walachowicz offered their help,but disappeared a few days later. Dr. Gross continued in charge with thedevoted and self-sacrificing cooperation of the former hospital nurses LolaMargulis (little Lola); Hala Eliasiewicz; Helena Storch; my younger sisterMadzia Gross, who had just returned from a German war prison afterserving as a Red Cross volunteer in the Polish army; I myself; and themedical student Alex Bloch.Workers in the Contagious Diseases Department were: Mrs. A. Zhulti,Yetka Koppel, and each one of us as far as possible. Several members ofthe service co-operated without a break and wih complete devotion. Theywere Feivel Chapnik and his mother who worked in the kitchen, Opochinskaand her daughter, Wroblewski and his wife, Zucker the tailor, Wolkowitchand Kalmanowitch.It must be said that under the conditions prevailing the hospital was amodel institution, which enabled it to carry out the important tasks laidupon it during the coming years. The statistics I kept as long as it functionedshowed that about a thousand patients passed through, most of them veryill or suffering from contagious diseases. Many grave operations were carried254THE KALISH BOOKout and thousands of injuries and wounds were dressed. Thousands of patientswere given medical treatment and many children were born. Later, patientsfrom the Ghettos and camps in the vicinity came here for longer hospitalis-ation. The well-equipped operating theatre, the clinic and pharmacy madethings much easier. With the approval of the authorities we engaged anAryan woman pharmacist, for M. Green, our own pharmacist, was transferredelsewhere. A few months later the student Stella Lieberman took chargeof the Pharmacy, besides helping in the Dispensary and the wards. Thehospital laboratory was set up and conducted by Chemical Engineer ArturShinagel and proved very valuable.Administration was handled by Shmuel Arkush who afterwards becamea member of the Altestenrat (Council of Elders). Subsequently he wasassisted by Sender Zeidel, who also made the purchases in town. The kitchenand laundry were managed by Mrs. Arkush, who was assisted by Opochinskaand her daughter, Mrs. Feivel and Mrs. Zeidel. Burials were performed byBerker, Prussak and Kowalsky. They had plenty to do, as mortality wasconsiderable at first. The gravely ill who were absolutely unable to travelwere brought here from the Market Hall. There were also many oldpersons who had no resistance at all under these conditions. There wereno burial ceremonies, and few people were present.This hospital became a strong unit with considerable independence andimmunity. It also became a centre of the fading or vanishing Jewish life,being the last citadel which kept several hundred Jews in Kalish. The littleSynagogue of the hospital, and every room that could be used for dwellingpurposes, were also filled very quickly. More than 150 patients were admitted.About 350 invalids, chronically diseased and old people, were housed inthe Talmud Torah. This institution was managed by Dr. Feigin-Danziger,and she remained in charge till it was liquidated. Her faithful assistantswere the Orderly Neuman, Male Nurse Green and his sister, Hella Nomberg,Irka Rosenfeld, Mrs. Somatitzka, Freedman the upholsterer, etc.The more active of the old folk also helped as best they could. Administra-tion was handled by Somatitsky, Skobron and Rosenfeld. This was actuallya kind of Old Age Home, though some wards and a dispensary were provided.But those really ill or suffering from contagious disease, or requiring opera-tions, were sent to the hospital. The other old folk were housed in the formerOld Age Home which was managed by the industrialist Isidor Wiszniewskl,Landau (of the Guttstat family) and Hahn. We also took over the JewishOrphanage which had been emptied. It housed several dozen families, largelyworkers of the hospital and Talmud Torah, their wives and children.The Orphanage remained in its own place from the beginning of the Waruntil 18th November 1941, and was managed by Mrs. Ella. It housed abouttwenty orphans, who were kept in exemplary cleanliness in spite of thedifficulties. The older ones studied. Later they were employed in sewingand in the tailor’s workshop.Meanwhile the last transport had left on 3rd November 1939. By a heart-breaking chance I saw them leave, that last griefstricken caravan of wanderingJews exiled to an unknown land. It included many old folk who were classifiedas “fit for transport” and were taken from the Talmud Torah. These, togetherTHE KALISH BOOK255with the people of the Old Age Home, about 120 in all, were sent to Lochownear Warsaw. We received letters from them for some time but do notknow their final fate.The Judervrat had virtually ceased to function during this period, althougha few individuals maintained contact with the Germans. The only Judenratmember left was Hahn, the “Jewish Elder”, who was trusted by the Germansafter all the honoured representatives of Jewish society had fled. He wascoarse, lively and sharp-witted, and won the approval of the Germans, inwhom he in turn largely believed on account of his ignorance.Landau appeared and was very active from the beginning of the trans-portation. He knew many of the gendarmes because he had been arrestedearly in September and taken to the Reich as a “civilian prisoner-of-war”.During the transportation he was allowed to move around freely andarrange many official matters. He too skilfully won the confidence of theGermans. After the liquidation of the Old Age Home these two, togetherwith Isidor Wiszniewski (of the family of Ben-Zion Wartski) were recognisedas a Council of Elders. Wiszniewski took over supplies, Landau ran thePolice, and Hahn as Jewish Elder handled the Gestapo affairs. Shmuel Arkush,manager of the hospital, was appointed Secretary.To our great surprise we were not transferred like the others to theGeneral Government, possibly because the Jewish quarters of Warsaw, etc.,had become congested and disorganised. Instead Jewish camps were establishedin December 1939 and early in 1940 at various places in our region (Warta,Turek, Zdunska-Wola), each containing several thousand persons from thesmall towns. A larger camp of 2,500 was set up at Kozminek-Bornhagen,which contained the Jews of Staviszin, Dobra, etc. This was headed byHaftka, Dudek, Knopf (Chairman), Wilczinski and Roth. Health was handledby the orderly Grzemilas and later by Dr. Shalit, who had escaped fromGermany in 1938. Although it had a certain amount of independence itwas still under our authority in all respects, for we retained the statusof administrative and economic centre to the very end, and became themost important health centre in the entire Kalish district. The authoritiesand District Physician Karsch took interest in our hospital and paid itmany visits. We received considerable allocations of food and medical suppliesfor the patients, and were also permitted to send them to the MunicipalHospital for special treatment, X-rays, pneumothorax, etc.A typhoid epidemic began at Kozminek early in Spring, and Dr. Gross-Shinagel engaged in an energetic inoculation campaign extending to severalthousand persons in the neighbouring camps. We had to isolate all actualand suspected patients, and accordingly enlarged the Contagious DiseasesDepartment considerably.Immediately after Passover 1940 all Jews aged 10 or more were requiredto put on a yellow Shield of David 10 cm. in diameter with the word“Jude” in the centre. These had to be sewn firmly on the upper garment,one on the right-hand side of the chest in front and the other on the right-hand shoulder behind.In Spring 1940 many Jewish soldiers returned from the war prisons. Amongthem were: Julek Wolkowitch, Shmulek Rakowski, Preger, Dzialoszynski,256THE KAL1SH BOOKMoshe Moshkowitch, Heniek Breuer, Heniek Bleshkowski, Adolf Bloch, LaibBejrach, Josef Diamant the shoemaker, Abraham Hirshbajn, Epstein andSmuliek Eliashewitch the very experienced male-nurse of the former JewishHospital, who immediately started working in our hospital.The total number of persons in the camp rose to 150.From Kozminek camp about 100 men were sent to set up a labour campat Opatowek; and a few weeks later a smaller labour camp of 30 men wasset up at Stary.In June 1940 the Talmud Torah had to move to a building in P.O.W.Street No. 13 (former Nowa Street) which had once served as a lace factory.Most of the apartments were ruinous and many of the larger halls werestill full of machinery. However, the transfer was completd within threedays by dint of great effort, and the offices of the Wirtschaftsamt (EconomicDepartment) were housed in the Talmud Torah. A few days later theHospital and Orphanage were also ordered to move to Szopena Street No. 4.The whole building was dismantled while the patients were still lying inthe wards. Several weeks later the large “German” Synagogue and the OldCemetery were broken up. The tombstones were taken as building materialfor shelters, and for street paving. The bathhouse and community buildingswere also destroyed.The Hospital was reopened on a smaller scale and without an operatingtheatre. However, the demand for hospitalisation also decreased, and itnow served chiefly as a Health Centre. Patients from the surroundingcamps came for prolonged treatment, chiefly surgical cases and contagiousdiseases, i.e., Typhoid and Scabies. Luckily we checked the typhoid by theinoculations which we renewed every six months.n. JUDENLAGEREvery day a few score workers now proceeded to the work required bythe Labour Office, breaking up old houses, paving roads in town, blockingthe course of the Prosna from the theatre to Wodna Street. The policeand Gestapo found work for a number of drivers and locksmiths: MoniekLipinski, Shmulik Rakowski, Henek Brenner, Boobi Hahn, Leo Feigin andAaron Winter. Every day our tailors and shoemakers Berel Gross, ZeligGross, Opas, Zucker and Schiller went off to the police workshops. Fuyaraworked for a Ukrainian who received permission to employ him. Thehousepainters Bloch Senior, Mendel Bloch and Adolf Bloch worked in thebarracks and at the police.During the summer our Hospital and Old Age Home gradually turnedinto a Judenlager where the Council of Elders exercised increasing authority.The nameplate of the Hospital disappeared and was replaced by that of“Arbeiter Kollone”. In order to increase the number of workers the Councilof Elders reduced the hospital staff to a minimum, disregarding requirements.The Hospital Management helped as best they could with this, but in Springand Autumn the percentage of patients increased and the staff could nolonger do everything necessary. In spite of this it was the practice to leaveonly one nurse for all the patients and the Dispensary, arguing that thedoctor could also go out to load up coal or dig. And indeed a year later,THE HOLOCAUST257when our situation was far worse, Dr. Gross-Shinagel also went out towork in the tailor's workshop, visiting patients only in the evening.There was constant friction between the Council of Elders and the Hospitalfrom the very beginning. First the Council seized all power and authority.Then it fought openly against the Hospital doctor and staff, giving themreduced rations, and claiming that they were idling. It also stopped payingtheir “wages”, which had originally been set at 50 Reichspfennig per day.Things were no better in the Old Age Home for the manageress Dr. Feigin-Danziger and the rest of the staff, who worked beyond their strength.It is possible that they were treated even worse. However, the Feldscher(Barber-surgeon) Neiman, in spite of his age, continued to attend patientsand most skilfully extracted teeth, besides running the only barber shopleft. By this time our Judenlager had taken on a regular pattern, with2 houses for the workers at POW St. 16 and 18, the Hospital at Szopena 4,and the Old Age Home at POW St. 13 (the former Nowa St.). A canteenwas set up for odds and ends in addition to rations, and for rations too.We were not permitted to go out into the town without a special permit.All official affairs were handled by members of the Council of Elders, themessenger Seidel and the Springer brothers. Still, many would steal outafter removing the yellow badges in order to earn a trifle. Poles often visitedus to do business, though that was also prohibited. We had no culturallife or entertainment, and lived not for the next day but for the nextmoment, for we never had an instant free for leisure.In June 1940 we were visited by Grabowski, former Mayor and nowhead of the Health Department, accompanied by Gestapo men in uniforms.They inspected all the patients and made a note on the card of each one.They then announced that some of the patients would have to be sentto other towns where special hospitals and convalescent homes were beingset up. To begin with only the aged and chronic patients would be sent.Then they went their way, leaving behind the usual depression that followeda visit by the Gestapo.During the Summer the number of workers increased to about 120 in all.Work was compulsory for every Jew aged 13—15 or upwards. Most ofthem went on sewing. The tailors, shoemakers, mechanics and drivers workedfor the police or wherever there was work. As we had many excellentcraftsmen, they were often sent to work in the homes of officials, gendarmesand Gestapo men. This gave the Concil of Elders excellent opportunitiesfor establishing contact with the various leading officials. More than oncesome of the Jews succeeded in obtaining information, particularly aboutour camp. As a result we often knew in advance about searches, orders andother oppressive acts which were being planned. Here much was done byCouncil member Vishnievski, who found an entry to the home of the MayorFetzel and was well treated by Major Krauser, head of the Police, andthe head of the Economic Department. Hahn also took his share in this.He won the confidence of Schonrogen, head of the Gestapo.All this cost an untold amount in money and gifts.That Summer we set up a dental clinic in the hospital which provedinvaluable, for teeth began to decay terribly on account of the lack of258THE KALISH BOOKvitamins and other important elements in the food. An Aryan dentistcame to the clinic twice a week by permission of the authorities. For along time her assistant was Zosia Freund.At the same time the chemical laboratory of the Hospital was developedand expanded by chemical engineer Arthur Shinagel. Our medical supplieswere cut down from time to time, but demand grew constantly with thearrival of patients from the vicinity and the surrounding camps. Thelaboratory began to manufacture its own preparations, particularly injectionswhich were difficult to obtain. In Autumn 1940 a big workshop was openedfor the manufacture of wooden soles, which carried out many orders forshops in Kalish and elsewhere. The workshop was founded by the BrothersAbraham, Benek and Nathan Hirschbein.We did our best to celebrate the festivals as well as we could. Prayerswere held on the New Year and Day of Atonement.ARBETTSLAGERThat Autumn the Germans decided to exterminate the sick and aged whocould not work. It should be noted that they carried out their mass trans-portations and slaughter either in Autumn or in Winter, apparently toreduce the danger of epidemics to a minimum. On 26th. October 1940,Grabowski arrived in our camp again and held a number of serious con-versations with our representatives. He and his two Gestapo companionsinformed the Council that at 10 a.m. next day the patients selected by themfor transfer to convalescent homes would be taken away. The patients hadto be washed and dressed in fresh underwear. We did not need to worryabout anything else, and even bedding was unnecessary as everything hadnow been prepared. That day our mechanics related when they returnedfrom their work at Gestapo headquarters that a large number of strangeGestapo men had arrived with a mysterious large black lorry that wasclosed on every side and had no ventilation holes at all. It was easy tolink these facts with the morning visit. We spent the day in feverish pre-parations, talks, discussions and leave-takings. There was still many optimists,hoping for the best, but the majority were ill at ease and apprehensive. Yeteven the most pessimistic never foresaw that the entire 290 Jews who hadbeen listed would be dead within a few hours.Next day, precisely at 10 a.m. on 27th October, a huge black lorry cameto a standstill in front of the Old Age Home at No. 13 POW St. Its roofwas as high as the first storey. It looked like a great black coffin. Twoshiny black cars brought Grabowski at the head of a gang of uniformedand unfamiliar Gestapo men. We had to fetch out those who were calledby name, for they were mostly chronic patients and cripples. The Germansordered us to carry them, seat the patients or stretch them on the bencheswithin fhe lorry.“When you come down the steps, be careful nothing happens to thepatient!” “Take it easy, we’re not in a hurry.” “Please put the man downhere in the comer till he feels better!” Meanwhile they saw to it that weshould fill up the cold lorry. But they would not permit the younger folkto join their departing relatives.THE HOLOCAUST259The metal doors were banged to, the heavy bars were dropped in place,the large lorry set off silently but swiftly, followed by the gleaming cars.Next day, October 28th, two more trips were made and about 110 personswere removed. Everything was done swiftly, in order not to spoil theweekend. They must have grown tired of putting on a show and stoppedbeing polite, calming the weepers with their whips and shooting at anybodywho looked out of the windows. The only ones who did not feel the generalapprehension and bitterness were the lucky insane.The two last groups left on Monday 30th October, and included a fewhospital patients. The chair of one of the old women was brought backon one of the trips. The Gestapo man who brought it explained, “She doesn'tneed it any longer because she's received a new one." That day the Councilof Elders was required to pay the cost of transport at the rate of fourReichsmarks a person, and to arrange all matters connected with the departureof 290 persons at the Economic Office.The Germans gave evasive replies to the repeated questions of the Eldersas to where the people had been taken. “At the moment they're in transitcamps, and from there they'll be sent to the permanent convalescent homes.As we don't know in advance who's being sent where you’ll have to bepatient for a few days, until everything is in order." For many weeks weapplied to the Krankenverlegung Institution which was supposed to dealwith such matters, but could not find out what had happened. Finally wewere told that news had just been received that a few of the old peoplehad died of heart failure, brain fever or pneumonia. The rest were inFadernice and were in good health. But no map showed the spot, because itdid not exist.Little by little we understood that we would never see the dead againunless we followed in their footsteps. After that we lived in a state ofconstant dread, for we could see the sword hanging over our own headsand knew that we would go the same way sooner or later. The Germanswere exploiting our working power, but would clearly exterminate us too.The hermetically sealed gas-wagons which were first tried out on our oldfolk were about to commence the great action of “purifying" Europe of theJews, which was afterwards perfected in the large extermination camps.The old people, who had been choked by poison pas in the lorry whilestill on their way, were taken to the neighbouring forest and buried or burnt.It was rumoured that they had been buried near Winiary. Nobody knewprecisely because the roads had been strictly blocked on that day, but itwas clear that the action had taken place near Kalish, for the lorries returnedwithin three hours. However, as far as mass extermination was concernedthe experiment does not seem to have been too successful. It took too longand called for trouble and deception. It was no way for finishing off eightmillion Jews “who were eating the bread of charity." It was then thatthey began to build the huge concentration camps at Auschwitz, Treblinkaand elsewhere, with their modern death-chambers and furnaces. At the sametime the Jews began to be concentrated in gigantic ghettos from whichthey could not escape. However, the gas lorries were kept for auxiliary260THE KALISH BOOKpurposes in the small towns from which it was not worth while transportingthe Jews. And we no longer had any illusions about our fate.in. ARBEITSLAGERIn order to remain alive we had to convince the Germans that they neededus for the time being, and that we were good workers. So the Councilof Eiders was given permission to operate large tailoring and shoemakingworkshops, the entire income of which went to the Wirtschaftsamt (EconomicOffice). There was ample room. One of the empty buildings at 13, POW St.was reiurbished. Machines were brought from all parts of the town fortailors, seamstresses and furriers, together with other tools.1. The Tailor WorkshopsThe tailors included: Zucker, Berl Gross, Selig Gross, Schiller, Of as, theNeimann family, Berek Pilz and a few dozen more who were their assistants.The first sewing machines were soon whirring “for the victory”. Severalscore were employed. The managers were my father Berl Gross andSchiner. Later the shop was expanded to sew women's clothes and under-wear. This department was managed by Mrs. Arkush. We all understood thegravity of the situation and started working with all our strength. Eventhe old people helped for fear of new transportations. There were fewerpeople engaged in digging, for they were all brought into the shops. Ordersfrom German businesses in Kalish and elsewhere were plentiful, and itwas impossible to satisfy them all. In addition many private orders werecarried out. The best tailors sewed for the high officials who were swampedwith gifts of clothing and other private “mementos”. They were very important,for they gained us help of one kind and another. We were visited byvarious supervisory delegations which came to ascertain the quality of theJewish work and always left with full hands. The Volksdeutsch Woiciechowski,who was the manager of the Wirtschaftsamt, was a frequent visitor, whowas very pleased at our work because it increased both his private incomeand that of his Department as well.•v2. The Shoemakers’ Workshop began operations early in 1941 and employedmore than ten shoemakers and their assistants, including Katz and his son,Ruhr, Abeczadlo, Wygodski and Diamant. The workshop was managed byMr. Freund of the Frenkel family. New shoes were made there, old shoeswere repaired and all kinds of slippers, children’s shoes, belts, bags, etc.,were made from the waste which was brought from the local tannery.These products were excellently made and showed an exceptional inventivecapacity which astonished the Germans. Later in the year they began themass production of shoes with wooden soles, which were also made fromwaste materials. These soles were manufactured on the spot by the brothersHirschbein. There was a big income from this branch, as many large orderswere received from Poznan and Ostrow.3. In addition a Hat Factory was founded and managed by the mastercraftsman Bulka and young Schiller.THE HOLOCAUST2614. The Furriers’ WorkshopHie furriers showed even greater energy and inventive capacity. Theleading ones were: Yossi Baum, Yulek Wolkowitch and S. Kolsky. Apartfrom the various orders and *‘presents” of the officials and their mistresses,furs were created here out of nothing. A few centimetres of fur trimmings,chiefly Caracul, which the Germans had previously burnt, were used to makevaluable articles. The trimmings and waste were brought from Berlin, cleanedand sewn together with much toil. There were plenty of machines and agreat will to work. Everybody wanted to go on living.By the following Spring production had doubled in every department.We were being urged on from every side, though it was quite unnecessary.We were called on to do our best for the vicotry! And indeed we wereworking for victory, but for our own and not for theirs. Our camp wastransformed into one huge factory, feverishly labouring and toiling in orderto secure us all the right to live.THE JUDENLAGER IN BORNHAGEN-KOZMINEKIn those days large workshops like our own were also established atKozminek. However, they lacked expert workers and so did not developso fast, nor did they give the local ghetto the aspect of a typical labour camp.In addition there were “too many” old people, women and children there,and so Kozminek remained only a Juden-lager to the end.Sanitary conditions in all these camps wer very poor indeed. Doctor Shalit,the only physician, and Grzenilas the Feldscher, could not handle all thework, and so they sent many patients to us. Dr. Gross-Shinagel oftenhad to go to the camps to help in difficult cases, receiving special permissionfrom the authorities. We also went there twice a year to give inoculationsagainst typhoid.Contact between the camps was very close. They were all dependent onus in spite of the measure of autonomy found in each, but we were linkedby ties of mutual interests. They had horses and wagons, with which theyvisited us twice a week to take the rations allocated to them by the Wirtsch-aftsamt, various goods, medicines from our dispensary which also servedthem, and post. It should be noted that all this time we were permitted tosend letters and parcels by post to other towns. We maintained contactwith the other ghettos and in general knew what was happening there asfar as the German censorship did not erase what was written.Theoretically only physicians and members of the Council of Elders wereallowed to travel by special permit; also patients. However, healthy peoplealso travelled because the police could usually be bribed and illicit tradewent ahead on a considerable scale. Hawkers would go out and wouldbring back butter, eggs and meat which could be bought more easily andcheaply if the authorities were not in the neighbourhood. Nobody paidattention to the penalties involved.In general the Kozminek Jews felt more at ease in their ghetto. Therewere more of them and they were not so shaken as we were by large-scaletransportation, the removal of the old people and the endless oppression262THE KALISH BOOKand extortion. Besides, the only Germans they saw were three local gend-armes. To begin with they were not even interfered with when theycelebrated Sabbath and Festivals. During Passover 1941 they had dry potatoesand coarse matzot for the Seder, but the sanctity of the Festival waspreserved. And surely, they thought, it would be the last Seder in wartime,and next year in Jerusalem! Their only fear was the camp commandantBuechler, a Volksdeutsch. He often burst into the ghetto when he wasdrunk and beat anyone he met with his stick. If anyone was found withan egg or a pat of butter he was beaten and fined. If word came thatthe “Greener” was on the way, they all hid like mice in their holes. Theperson in direct contact with him was our Council Elder Landau, whowas also controller of the Kozminek Judenrat.Our own camp was directly under the Municipal Authorities and DistrictAuthorities in Poznan. The Kozminek Judenrat (with Knopf as Chairman,and Roth, Dudek and Wilczymski) was generally hated by the Jews, likeour own and all the others, and for identical reasons. In the Kozminek ghettothere were several Jewish policemen, without caps and sticks, it is true, butin charge of the detention cell and enjoying the assistance of the Germangendarmes.In Kalish we had no Jewish police until the end. It was true that ourChairman Hahn called for volunteers and tried to recruit a number, butther were none. Maybe because we were too few, maybe because thehandful of survivors stood firm together.That year, 1941, we had a peaceful but gloomy Passover. Each familyhad lost at least one of its older members. It was hard to obtain matzot.We did not receive a baking permit, and the Kozminek matzot which werebaked by hand were very expensive, while our potato supply was alsoscanty. Nevertheless the truly observant Jews observed the festival in meti-culous detail after a hard day's work; for nobody could even dream ofrelease from work.The only pleasure left to us after working was to walk about the largecourtyard in front of No. 16, POW St., or one of our buildings. Part ofit had been cleared and planted with vegetables for the kitchen and thecanteen. The fences were removed and the plot was expanded as far asthe burnt flourmill of Kupfer, so that the courtyard of the neighbouringhouse, No. 18, was also added to it. This alowed the children to pass fromhouse to house without going out into the street and infuriating the Germans.In addition we could also pass from house to house at night without fear.Ther was another such courtyard in No. 13 POW St., where grass actuallygrew; though it was as thin and white as the faces of our childen. However,there was no stench of sewage water there and it was farther away fromthe street and closer to the fields. Three times a day we were permittedto visit those houses, and in any case people did not pay particular attentionto the regulations. Nor could the Germans really restrict our movementsas the Hospital was on one street, the canteen in another and the onlykitchen and workshops stood separate. At first the Brothers Asher andSimha Shepinger acted as doorkeepers, but later they were transferred to theworkshops.THE HOLOCAUST263In spite of the prohibitions people would steal out into the town to sellsomething and buy a little food, while some would visit Christian acquaint-ances to ask fdr something to eat. Naturally only those who had the rightkind of appearance could venture on this.THE BEGINNING OF THE ENDThe heat of June arrived. Endless military convoys, artillery, ammunitionand aeroplanes had been moving eastward for several months. Though thislooked as if it meant a conflict with Russia, there was no indication of itthe Press. This went on until Sunday, 22nd June, 1941 when I overheard awhispered conversation in one of the flats and someone saying, “So theyattacked first and are advancing rapidly...” My friends and I embraced withtears in our eyes, and we ran down to obtain details which had been broughtfrom town and had spread through the camp like lightning. But ourenthusiasm swiftly vanished. What would happen to us next? Would theylet us live till the end of the war? Now they would either send us deepinto Germany or else murder us here for fear of vengeance.From this date our situation took a turn for the worse. The Fuehrerhad declared that we were the arch-foes of the Germans, and our treatmentchanged accordingly. The only weapon left to us was work. We had noalternative except to increase production and prove to the Germans thatnow more than ever we could help them at the front as a source of labourand supply. And we did. They recognised the value of our work, recognisedus as a productive element and for the time being deferred their plansto liquidate our ghetto. For as we afterwards learnt they had intendedto get rid of us together with the Kozminek people at that time.After the first assault and the German victories our situation seemed toimprove slightly, but not for long. In September the Arbeitsamt demanded200 young men to be sent from Kozminek for agricultural work in thePosen District. They were selected without any medical examination.The Arbeitsamt announced that they would all be back in four weeksprovided that they picked the potatoes as required. Those who left wereallowed to take small bundles with them and next day most of themwere marched on foot, and a few in carts, to Kalish. On the way theGermans collected some more workers from the Opatuvek and Stavy camps.All of them were housed for the time being in the former Kalish vinegarfactory which had belonged to Lustig, and which was notorious among thePoles because it had been a concentration camp for those exiled to Germany.Several of the men ran away. Next day they were all sent by goods train toGildenhof and Brunsdorf in the vicinity of Posen, where there were largeestates.Several days later we were ordered to send a hundred men. Here as wellthe first to be sent were those who avoided work, the shouters and thedissatisfied. After picking the potatoes they were all due to come back.They were permitted to take some belongings and were led like sheep tothe vinegar factory. Once again a few of the bravest ran away, and nextday the rest followed their predecessors. Among them was my girl-cousin,Madza Borislowska, who had been brought to us half a year earlier from264THE KALISH BOOKthe Warsaw Ghetto by our Polish friend, Mr. Antoni Pawelski. About 337persons were left, and we now feared the worst for those who had gone.A week later we received the first letters. They had all arrived at Gildenhofand Brunsdorf in the Posen District and had been dispersed among thefarms. Lodging and food were not too bad. They were engaged in pickingpotatoes and other agricultural work. We breathed easily. This time theGermans had not deceived us and they might be trusted up to a point.We began to go back to work. But this interval did not last very long.On Saturday, 15th November 1941, Kalish was again visited suddenlyby the black gas lorries, so our driver reported from the Gestapo. Wetook this as clear evidence that they intended to destroy us all, and hadfirst sent the strong young men away to agricultural work, while theremaining 370 of us would meet the fate of the old people who hadbeen killed the year before. We remembered that the Gauleiter Greizer hadpromised in a speech not long before to purify his region from all “harmfulelements” while the Fuehrer had said only a week earlier that the timehad come to exterminate Jewry, adding, “the Jews should not imaginethat they will ever take vengeance on the Germans. Even if such a timeshould ever come, the memory of European Jewry will already have beenblotted out.”The members of the Council of Elders proceeded to the Municipality tofind out what was planned and take steps if possible, while the workshopscame to a standstill. Everybody went home. By evening the camp was likea big beehive and many people ran away to Kozminek and Varta. Late atnight the Elders returned declaring that the Germans were going to sendus to Kozminek or Lodz, for Kalish was a district town and must thereforebe “Judenrein”.The endless night passed with the Council of Elders trying to persuadethe Germans to leave the community shut away where they could workfor the victory. But it was only when darkness fell that we heard motorengines and found ourselves under a strong guard of armed gendarmes, andknew that we were trapped with no way of escape. People dashed crazilyfrom place to place. The younger men began to discuss feverishly whetherthey ought not to resist the Germans by force since in any case it wasthe end for us all. But what could we defend ourselves with? With sticks,with axes, with our hands and teeth, with whatever came to hand, as longas we did not permit them to lead us away like sheep to the slaughter,but to prove that Jews also know how to fight and die.More sober people went hunting for some weakly guarded point. Therewere no hiding places in the houses. Some of the more daring men managedto reach neighbouring houses over the roof and fled by night to Kozminek.The Gestapo men laughed aloud, and did not even bother to chase them.The God-fearing Hassidim tranquilly prepared for death. After carefullybathing themselves they put on shrouds, then swathed themselves in prayer-shawls and began fervent prayer. They no longer sought for deliverancebut for the forgiving of transgressions. They were happy men, that handful.They were happy and proud because they knew that they had been privilegedto die hallowing the Holy Name of God, like our forefathers in SpainTHE HOLOCAUST265and elsewhere in Europe for so many generations. The women wept silentlyas they pressed their children to their hearts.With the coming of day everybody felt slightly easier. It was the darknessthat terrified. And yet Jewish optimism proved to be more astoundingthan anything else. Though we could not delude ourselves as to our fate,our hearts refused to believe that we were all about to be destroyed.We felt it was impossible for so many innocent people to be killed together.But in any case all those who had some property left hid it away, andwaited for what would happen next. To be sure, what difference wouldit make whether our neighbours pillaged our property or our murdererstook it all? Yet still people worried as to what was going to happen to it.On the afternoon of Monday, 17th November, the two black lorriesstopped again at the gateway. Now Hahn the Chairman, who had formerlybeen so noisy and impudent, was as bowed and bent and pale and submissiveas we were. He called us all to line up in the courtyard. Then the Gestapomen came and summoned each person by name from a list they had.Each one called had to take three paces forward, turn round on his heelsand return to his place, while the chief executioner made some mysteriousmark next to his name. When I was called I sprang out of the row andfixed my eyes on the man who called me, and whose face was familiar. Afterthe parade and census Hahn told us that they had intended to send themall, but at the last moment the “monster with the scar” had decided onlyto take the old people and the rest of the sick. Afterwards we learntthat the change had been brought about by a cable from Berlin.Now there came a most egotistic and ugly relief of tension. We foundthat Hahn was telling the truth this time. The Gestapo men came backin the evening and called a number of persons, chiefly old people andpatients. Once again they noted something down beside each name as theyobserved the terrified faces. And we knew clearly who would be taken.When my parents were summoned I burst out weeping for the first timeafter many years. I do not know what happened in bygone times, butin our case we did not leave our parents alone even for a moment, mysisters, my brother-in-law and myself. We could not bear the thought thatthey would soon be lost to us forever, that they would soon die, stopbreathing, thinking, feeling. And they kissed us goodbye, while our tearsmingled. Suddenly I dashed to the attic as though possessed. It was stillpossible to climb over the roofs and escape. That was the last chance. Butour parents preferred to die rather than endanger our safety. I wanted toforce them to go, but my father threatened that he would shout or jumpfrom the roof... I never saw any man exercise such self-control. It washe who consoled us. My mother fainted but recovered after an injection,and was angry with my friend who gave it. How much she wanted todie among her kinsfolk, in our arms.At 9 a.m., 18th November, we had the terrible experience of parting fromthem when the men of the Council of Elders came with a list of thosesentenced to death. The death lorry was due to come in another hour.I could hear weak voices raised in lamentation. They were particularlyterrifying as they did not seem to come from this world. A last thought266THE KALISH BOOKoccurred of snatching an axe and bringing it down on the fat Germannecks and shaven skulls, splitting them so that their brains burst outeven if I fell and drowned in their blood. I turned giddy but somebodysupported me. I heard the sound of a motor and there the lorry was.We kissed for the last time, said a last word and looked at one another.Then they went. Now I was an orphan.I do not know how long I stood looking after the departing lorries andtheir convoy. I simply could not move but felt as though I were turnedto stone. My sister led me home. We passed the empty room of the HassidNeuhaus. He had left a soul light burning there before he went out, andhad covered the mirror with a white sheet. I fell weeping into my sister’sarms. I think those were the last tears I ever shed.There was a young girl named Malka Yakubovitch whose legs had beenparalysed for years. Now suddenly she rose from her bed by herself.Some people escaped over the roofs, Kalmanovitch and his wife hid inthe well in the courtyard. The Gestapo men fired warning shots andstruck all who came their way with their whips. That 18th November1941 cost us 127 victims, including 15 children from the orphanage. Fiveof the oldest girls and their director managed to escape at the last moment.That self-same day we were ordered to leave the house at 4, Szopena St.The keys were received by the criminal German policeman Puppe, who Ibelieve was remembered from the First World War. We were housed in thedwellings at 13, 16 and 18 POW St. which now stood empty, under guardby day and night, without knowing what was going to happen next. TheElders knew no more than we did. But on Saturday night 22nd Novemberthe last patrol left and did not return. On Sunday we began to arrangeour work at the shops, in order to go back to work next day.But early on the morning of the 1st December we were called to attentionby the gendarmes and found ourselves surrounded once again. Before weknew what had happened the murderers had burst into the dwellings andtook the families that had children up to the age of twelve, in accordancewith a list. They were accompanied by members of the Council of Elders.Within half an hour about a hundred people were loaded on two lorriesand taken off towards Kozminek. The gendarmes went back to their ownplace, having now done their job with perfect Prussian precision. Nobodyescaped. But we all felt at ease when we saw that these were ordinarylorries.Afterwards we found that the Council had known of this action severaldays in advance, but did not warn anybody for fear of their own fate andthat of their relatives. Yet this was also a death transport and all theyoung people were destroyed.By now each one of us was the solitary survivor of a big family, theonly person saved from a sunken ship. I was left with my younger sisterMadzia. The economical Gestapo decided that it was not worth their whileto bring the black lorry for a mere hundred persons, and therefore orderedthat they should be transferred to Kozminek where a major action wasto be carried out. Our people were forced into the firemen’s shed togetherwith the Kozminek victims, and taken out several days later in groupsTHE HOLOCAUST267of seventy by the black lorry. Here the Germans showed their full brutality.They smashed the weeping babies, whom the mothers left behind, againstthe sides of the lorry in order to enjoy the sight of the spurting bloodand brains.But there it was possible to escape by giving large bribes. The membersof the local Council of Elders bribed the gendarmes and saved themselvesat least. Still, several hundred Jews were killed, including a large numberof women, old people and babies. By a virtual miracle my sister, Dr.Devora Gross-Shinagel, with her husband and their child Jacob, were savedout of the Kalish people. When she told the guard that she was a doctorhe allowed her to leave, in sheer astonishment to find her among all these.There were only about a hundred and fifty of us left now and we werecrowded into two buildings, 13 and 16 POW St. Next day we went backto work as usual, as though nothing had happened meanwhile. The machineswhirred and the hammers banged in our struggle for life. So far wehad chiefly carried out the orders of private firms for clothes and shoes,and the Economic Department made a lot of profit on us. In the year1941 alone we provided them with several million Reichsmark. But to makeour work even more important, the Council now made desperate effortsto obtain military orders. These might secure our residence in Kalish.And they did succeed in obtaining a large order for sheets, gloves, leggingsof synthetic ramskin and high felt boots for the army. But these orderswere irregular, to our regret.Still, the Elders finally established contact with a big German industrialistfrom Berlin named Sannwald, who had had to cut down the productionof uniforms for the army because of a shortage of workers. He was happywhen we offered him our services, with the approval of the EconomicDepartment and other Municipal Authorities. After our first trial order ofseveral score uniforms proved satisfactory, Sannwald asked the DistrictGestapo for a permit to exploit our working capacity. We were anxiousthat he should make our shops part of his factory, take over the administra-tion and thus give them the status of a military supply factory. Wetherefore did our very best to make him feel satisfied with our workand finally learnt that his contract had been approved. We rejoiced, believingthat we now stood firmer.Weeks had passed and the young people who had been sent to Poznan werelong overdue. More than two months went by and they did not comeback. In addition the information in their letters described a worseningsituation. From January 1942 they had been sent to camps where theywere suffering from starvation and filth. They were working hard at landbetterment and road repairing, and their food was being steadily diminishedso that they did not have the strength to work. We gave up all hopeof seeing them. Then one day we were alarmed to hear that the “manwith the scar” had been seen again. The news was enough to empty thecamp of half its inhabitants. Many went to stay with Polish acquaintances.By day we set up many observation patrols. After three days we learntthat he had left town and the tension died down. Still, many families leftthe camp in order to find refuge in “safer” camps like Zdunska-Wola and268THE KALISH BOOKLask. (These were the Bloch, Bulka, and Lipshitz families, Mrs. Arkush,Mrs. Vishnievska and her children, etc.)Meanwhile work in the shops was expanding rapidly. Wornout uniformswere brought in heaps and piles. We had to disentangle them very cautiously,clean them, patch them and put them together again, so that they lookedlike new. Every seam, every stitch and the place of every button werecarefully measured. Everything had to be done with absolute precision.The newly-emptied halls were used for a special department for sortingand cleaning, which employed all the women without exception, the childrenabove twelve and all the men who did not know how to sew. The shoemakingshop was shut down as being less important, and everybody was put towork tailoring to increase production to a maximum. The one purposewas to please the capricious Berliner who held our fate in his hands. Heknew this and drove us without mercy. Now our task was to toil for theGerman Army day and night, and sometimes on Sundays. We gave allthe strength we had and even more, “all for the Wehrmacht!” That slogangave us and the people in Kozminek several more months of life. But badtidings reached us from the camps.During the Spring many of the young men died under the dreadful con-ditions of the Labour Camps near Posen, while some went out of theirminds. A few succeeded in escaping and reached our own camp. Theyused to walk at night, hiding in the forests by day. They were shadowsdressed in rags, and the tales they told were horrifying. Since they weretailors we managed to have them registered as coming from another ghetto.They were most obedient and did not behave like the rebellious Krize,Hela Moscowitch and Lola Yedvah, the former two of whom lost theirlives because of their rebelliousness. My younger sister Madzia Gross washanded over to the Gestapo on 26 March 1942, on a charge of collaborationwith the Polish Underground. Two gendarmes came to arrest her, thoughshe was ill. They said she was being taken for a brief interrogation butwe knew that we would never see her again. Polish acquaintances relatedthat she marched like a soldier, as though she had arrested the others.After the liberation many people related that they had found her signatureon one of the walls in the Lodz Ghetto Prison, for she was transferredthere and was sent on by the judges and policemen of Romkowsky, theruler of the Lodz Ghetto, who sent hundreds of “saboteurs” like her tothe Chelmno Death Camp near Kolo almost every day.We knew that sooner or later we would be sent to camps or killed, forwe could feel that the attitude of the Germans was changing for the worse.This became plain after their first defeats along the South-East front. Wewere going to have to pay for the victory of the Russians at Stalingrad.If we heard German being spoken or the roaring of a lorry engine ourhearts would cease beating and the blood would freeze in our veins. Wefelt that the sooner they came to finish us off the better. In spite of thiswe were happy every day to know that we had lived one day, one hour,one minute longer. All we hoped was to be allowed to sleep on till themorning.Toward the end of May 1942 our camp was again surrounded by theTHE HOLOCAUST269gendarmes who took away several dozen men who were fit for work. Thecamps in Poznan were emptying too fast on account of the high mortality,and the losses had to be made good.At this point I decided it was time for me to escape at all costs. Imanaged to get to one of the vacated houses, climbed a high fence andhid under the stairs of a ruinous cellar in a neighbouring house. ThereI found our shoemaker, Bendet Rohr. We put branches in front of the entry,but heard leaves rustling and twigs being crushed. We made a dash for thenext fence. I believe that shots were fired after us, but we reached thethird garden, belonging to Dobrowolski. We were separated from the streetby a little wicket-gate, and parted from one another. Strolling sedately soas not to attract attention I walked along the streets to the house at 15Ciasna St. where I had been born and lived for seventeen years. My formerneighbour, Mrs. Zofia Lewandowska, hid me in the cellar, where I spentseveral hours. In the evening I went back to the camp, after the selectionhad been made.Next day the only sign of a change was that a few dozen machineswere not working and a few hearts mourned at fresh bereavements. But themachines that were working speeded up in order to make good the with-drawal of forty workers. We were now 120 in all.During the hot days of June 1942 we learnt from bribed German officialsthat we were to be sent first to Kozminek and then to the Warsaw Ghetto.We went on working, but the work was no longer any good. Sannwaldvented his fury on the terrified foremen. We had to repair every defectafter our working hours and on Sundays. Yet in spite of his fury, Sannwalddid his best to ensure that we should be left in Kalish; in his own interestas well as our own.THE ENDOn the hot morning of July 8th 1942 I took the uniform which I wasto pick apart by noon and set out to work on the roof of the low woodenhut, in order to avoid breathing the dust which rose from the clothes asthey were picked apart. Suddenly an unusual movement in the courtyardattracted my attention. I looked towards the field. The gendarmes had notarrived there yet. A single leap and I would be free, but I remembered mylast remaining sister above in the workshop. I slipped down into thecourtyard, not seeing what was going on or paying any attention, arrivedupstairs within a few seconds and dashed into our room, thrusting asideall who came my way. But my sister was no longer there. A neighbourtold me that at the very last moment she, her husband Artur and two-year-old child Jacob (the last child in the camp, whom we had succeeded inhiding until now from the gendarmes) had managed to get away and find arefuge with a Christian family opposite, at No. 18 POW St. I looked outof the window, saw the curtain move in the room opposite me and saw mysister’s tearful face.I was down in the street within a few moments, and because I had nobelongings with me and was not even properly dressed the gendarme assumedthat I lived in a different house and let me pass to No. 16. I dashed into270THE KALISH BOOKthe corridor, dashed up to the attic and shifted a cupboard to reach a well-camouflaged entry in the wall, which led into the attic in the next house,No. 18. The entry had been made in the previous November. Now I forcedmy way through it with difficulty and found myself in the now Aryan house.But I had to cross a big courtyard to reach the apartment where my sisterhad taken refuge. Luckily it was empty.I ran across but in the corridor I found the way blocked by Schultz theshoemaker, a Volksdeutsch whom I knew well. My entreaties did not help.A gendarme appeared promptly. Still I managed to scurry away and escape.I believe he shot after me but I was very quickly back in the camp. ThenI realised that there was no way out. I could not reach my sister. If Itook a single careless step the gendarmes would find her. Even if I shouldreach her, it was very doubtful if there would be any room for me as wellwith my distinctly Jewish appearance. So I had to stay where I was andhide until the fury had passed over. I had to change my tactics.At this point I heard the yells of the gendarmes: “Alle austreten!” (Allout!). I dashed into the corridor where my companions were standing arguingfuriously. “Don’t waste a second. Follow me!” A few of them did so.And within a few moments we were back in the attic. After a briefconsultation we decided to get out onto the roof, cross three more roofsin succession and hide in the attic of the third house. After that we wouldsee. There were five of us: Haniek Blashkovsky and his wife Esther,Schwarzbard, Yulek Volkovitch and his wife Marisha Zeidel, and I. First wegot the women onto the roof, wiped out all the traces and then followed.We crawled over the glowing surface so as not to be seen. Finally wereached the entry into the last attic of the Aryan house and forced the coveroff. Slowly and furtively we slipped down and crowded against the darkestcomer where the roof met the wall. The walls and roof-beams were all dryand the slightest careless movement could start them creaking. So welay pressed against one another, listening to our hearts beating. The onlything that disturbed the silence was the buzzing of the flies and the yellingof the gendarmes which reached us from the distance.The clock in the Municipality Tower rang 11. A motor suddenly startedroaring. I cautiously crept to the low attic window. Startled swallowsflew away from their nests. I scattered dust on the panes and then ap-proached. These were not the death lorries but ordinary ones. The peopleof the last group were being pushed onto them. I could recognise acquaint-ances. They were not alarmed because they had been promised that theywere being taken to Lodz. When the lorry left my heart pounded in grief,knowing that I would never see them again.Back with the others the women were weeping. What would happen tous? Where would we find a hiding place? We could not stay here, wherenobody would lend us a hand. Nobody was going to risk his own safetyfor us. The women began to regret having come. They wanted to go backto their kinsfolk. And we were particularly worried about Esther, whowas ill and was expecting to give birth to a child any time. Still shedisplayed astounding courage and calmness. It grew hotter and hotter. Itbecame hard to breathe. We did not feel hungry though we had eatenTHE HOLOCAUST271nothing since thenight before; but we were very thirsty, and had not theslightest idea how much longer we might have to crouch where was were.Suddenly the rusty lock creaked and the wooden door of the atticopened. A young woman came in carrying a basket. The others looked atme. I was the closest and knew what they meant. If she should noticeus we would have to hold her, cover her mouth and tie her up until wegot away. But the young Volksdeutsch woman quietly put the basket inplace, undid the rope covering it and went off. And the hours continued tocrawl by until at last darkness fell and it became a little cooler. That waswhat saved us, for we were on the verge of collapse. Yulek and I proposedto go over to the empty house and fetch water, food and some clothes.But we had to give up the idea for fear of waking up the housefolk whilecrawling. Apart from that the guards of the Voluntary Fire Brigade mightobserve us, since they used to go round the abandoned dwellings stealingwhatever they could.At six o’clock in the morning, when the workers in the neighbouringfactory went home after the night shift, we would leave our hiding-place,we decided. Each of us would go separately for safety purposes. Maybesome of us would be lucky. When the clock struck we looked at one anotherfor the last time, and broke down the door with a joint effort. A momentlater I was standing at the gate of the house and slowly took a few dozensteps. When a group of workers passed me I made a dash for the fieldsand for freedom.I afterwards learnt that the Germans had told the truth for the first timeand had not deceived us. All the camp folk had been concentrated for thetime being in the empty mill which had formerly belonged to Reich andChmielnicki. Next day they were all placed on the train and taken to theLodz Ghetto, either 136 or 146 Jews in all. And that was the last transportin the history of Kalish Jewry. It took place on 9th July 1942. Just beforethe train started the two sisters Klein, pupils at the Orphanage, appearedat the station. They had run away from the Poznan camps and returnedto Kalish at that moment, and willingly joined the deportees for lack of anyalternative. Henyek Blaszkowski and his wife of our five did the same.They too had no alternative, for Esther was about to have a child andalready found it hard to walk.The other couple, Yulek Wolkowitch and Marisha Seidel, arrived at Wartaon foot, and after resting there for a few days proceeded to the Zdunska-Wola ghetto. But the whole of that ghetto was transferred to Lodz soonafter. “All of them” means the handful who were left after the terribleslaughter which took place there first, when almost all the Jews in thecamp were cut down by machinegun.During the transportation of Kalish Isidor Wiszniewski also ran away butwas unlucky. A few days later he was handed over to the Gestapo, but hisnumerous gendarme acquaintances saved his life and he was sent to Lodz.I was, I believe, the last Jew left in Kalish. I spent a fortnight in the homeof Polish acquaintances, first with Mr. Josef Jaworowicz and then withAntoni Pawelski, who risked their lives and unhesitatingly lent me a fraternalhand in my distress.272THE KALISH BOOKTwo days after the last transportation Mr. Pawelski told me that mysister was no longer in the apartment where she had taken refuge, andthat all the Jews were still in the Kalish area. I set out to Kozminek onfoot, to find out what was going on. No one recognised me on the way, andhere I found that the Ghetto had already been removed. For a moment Ientered the home of a Polish acquaintance, hoping that my sister was sittingthere. While I was eating the food she brought me a Volksdeutsch postmanentered the house. It seems that somebody had recognised me in the streetand sent him there after me. I did not have the strength to run away, andwas taken to the Gendarme station.Here I pretended to be a fool and told Wachman that I had come fromKalish to look for my family. Our Ghetto had been transferred only yesterday,so I had come here to join my kinsfolk. The fat Prussian shook his head,not knowing what to do with me. He could have killed me, but why botherfor a single Jew? He looked at me dreamily, but suddenly woke up. Heangrily ordered me to go to the Warta Ghetto. But I preferred to returnto Kalish, hoping to find my sister. There I learnt that she had beenhanded over in her hiding-place, and had apparently been sent on to Lodzwith the others. What was I to do next? Reporting to the Gestapo meantdeath, for they were not going to send a single Jew to Lodz under guardwhen one bullet could do the business.Besides, I did not believe that they had really been sent to Lodz. Myfriend Antoni Pawelski advised me to proceed to the General Governmentarea and try to cross one of the fronts there, or wait in one of the ghettosfor the time being until the front approached. But this seemed impossibleto me too, since I had no money. All I had was thirty Reichsmark, a tornshirt and trousers and an old pair of shoes. My Polish friend Josef Jaworowiczgave me an overcoat and hat.To me it seemed preferable to go to Germany and work as a Pole. As Ihad no documents, Mr. Pawelski found me a temporary refuge with acquaint-ances in Piwonice. For two days I remained hidden in the barn until Icould bear it no longer, and went back to Kalish to find out what hadhappened. It turned out that Poles were not being sent to work in Germanyat the time. Now I began wandering from Piewnice to Kalish and backevery day, rather than lie hidden and tense. The Pawelskis encouraged meas best they could and tried their hardest to get me Aryan papers. I doubtwhether I could have held out had it not been for them. Besides, in thebarn at Piwonice there was a danger at any moment that one of the farm-workers might come and take hay for the animals and discover me. Iwalked by day when people were going to work, and I carried a bottle ofcoffee and some sandwiches in my hand as though I were going to theworks as well.One day a gendarme came walking round the street comer so suddenly thatI was caught unprepared. I slowly strolled past him without looking in hisdirection and went on without changing direction. At the road-block Istopped, glanced in boredom at my watch and turned into the neighbouringstreet. Mrs. Pawelska saw this from her window and told me afterwardsTHE HOLOCAUST273that the German had turned his head to watch me and stood there doubtfullyfor quite a while.At night it was safer in the village, for searches were being conductedunceasingly in town. But one night the farm-woman told me in alarm thatI could not stay because she was afraid that the gendarmes would be comingthere in connection with the arrest of her husband. I remembered thatfive kilometres away there was a peasant I knew in Liss village. But herefused to give my any help, and I spent the night in the fields.The woman who allowed me to stay in her place did not know I was aJew, otherwise she would not have let me remain for a single moment.So I made up all kinds of stories for her with the aid of Mr. Pawelski.As far as she knew I was the son of one of the rebels who had met hisdeath in Auschwitz together with her husband.By this time I was on the verge of collapse, but still I wanted to go onliving. Now I spent weeks hidden in the high pile of hay. Searches werebeing conducted everywhere. I counted on a last chance. It was rumouredthat the arrests and searches in Kalish had stopped on the Friday. I washoping for Mr. Pawelski’s visit, since the convoy would be leaving thefollowing day. And this time I was right. At about noon on 18th July 1942he arrived. The Polish transportees to Germany were leaving that day andwe must not lose a moment. I had to leave at once. And on the way wediscussed the plan of action. I had no documents, so I had to try to stealinto the convoy. We went back to Kalish through the fields and reachedthe railway station through side streets.The station was swarming with secret police. I stopped in front of thetime-table as though I was studying it. Meanwhile Mr. Pawelski broughtme a platform ticket and shook my hand for the last time. I tried to thankhim for his generosity and the brotherhood he had shown me, but he wouldnot let me do so. Be careful! A plainclothes man approached. Once again Ibent down to tie up my shoelace, and when he passed I went through to theplatform.It really was the last moment. A group of displaced Poles, men, women andchildren, were approaching bringing any amount of luggage with them. Isized up the situation in the twinkling oi an eye and ran over to one womanin order to offer her my help. I swung up a heavy sack of her belongingson my shoulder and marched along with all the rest towards the carriage.A fleshy German belonging to the Arbeitsamt (Labour Office) countedpeople off: “Thirty-five, thirty-six.” All my bones were quivering... “Thirty-seven...” and I was inside the carriage.The engine whistled and the train started out. The peasant women wept Thepeasants dropped their shaven heads in nervous worry. It was hard todepart from the beloved homeland, the village where they were born, thecabins and their own land, their own soil, where they had grown up andstruck root. I could share their grief, who better than I?I approached the window. Mr. Pawelski was stading in the doorway of thewaiting-room. His face showed how happy he was. We had succeeded. Hewaved his hand, but surely could not have believed that he would ever see me...jr?"i.■■•. '■ * >274 THE KALISH BOOKagain. He vanished from my eyes, but remains firmly engraved in my ever-grateful memory.Darkness began to descend. The wheels span faster and faster. The trainbegan speeding up, forging ahead into the grey distance. I was going toGermany for a fresh contest with my fate, to go on struggling bitterlyfor life.Lodzi, 26th March 1947The Ghetto — 4, Shopen Street.THE HOLOCAUST275WOLF LASSMANKALISH, KOZMINEK AND THE CAMPSAs soon as the War broke out on 1st September 1939, about three-quartersof the Jewish population left Kalish, dispersing in all directions. My twobrothers and I also fled to Leszno but had to return because the Germansadvanced so fast that they cut us off. Others came back after the surrenderof Warsaw, but a small proportion proceeded to Russia.The Germans were rumoured to have entered Kalish on 6th. September.When I came back on the 21st., Kalish was empty and like a city of thedead. Everything was closed and locked but most of the shops had beenlooted. Many Jews had already been shot. I heard that when the Germansentered the town they surrounded several Jewish streets, drove the Jewsout of their beds in their night clothes, ordered them to run in circlesand then practised shooting at them for several hours. After that thosewho survived were sent home. Rut many bodies were left in the streets.Jews were allowed in the streets until 6 p.m. If a Jew with a beardappeared it was promptly cut off, often with pieces of skin as well. At thistime the Germans were sending the Jews to the filthiest kinds of work,beating them murderously on the way.In due course Jews began to open their grocery shops. There was nohunger as yet but they lived in dreadful fear, feeling that they were captivesin the hands of savage beasts. Early in November, 1939, the Germans suddenlycut off Gornoslonska Street, broke into the Jewish houses, ordered themto take some household linen, pillows, food, etc., and leave their homes atonce. They were first taken to the Market Square and were afterwardsdriven into the large Market Building there. More than 2,000 Jews weredriven there on the first day. A hundred were separated and taken to theTown Hall shelter. They included lawyers, industrialists, merchants andphysicians, and were cross-examined about the hiding-places of gold, silverand jewelry. The Germans also demanded that they hand over all valuablesthey possessed. Then each one was taken to a dark room, a blanket wasflung over him and he was beaten till he was insensible. No food or waterwas given to them. Two days later they were brought back to the MarketBuilding.A total of about 10,000 people were finally crowded in there. In due coursesome food was provided. The building was surrounded with barbed wireand placed under S.S. guard.One day the Germans took the writer Flinker into the market place andsimply cut him to pieces. His household help had told the Germans thatshe had heard him cursing Hitler. After he had been tortured to death shetook possession of his home and belongings.A few Jews managed to escape from the building. The only question was —where could they go? They were being kidnapped and expelled everywhere.But most decided that there was no point in trying to run away. A dreadful•V276THE KALISH BOOKepidemic of typhoid began in the Market Building, and killed off hundredsof people. Only after this did the Germans remove people from the Building,sending one transport to Lechow and another to Rembertow near Warsaw.After the first set of Market Building inmates had been removed, otherJews were caught and sent there.The remainder made the mistake of hoping that now they would be leftalone. But the Germans promptly began transporting the second 10,000.Then they began kidnapping more Jews and concentrating them there onceagain. By the end of 1939 almost all the Jews of the City had been expelled.It was announced that any person with more than 10 Reichsmark in hispossession would be executed. The Jews got rid of all their possessions,their gold, their jewelry and their valuables. Very few risked keepinganything for themselves. The only Jews remaining in the city were theHospital patients and staff and a handful of unskilled workers. Somewhatlater tailors were selected in order to establish a tailor's workshop.A few weeks later the Germans sent all the hospital patients in thedirection of Grochow. On the way they were gassed to death and flung intocommon graves. After this expulsion the Germans collected parcels for thepatients among the Jews of Kalish. Later one of the tailors recognisedhis father's fur coat, which an S.S. man brought him to be made over.The Germans gathered all the belongings of the 30,000 expelled Jews inlarge warehouses. They sold the less valuable goods to the Polish populationfor next to nothing, took the best for themselves and sent the rest toGermany.KozminekTHE HOLOCAUST277While the Jews were concentrated in the Market Square before transporta-tion the Poles stood around and watched. Some of them asked S.S. men totake bundles away from the Jews for them. Polish girls asked the Germansto take rings from the fingers of Jewish women for their sakes, and theGermans obliged them. A few families succeeded in running away. Togetherwith my father and two brothers I got away to Brzezyny near Kalish, wherewe met the Greenbaum family with 6 members. We all worked a fortnightfor Marr the Volksdeutsch. But one day all the Jews in the neighbourhoodwere collected and sent to Kozminek, about 20 kilometres from Kalish.At the time Kozminek was still an Open Ghetto, where people were packedtogether like sardines. But we did not starve because we could buy food fromthe villages. The Ghetto was conducted by a Judenrat and there was aJewish Ordnungsdienst (Police). Haftke was placed in charge of the JewishLabour Office and afterwards became notorious for his cruelty to his fellow-Jews.Meanwhile the Jews of the Kalish District had almost all been liquidatedor transported elsewhere. My family and I registered for work at the OpatowekCivilian Labour Camp 11 kilometres away. There we were employed inwork like unloading coal, cleaning drains and ditches, making roads, etc.,being sent out in groups when called for by various German factories.We were housed at the former Elementary School. Our daily rationincluded 330 grammes of bread and two plates of soup a day. From time totime we were given a piece of horse-meat. As a rule we had to worktwelve hours a day, but we were often compelled to continue until late atnight, and had to begin working at 7 a.m. as usual next morning.The situation rapidly grew far worse. The overseers began beating us andwe began to feel hunger. Then we stole coal and sent it to the KozminekGhetto, and they sent us bread in return. We also stole potatoes. In manycases those who were carrying the stolen goods were caught and murderouslythrashed. But nothing could prevent us from stealing, because that was theonly way to obtain food. Otherwise we would all have perished of starvation.Early in 1940 the Germans began transporting Jews from Kozminek toother Camps. When the unspeakable German Gett was appointed supervisorof the whole District our situation became absolutely intolerable, and wecould feel that our days were numbered. Things went on like this, rumourfollowing rumour, persecution growing steadily worse, until March 1941.Suddenly we saw one day that the Ghetto had been surrounded. There wasnowhere to hide. Gestapo and S.S. units burst into the Ghetto and drove Jewsinto the Synagogue courtyard. They drove the weak, the ill, the old peopleand the children and any one else to whom they took a dislike into theSynagogue. But anybody could be released for money. Haftke released peopleas he liked. He went through the Jewish homes, brought out those in hidingand took them to the Synagogue.Black lorries then came and the sick, weak and children were loaded onthem, to a total of about 150 in each, so that many were choked while theywere being loaded on. Mothers climbed into the lorries themselves, refusingto be separated from their children. By the time those lorries passed Opotowek278THE KALISH BOOKnothing could be heard from them but occasional moans, for all the peoplehad already been choked. Poison gas was used in them to kill off the people,and the bodies were emptied out and burnt. When Jews in Opatowek sawthe lorries passing they ran after them wailing bitterly. The S,S. men shotat their legs while the overseers beat them mercilessly. This action lastedthree days while the lorries removed about 1,500, as I saw with my owneyes in Kozminek.After this many Jews ran away to Warsaw and Lodz, believing there wasa better chance of surviving in the large Jewish concentrations. MeanwhileGett the District Commissioner came to the Ghetto every day wih a gang ofdrunken Gestapo men. At night they drove the Jews naked from theirdwellings, forced them to run through the streets and beat them murderously.Occasionally they brought pretty Jewish girls to the Gendarmerie station,violated them all night long, then beat them early in the morning anddrove them into the streets naked.Jews were dying off like flies, starving to death. They were replaced byothers. After the terrible action of Kozminek there was no food availableany longer for the others at Opatowek, and it was clear that the days ofboth Camps were numbered.In May 1941 orders were given that all residents of Opatowek shouldprepare to leave. Jews from another labour camp were also brought andwe were about 300 in all. On that day 30 peasant carts reached the Campand we were carried off to Kalish, where we were forced into six railwaycarriages and brought to Poznan. There we were received by representativesof private factories. We were divided into two groups, and the second groupof about 150 Jews was sent to Schwanningen which belonged to the GermanLabour Front. There we were taken to a Camp containing two large barracks.It was surrounded by a barbed wire fence and had a special guard. Wehad to fetch straw before we were given food, and had to move at thedouble. When we returned each two of us had to carry back a load ofstraw weighing 150 kilogrammes in our hands, under a hail of mercilessblows. Then we were summoned for the first parade and informed: “Youhave come here to work and obey orders. Anyone who does not obey willbe hung. So will every saboteur. You will be beaten for every breach ofdiscipline.,, Our group was then divided into 10 units.Though we were forbidden to speak to Polish workers who were employedwith us, they soon told us that Jews had already been here, and had beenstarved by the Germans and then sent to Konin where they were destroyedand their bodies given to the “Reiff” Soap Factory.We had to work at hard labour 10 to 12 hours a day, on 300 grammes ofbread and 2 mouthfuls of water. Within a fortnight one Jew ran away andwas followed by 5 more, several days later. The regime then became evenmore severe, and close guard was kept over us at work. We were not allowedto rest at all, but had to work bowed down and might not raise our heads.We were kept separate from the Polish workers.After much searching the Germans caught the six Jews who had run away.The first one was placed in a hot disinfection oven “in order to fry there”.THE HOLOCAUST279There was only a scorched black skeleton to be removed. The Germansallowed the other five to die easily, all of them being hung. One of themsaid in the eyes of all present: “We are innocent and the German murdererswill pay for all this!” A Gestapo man shot him and his corpse was hungup as well.Now the overseers thought up a new game at work. They would place aJew in a little cart, cover him with sand, wheel him to some abyss andempty him out. The poor fellow tumbled down the slope breaking all hislimbs and perishing in agony. Those who died while falling were the luckyones. We were compelled to watch. Often a Jew would be covered up tothe neck in sand and left to perish. Koemer the German overseer wasparticularly murderous, and was the one who organised these “Jewish” gamesas he called them.After three months at the Camp we were absolutely exhausted. TheGermans selected 60 Jewish “Mussalmen” — people who were to weak to doany work — and sent them to the Soap Factory at Konin. Only a handfulwere left, and we were sure that we were going the same way. Instead,200 other Jews were brought to the Camp. One Jew succeeded in escapingfrom Konin. He was caught, brought to our Camp for execution but was keptin detention for several days. The Jewish camp attendants who broughthim his food learnt from him that after Jews had been gassed to death inthe whole region, their bodies were brought to the Soap Factory. He himselfwas hung.One winter night all the camp heads made a party to celebrate theGerman victories at the Front. At midnight the Camp Heads and theGestapo men burst into our huts and drove the Jews out naked, making usrun across the snow and beating us murderously. Then the Germans linedup on either side of the entry to the tents. We were ordered to return andthey made us run the gauntlet, killing eight Jews. One was first flung intoa pit and afterwards dragged out and tied to a telephone pole, at a tem-perature of minus 30 degrees Centigrade. He froze to death. Czekala, Chiefof the guard, who was a savage sadist, took the lead in all this.The searches conducted when entering the Camp were a chapter in them-selves. If a Jew was found bringing anything in his number was noted downand he was tried on parade, the usual sentence being 50 strokes on thenaked body. The Germans used damp rubber whips which cut up the victim'sflesh. The victim was then placed in an unheated but hermetically sealeddisinfection oven, where he choked to death.One evening in July 1942 we were ordered to leave with our bundles.We were called out on parade at 11 p.m. and left standing until dawn, whenwe saw that the Camp was surrounded by S.S. men and Gestapo. Therewere then about 500 of us in the Camp.About 60 armed Germans led us to the railway station, where almost 60goods waggons were on the line. We heard groans and moans and humanshadows peeped out from time to time through the tiny barred windows.Four additional waggons were coupled on and we were loaded into them.But the train did not take us in the direction of Konin as we expected.iil > -p ' £••. V,-. ...;— '- - r-■, -■' ■1™- • r1'n’<J V ••'wV4'■ i■ ;;The Synagogue in KozminekWe journeyed for six days and six nights without food or water. Of the2,000 Jews in the train many perished.In due course the train stopped and we were ordered to get out withinten minutes, leaving our belongings behind. The survivors were arrangedin groups of five. Three S.S. officers made a selection, the healthy to thisside and the others to that. About 600 men were selected, loaded on lorriesand carried off to a Camp. At first we did not know where we were butlater we found out that we were in Auschwitz. The others were taken offto Birkenau.We found people dressed in what looked like pyjamas. This we did notunderstand. We knew that there was a mass extermination of the Jews goingon, so how could they suddenly be walking round like that?Now we were conducted into a transit hut where we stripped and wentout naked through another door. There we were left standing all nightuntil 8 a.m. It was cold and raining. The Kapos of the neighbouring hutmocked us, threw stones at us, poured water over us, etc. In the morningour heads were clipped and we were taken for delousing. Then we were alsogiven similar pyjamas and wooden clogs. Now we understood that thestripes meant that we were in a Concentration Camp. We were then conductedto Quarantine Bock No. 30, which already contained about 3,000 people.We went up to the attic where each man was given his piece of bread.Thereafter a new life in a real Concentration Camp began. We were noti’HE HOLOCAUST281sent to work but were tortured with parades, and had to stand with kneesbent for three hours before the parade. Anybody who fell was beatenunconscious. Bread was brought in huge baskets. Each man had to approachand take a piece of bread without looking in. The moment the man's handclosed on the bread he would be hit over the head. Often enough he wouldreceive the blows but not the bread, and was left to starve all day long.They kept us busy doing drill accompanied by beatings. Dozens of people diedevery day.One day the authorities began to select men for work outside. Everybodytried to think up a suitable occupation and look as young and healthy aspossible. About 300 men were selected including my father, my two brothersand myself. There could be no greater good fortune than to have the wholefamily leave together.FROM THE RINGELBLUM ARCHIVESKALISH IN AUGUST 1939 AND AFTERIn August 1939 the public became clearly aware that war was inevitable.This led to greater excitement and all kinds cf preparations. The Poles wereimbued with a spirit of patriotism and displayed their readiness to defendtheir Fatherland. General mobilisation was proclaimed and preparations began.In Kalish the local Jews were convinced of the justice of the cause of thosewho were defending themselves. As War grew closer the relations betweenPoles and Jews improved, for they knew they had a common enemy and aunited popular front had to be set up against him. The anti-Semitic pro-paganda of the Polish Endeks almost ceased. While the Poles knew howpowerful the German enemy was, they felt they could rely on the spirit oftheir own soldiers.The fate of the Jews was also bound up with the War, for the attitudeof the Germans towards Jewry was familiar. They also knew that theGermans were encouraging the Endeks and their anti-Semitic activities.The conscious sections of the Jewish population had condemned the FascistRegime of the Third Reich. A defeated Germany would certainly improvethe position of Polish Jews.They all believed in victory, and this led to the consolidation of thepatriotic Front in Poland. But events moved fast. There were provocationson the frontiers, incidents in Danzig, and the mobilisation. A whole series ofyear-groups were called back to the army, and the Kalish groups began togrow. The barracks were too small to hold all the mobilised men, so theywere placed in schools, cinemas, Government buildings, etc. The City beganto look like a military camp.Tension increased steadily when the German Soviet Agreement becameknown and general mobilisation was proclaimed. The military authoritiesresolved to dig trenches and erect barbed wire barricades. Civilians weremobilised for these tasks and responded with devotion. Groups of civiliansmarched out of town with flags, accompanied by bands. The Jewish population282THE KALISH BOOKtook a very active part in all this. Various organisations like the Bund,Betar and Maccabi mobilised their members and marched under slogans like:“Jewish workers are digging a Grave for Hitlerism.” Jews also dug sheltersin town against air attack. There could be no doubt that as soon as militaryaction began the city would be bombed. The Air-Raid Precautions Com-mittee recommended that women and children should be sent to neigh-bouring small towns and villages, and a special office was opened by theTown Council for evacuating the population.These instructions caused much excitement in the town. Everybody under-stood that it was necessary to leave quickly. The rumour that the Govern-ment Archives had been taken out of the town increased the commotion.Long files of people began to stand at the offices of the P.K.O. (PolishSaving Bank), made up of people who wished to withdraw their savings andkeep them in spot cash. People on holiday came back in alarm from theholiday and rest resorts. The prices of travelling-bags, baskets and casesbegan to rise. The railway station was thronged. Only really well-to-dopeople could hire lorries and taxis. People were packing their belongingseverywhere and setting out on their wanderings to find a safe place.Towards the end of August the stream of refugees from the city began toincrease, as long caravans of peasant waggons full of evacuees from thefrontier villages began to reach the town. The peasants loaded whateverthey could on the waggons, put their cattle out and began moving eastwards.Now even the poorest left the town, moving with their knapsacks on theirbacks towards Lodz, Warsaw and other towns lying to the east. Nobodyconsidered whether he was doing the right thing. There was a general panicand flight.Three-quarters of the population left the city during those days before theWar.12.7.1941.From Kalish to WarsawThe events of September led to a general flight, absolutely confused,without any consideration or preparation. People went off without belongings,in their morning suits, without overcoats. Everybody could feel that anotherhour in Kalish was as good as destruction.The following fact indicates how nervous and terrified the townsfolkwere. My mother, my younger brother and I went to acquaintances in themorning to take advice. The streets were quiet. Most of the shops wereclosed and a large part of the Jews were already detained in the MarketBuilding. Our acquaintances had already finished packing and were aboutto go to the railway, where the train was due to leave in twenty minutestime. Without further consideration we decided to join them, although wehad nothing with us. We entrusted our apartment with everything in it toa Christian neighbour, a blacksmith’s wife with whom we were on goodneighbourly relations. She promised us that if we had to go away she wouldsend our belongings on to wherever was necessary. In due course she tookeverything herself and claimed that the Germans had expropriated the lot.THE HOLOCAUST283The Railway Station was packed full. The trains could not contain all thepassengers. Jews waited, grew nervous, were apprehensive about new excessesthat might occur at any moment. They climbed onto the steps and thefenders of the carriages. The carriages themselves were packed and choking.Everybody was standing. Yet they began to feel more at ease. As soon asthe train began to move they breathed easily. They were outside the cityat last.The train stopped at Sieradz and Zdunska Wola. Jews were standing ingroups and also wanted to travel. Their faces were stamped with fear,anxiety and grief because they could not join us. In Lodz we had to waitseveral hours for the train that left for Warsaw. Here as well there weremasses of Jews from Lodz and other cities and small towns. They couldfeel what a long time it was, for they wished to escape after all that hadhappened to them. The yellow badges they wore gave the Germans reasonto mock and torment them. They expelled all the Jews from the waitingroom at night, and ordered them to crowd together on the platform. Theyarranged them all in a long column and ordered them to open their bundlesand bags for inspection. When the Jews obeyed the Germans moved frombundle to bundle, taking whatever they liked the look of. Anybody whodaved to object was beaten mercilessly, including women.When the train arrived at last the Germans put all the Jews in one placeand kept them there until the Poles were all on board. One minute beforedeparture they made the Jews run to two goods waggons that were hitchedonto the train. The crowding and confusion were indescribable. People trodon one another. There were terrifying shrieks. Families were split up,children were left without parents, and many lost all their belongings. Whenthe train started out at last, half the Jews were left at the Station, notknowing what to do and cursing the day they were born. The Germansenjoyed themselves, mocking the barbarous Jews who did not know how tobehave quietly like civilized people.Thoroughly dejected the passengers arrived at Koluszki, where we had toget off and wait for the Warsaw train. This was the Frontier Station betweenthe areas that had been annexed by the Reich and the General Governmentof Poland. Thousands of Jews were walking nervously up and down theplatform, looking out for the train. Between Lodz and Koluszki the Jewshad removed the yellow badge, hoping that they would not have to wearit any more. But they were wrong. The Germans at once saw how manyJews there were at the Station and went on tormenting as before. TheGerman railway workers took them all to one spot, beating and cursingthem for removing the badge. The Jews swiftly put it on again, but it didnot help. The Germans had decided to torture them. There was* one youngGerman who walked up and down in front of the terrified Jews as theytrembled there and pushed them about, saying all the time: ‘‘These cursedJews.” Suddenly he stopped and ordered them all to repeat together atthe top of their voices: “We wanted War.” The Jews obeyed.The Polish passengers gathered round, laughed and did their best to showthe Germans how much they appreciated these tricks. One of the Polesoffered to translate the German's orders into Polish. The young German felt284THE KALISH BOOKencouraged and went on inventing torments. He ordered all the Jews whohad served in the Polish Army to take one pace forward. About fifteen menor so advanced. The German arranged them in two rows and rebuked themfor having shot at German soldiers. Then he began to drill them, orderingthem to fall and stand, and helped them obey by kicking them. Then hecommanded them to pick up their bundles, cases and knapsacks and madethem run a hundred metres along the railway tracks. Many of them stumbledand fell. Before the train left the Germans again “inspected” the baggage,and took whatever they wanted.When the Jews finally forced their way into the Warsaw train they moanedwith relief. People climbed through the windows and climbed onto the roofs.Weary and exhausted they reached the Warsaw terminus late at night. Apartfrom the many Jews the Station was full of peasants and food hawkers,who had brought supplies from near and far. Everybody waited for themorning. Then they went into town to search for a refuge and some wayof earning a living.23.8.1941.The Jews In Kalish from September to November 1939.Early in October anti-Jewish measures began to increase. Until then thesituation had not been too bad. When the Jews returned from their wanderingsthey also returned to their former occupations, operating the workshops,opening their shops, and things were almost as they had been. As massesof German soldiers passed through Kalish there was a great increase inbusiness, particularly in cafes and restaurants. The Jewish pastry-cooks andcake-shops worked hard and made plenty of profit.The German character of the town became steadily more clear. All Polishsigns were removed and replaced by others in German. The streets weregiven German names. Photographs of Hitler began to appear in shop windows,and swastikas fluttered everywhere. The Polish population swiftly adapteditself to the new conditions, and many Poles set out to prove to the Germansthat they were even prepared to run ahead of them in some respects. Manyshop windows began to display not only swastikas and portraits of Hitlerand Goering but also notices: “Aryan business”, or “Jews not admitted”,whereas formerly they had merely written: “Christian business.”By the 10th. September, in some mysterious fashion, an old Endek pre-Election propaganda sheet was strung across a cross-roads. It read: “Kalishwithout Jews.”As soon as the Germans entered Kalish they arrested many of the Jewsand Poles who remained in town. Five or six weeks later these Jews returnedand described how they had been taken to various towns in Germany andexhibited to the population with the explanation: “These are Jewish swinewho shot at German soldiers.”When the town was occupied German soldiers confiscated all kinds ofgoods from Jewish and Polish shops alike, particularly cotton goods. Graduallyorders began to appear which affected Jews alone. An orders was publishedthat Hitler flags were to be removed from all Jewish houses. GermanTHE HOLOCAUST285officers had already confiscated all the goods from the Jewish shops. Furniturewas taken from the dwellings. Many shopkeepers and apartment owners wereordered to vacate their premises within a few hours or even a few minutes,and German or Polish families took them over. The whole appearance ofthe town changed within a few days.So did the external appearance of Kalish Jews. Before the War many hadcontinued to wear the traditional Jewish garb, beards and earlocks, kapotaand Jewish cap. Now these disappeared. Everybody wore either ordinarycaps or hats. After the many cases in which beards and earlocks had beenripped from the faces of the Jews by German soldiers, there were scarcelyany beards to be seen.One day the Germans ordered that all Jewish shops must display aplacard of a standard size containing the word: JUDE. On 10th. October theGermans ordered the establishment of a “Council of Elders of the JewishCommunity.” However, none of the former leaders were left in town, sothe Governor of Kalish summoned Hahn the Cantor of the New Synagogue,placed him in charge as Senior of the Elders and ordered him to set up aCouncil of 25 members to represent the Jews pf the City before theAuthorities and ensure that they obeyed all orders and regulations. TheCouncil members were to be responsible for obedience with their lives andproperty.Within two days the Council had been set up. Its offices were placed inthe former Kehilla building and its first task was to conduct an accuratecensus of the Jewish population, property, money exceeding 2,000 zloty andall jewelry. Between 15 and 20 persons worked on this task for ten daysand nights, and 20,000 Jews were recorded.The Germans began making all kinds of demands of the Council. On oneoccasion they demanded 50 sets of mattresses within four hours. All goodsof this kind in the Jewish shops had been confiscated weeks before, so themattresses were collected by Jews from Jewish homes. If the Jews refusedto hand over the bedding the collectors took them by force. When theGermans demanded money, as they often did, the Council imposed a taxon the rich Jews. But the Council’s chief range of activities was the supplyof workers for daily labour.The Labour Department supplied the Germans with 150—200 workersdaily on an average, and as many as 400 on special occasions. The Jewswere summoned for two or three days’ work a week. Those who wishedfor exemption paid two or three zloty instead of a day’s work, or 36 zlotya month. In addition half a zloty was charged for deferring work for oneday on medical exemption authorised by the Council’s physicians, for whichone zloty a day was charged. Many Jews redeemed themselves with money,and 60—70% of those sent to work every day were hired substitutes towhom the Council paid 2 zloty for each day’s work. This money camefrom the receipts for exemption and deferment, which left the Council witha daily surplus of 50 to 100 zloty.The Germans imposed various kinds of work on the Jews, who buriedPoles that had been shot in the New Jewish cemetery, the barracks, the286THE KALISH BOOKHospital of the Holy Trinity, the District Government Building, the PublicInsurance Building, the Auxiliary Police and the Gestapo, Four Jews wereregularly employed removing Polish sign-boards or erasing whatever waswritten on them, or other Polish texts. A reserve of 10 workers wereregularly on duty at the Council offices, to deal with sudden demands bythe Germans. As a rule the orders for workers arrived one day before thedate they were required. The Germans did not pay any wages, but gavebread and lunch in a few places.The Jews were treated differently in different places. Here and thererelations that were almost friendly were established between the Germansoldiers and the Jews. In such places the German would give the Jewscigarettes and beer, and talk to them freely. Elsewhere the Jews werebeaten, pushed about and hurried up. One day a German stamped the word“Swine” on the foreheads of all the Jews working under him. He orderedthem to leave it there for the whole week and inspected them daily to makesure it could still be read. For three weeks 25 Jews worked on a farm nearKalish. The German soldiers stationed there treated the Jews better thanthe owner, who was a Volksdeutsch woman.The attitude of the German authorities towards the Council varied fromtime to time. They made all kinds of demands which were fully satisfied.But there were also cases showing a very different attitude. Once twomembers were summoned to the Gestapo, arrived at 11 a.m., and were lockedin a room until dark, but to harm was done to them. On another occasionthe Germans took 10 Council members away, including the eighty-year-oldDr. Beatus who was there by chance. They were all beaten savagely, com-pelled to drill and then given pavements to scrape. Meanwhile a fewGermans were busy photographing these activities. Another time they wentto the Kehilla building and smashed furniture, screens and chairs. Theyturned the Jewish Gymnasium quarters and the Jewish Elementary Schoolbuilding into a hospital for Polish Prisoners of War.The New Synagogue was locked up and had not yet been damaged. TheGermans temporarily housed Polish prisoners of War in the Great Synagogueand the Talmud Torah Building. There were many cases of desecration bythem. Thus they removed the Torah Scrolls from the Synagogues at 21 and29 Ciasna Street and burnt them in the courtyards; and Jewish girls wereordered to dance round the fire. They destroyed another Synagogue andflung the Torah Scrolls and religious literature into the river, with blowsand shooting. German soldiers entered the home of a poor family on theexcuse of sanitary inspection, and ordered the mother to strip her seventeen-year-old daughter and give her a bath.Flinker, a flow-mill owner who had once edited the local Jewish paper,was murdered following denunciation by his Polish household help, whoclaimed that he had weapons hidden in his home. He was arrested, had aheart attack on the way to prison and was shot by German soldiers. Usingthe same excuse the Germans early in November also murdered a PolishPriest. The Jews were ordered to bury his corpse at the entrance to theJewish Cemetery.THE HOLOCAUST287When Germans from the Baltic countries were settled in the Reich, mostof the good flats of Jews and Poles alike were expropriated early inNovember. Those expelled from their homes were allowed to take next tonothing of their property and were all housed in a Monastery. The BalticGermans who came to Kalish were promptly housed in these apartments.The Poles were gradually released from the Monastery and a few werepermitted to leave town. All the others were taken to the Market building,which had previously housed prisoners of war and army horses.About the 10th November, the method of expropriating apartments changedand only those of Jews were taken. The Jews were driven to the MarketBuilding. The German gendarmes would close off a street on all sides, orderall the Jewish tenants to clear out within a few moments, and then conductedthem in groups to the Market Building. Every few moments fresh Jewishfamilies could be seen crossing the City under guard carrying little bundles,knapsacks or pillows. They had had so little time and were so confusedthat each one had snatched what first came to hand.8. GLICK8MANSOME FIGURES (FROM THE RINGELBLUM ARCHIVESAND ELSEWHERE)The following meagre data to be found in the Ringelblum Archives andthe Documents of the Joint can help to give a picture of the Destruction.There were 24,000—28,000 Jews in Kalish before September, 1939, whenhundreds of families left the City. Some of them returned as soon as militaryoperations were over. In December 1940 refugees from Kalish were to befound in the following places: 6830 in Warsaw; in Cracow and Glogow 75;in Tyczyn 30; Lancut 84; Lezaisk 50; Rzeszow (Reisha) 1224; Rembertow150.Four large transports left the city, the last departing on Monday, 12.12.1939.One train went to Lublin, the second to Sandomierz, the third to Kaluszyn andhe fourth to Lukow. An additional four or five trains also left. Patientsfrom the Old Age Home were sent to Baczki near Lochow on 15th December.It is reported that in January 248 Kalish Jews were to be found there,including 100 old people and 53 children.After the great expulsion 400 gravely ill patients remained in the JewishHospital, including 280 chronic bed cases who could not be moved. Aphysician and 2 grave-diggers were left to look after them, and they werepermitted to remain until the Spring. Those looking after them might requi-sition food for them from locked Jewish apartments. A special permit wasnecessary to open such dwellings.There were 1,912 Jews in the Market Building between the 1st and 22ndof February 1940, who received extra food from the Hospital. On the 23rdof February 1940 they were transferred to Kozminek where a Camp wasset up for them. The Jewish Council distributed the following rations in288THE KALISH BOOK1940: Half a loaf of bread, 50 grammes of butter and 100 grammes of jama week. The whole population of the Jewish Camp ate in the Kehilla kitchen.There were also children aged less than 14, for whom an elemental y schoolof two classes was set up. They were taught German, Polish, Arithmetic andTorah. A kindergarten was set up for 25 children aged less than seven.The first Kalish Action was conducted between the 27th and 30th ofOctober 1940. Its victims were about 250 persons incapable of work, half ofthem chronic patients from the Hospital. They were taken off to an unknowndestination, apparently for extermination. The Germans pretended they hadbeen sent for convalescence. There were 437 persons left, including hospitalpatients. On 1st. January 1941 439 persons were enumerated. After theAction with the black lorries, about 50 able-bodied young men were left inKalish. One tailor's workshop was left. In July 1942 the survivors weretransferred to the Lodz Ghetto and the Jewish Community of Kalish ceasedto exist.ABRAHAM MILGROMKALISH IN MAY 1962I did not meet a single Jew at the Railway Station or on the way to town.In general there is little traffic. I did not find a porter and did not catch ataxi. There were two at the station altogether.The fate of the handful of Jews who had remained alive was symbolisedby my talk with a woman aged about forty-five, who had a Polish appearance.She asked me whether I was a Jew, and when I said I was she confessedthat she was also a Jewess and was now married to a Pole. When she hadsucceeded in escaping from the Ghetto this Pole had helped her to survivethe War period.I saw that it was hard to find living Jews, so I went to the dead. Therewas complete ruination at the Cemetery. The gravestones were scatteredin the field, smashed to pieces, with little bits lying here and there. The lastgrave was that of Solnik the dentist, who had died in Danzig and left a willasking to be buried beside his mother's grave. His gravestone recorded thathe had been a Colonel in the Polish Army. I gave the keeper a few zlotyand asked him to take a little care of the graves, but doubt whether hewill do anything. The Cemetery calls for attention.Naturally industry and trade are all Government enterprises. The membersof the free professions work in cooperatives: Cooperative of lawyers, ofbarbers, etc. I heard complaints about the absence of private trade andtold them: “You always preached that Poles should not buy from Jews.There are no Jews now, go and buy from one another!"The workers are not satisfied with their wages either. I found satisfactiononly among the pensioners. They had never even dreamed that they wouldreceive a pension from the Government. But actually none of this was myaffair. I did not find Jews.THE HOLOCAUST289DOV ZIELONKATHE FINISHIt was April 1945. After many air attacks we were ordered to leave theCamp. I worked on the day shift. Work stopped right away. The S.S. mendrove us out. Meanwhile people ran to the kitchen to find some food. I triedmy luck as well. The kitchen was full and the men fought one another inorder to grab something. The Nazi Commandant drew his pistol and orderedus to get out. But he shot at the ceiling and the window and nobody moved,though a couple had been injured already, while figthing for food. A squadof S.S. men burst in and began beating us. At last we went out, marching.I had not succeeded in grabbing anything in the kitchen.The streets were empty and shots could be heard on every side. Aeroplaneswere diving and shooting. Our guards were moving close to the walls whilewe were in the middle of the street. Where were we going? Nobody knew.That evening we reached same Camp or other. On the other side of thebarbed wire fence boys aged ten to thirteen were dragging heavy beams ofwood two by two, while a German followed them carrying a rubber truncheon.We did not know who the children were.All of a sudden we saw a twelve-year-old boy among us. Clearly he wasnot one of ours, for our children had already been exterminated in Auschwitz.We spoke to him in many languages. He did not answer. A German agedabout sixty went over, but the boy did not answer him either. The Germantook a slice of bread out of his wallet. The boy dashed to take it but theGerman signed to him to go behind him to the wall of the nearest house.He gave him the bread, turned him with his face to the wall and shot him.We had been marching for a fortnight now, sometimes by day and some-times by night. We had long lost every human likeness. Men who werewizened with starvation kept on dropping without interruption. We reacheda town that was being constantly bombed. Here we hoped we would besaved. But the Germans led us by side roads to a branch of a narrowgauge railway. Here they crushed about a hundred of us in a goods waggonand locked the doors. Our guards vanished. We felt that we were chokingand yelled. Nobody heard our voice. The time seemed to pass like aneternity.They opened the waggons in the morning. A dense vapour burst out likesteam from a boiler. The S.S. men drove us on. It was the end of April, afine day. We were marching through the mountains between Marienbad andKarlsbad. Laznowski was almost exhausted. Aeroplanes appeared very highup. Sender was still full of faith and confidence. All of a sudden the Germanofficer yelled: “They’re diving!” All the S.S. men dashed to shelter in awood nearby, but ordered us to lie down. The plane came diving down amoment later and began circling round us. I could see the muzzles of themachine-guns only ten metres away from me. Another plane arrived. They290THE KALISH BOOKdid not shoot. After circling for about ten minutes they cleared off. Theymust have seen that we were prisoners. “Nothing is going to happen to youany more”, said the German officer jokingly.We went on. It was Friday evening. Rain was falling without a break. Wewere wet through and our souls were weeping. Joseph Meir Seidel, ourspiritual teacher who always put heart into us, now began to lose his faith.There was some inhabited place five kilometres further on. Maybe we wouldrest there. They ordered us to stop. Rain was pelting down. Two S.S. menrode off to town to see whether we could pass through. An hour later camethe order: Turn back. Where to? It was dark already. We turned back fora distance of two kilometres. There was a stable with a broken roof. Theymarched us in. Wet animal droppings. Our feet sank in manure. We burstout weeping. Simeon Zucker wept and cried: “Lord of the Universe, endour troubles.”Now we decided not to march any further, I fell down, fell asleep anddreamt of Passover at home. The table was covered with the best of every-thing. The family was seated round it. I was asking the Four Questions.All of a sudden I felt a sharp pain and opened my eyes. A German had hitme over the head with a tick. Everybody went out except eight who wetfenot awakened even by the German sticks. I gazed with envy at these menwho had already been delivered.It was the Sixth of May. Men were collapsing on the road. Anybody whocould not run was shot by the German who had murdered the hungry boy.I no longer had the strength to move. My sandals were worn out and theirsoles were tied round my feet with rope. My strength was giving out. Twocompanions supported me and brought me into the front line so that theprofessional murderer should not shoot me. It was already dark and wewere still running. It was after midnight. At last they put us in a stable.This time it was dry. I tumbled down. I think it was our fifth day withoutany food. If only I could lie and not stand up again.It was still dark and they were already beating and yelling. On the marchagain. The S.S. were no longer counting us. The officer was carrying aknapsack. We had already made 15 kilometres. Now we heard that thevillage through which we had passed that morning had already been liberated.Was it possible?Passing through another village, two men tried to hide. The S.S. menbeat them murderously. All of a sudden a roll of bread fell beside me.I could not believe my eyes. Somebody had thrown it from a window. Ishared it with my five companions. There was no desire to go on. We wereonly 15 kilometres away from freedom.Once again we decided we would go no further. Without a word we allsat in the field. The Commander was nervous. In his knapsack he had acivilian suit. He left us sitting while he himself dashed this way and that,looking at his watch every few moments. After ten minutes had passed heordered: “Get up, get on!” We remained sitting. He yelled again. We didnot budge. He summoned the S.S. men, drew his pistol and shot in the air.THE HOLOCAUST291Our companion Moshe stood up, bared his body which was covered withbruises and sores and said: “Leave us alone. I've left a wife and child andI want to see them again. The War is over. Why should we die at the lastminute?”His words made their impression. The German lowered the pistol. At thatmoment we rose and dispersed in all directions. I ran through a sown fieldwith a strength which suddenly appeared, although my companions had hadto support me only a few minutes earlier. I heard shots but I went onrunning.I was too impatient to stay at this Hospital, in Saatz in the Sudentenland.The War had ended a month earlier and something was driving me back toKalish. I had seen my two younger sisters leaving for Auschwitz in 1944...They must surely be back in Kalish, desperately awaiting my arrival. Afterall I was responsible for them. I tried to walk but my legs would not carryme. The doctor refused to allow me to leave the Hospital. In spite of thisI decided to go.I learnt to walk again, and a few days later I was out in the streetsasking how I could get back to Poland. I met a group of Poles who hadbeen doing forced labour here. They would be leaving for Poland by a specialtrain in a few days. I promptly joined them.Now at last I was on the way. The train crawled. I felt really ill. Wereached Kattowitz after a fortnight. There I left the others to make myway to Kalish. At six o’clock in the morning I got out at the railway stationamid a huge crowd. My eyes were searching for a Jew. What had happenedto all the Jews of Kalish? The Municipal Bus took me to town. I got offat the Town Hall.It was a fine summer’s day and I was back in the city where I had beenborn and grown up. Yet how alien the whole place was! I searched for aJew in the Old Market. There were none. With a beating heart I dashed toNo. 5 Babina Street, where we had lived. I went in and spoke to the janitor.At first he did not recognise me. “Jusef, don’t you know me?” He recognisedme, crossed himself and asked whether anybody else of the family had come.I told him that my sisters ought to be here. He shrugged his shoulders.He had not seen them.I asked for water. The fellow could not understand what was going oninside me. He said that he would give me some coffee in a little while, andwe would have some breakfast. I sat in his dwelling for an hour. Then Irose and departed. I went out and came back at once to ask: “Maybe youknow where a Jew lives here?” He answered that one had been living inBabina Street but had already moved away.The moments that followed were maybe the worst in my life. What wasI to do? I had reached my destination. Here I was in Kalish. I had managedto reach the finish of the War. Was this the life that would follow? Why,292THE KALISH BOOKI was an unnecessary person in the world, without a penny in my pocket,ill, in rags and tatters, without a roof over my head.The Town Hall clock struck the hour of ten. I had been walking throughthe streets for four hours, and had gone round the Park five times already.Where could I go? Tears burst from my eyes. And once again I found myselfby the Town Hall. My legs were failing. I sat down on a stone oppositethe Bus Station. I dropped my head and fell asleep. A woman woke me upand asked if I was a Jew. Yes, I answered, I am a Jew. She pointed to thehouse of Apt and said: You’ll find Jews there.I went up and met with the Jewish Committee of Kalish.Berbed Wire FenceTHE HOLOCAUST293HALIN A LIEBESKIND:MY DREAM1 dream of a journey afarThat is quiet and stormless and good.I dream of a distant comerFar away in the peace of a wood.And I dream of a lonely islandUnder the shade of a treeWhere I shall not long for people.Yes, that is the dream I see.The beauty of Nature I’ll cherish.All alone I shall swallow the air.Oh, how sweet my life will becomeWhen I’m done with all bitterness there.The grasses will serve me for food,I shall live on the fruit of the trees,I shall pick corals for berries,While the birds will sing me of peace.And when I shall have to departFrom that loveliest world of them all,The forest will sing me a death-songAnd I shall give up my soul.And no one will shed tears for me,My memory will vanish away,And none will lament for my passingSave the winds as they wander and stray.Halina Liebeskind was thirteen years old when she arrived in the WarsawGhetto with her parents. During the Revolt in the Ghetto she sheltered in aBunker which the Germans discovered. She was sent from Warsaw to Lublin,but by a miracle she was not sent to Maidanek. Instead she reached theBirkenau Camp with her aunt, and was sent from there to Ravensburg,where she remained until the Liberation.The original poem was written in Polish.THOSE WHOFOUGHT BACKJOSEPH KAPLANJoseph Kaplan was born in 1913, passed through Heder and Yeshiva andspent a little time at the Hebrew Gymnasium but had to stop studyingbecause of the material situation of his family. He attended Evening Classesinstead. While very young !he joined the Hashomer Hatzeir with which heidentified himself. He studied Hebrew and made a living as a carpenter.In Hashomer Hatzair he was first a Guide, then Unit Head, then Head ofthe Group. From there he became the Leader of the Lodz-Kalish Districtand later proceeded to Wolhynia. H. Geller reports on his activities there.The entire region had been left without guides and instructors, who had allproceeded to Eretz Israel or else had been summoned to the Headquartersin Warsaw. It was 1937 and they were awaiting the new Representativeurgently. One rainy morning a young fellow in a tattered overcoat arrivedat the Rovno Ken (Club Centre). He had a head of thick black hair, asunburnt face and a rather mischievous smile, and his name was JosephKaplan. A few moments later he opened his bag, produced a few hectographedsheets and said: 4T put out these circulars in Kalish. I prepared themmyself.” Next day our own First Circular appeared. The leadership inWolhynia had gone into action. The leadership of course consisted of atypewriter, a hectograph and Joseph Kaplan.Next day he vanished for two months, while he went to all the littleClubs in the small towns. There were no railways there, no highroads. Alljourneys were made by waggon or on foot. But warm Jewish hearts wereto be found in those little towns. He had to advise, instruct, scold andTHOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK297encourage, and hold back those who wished to go up to Eretz Israel beforethey had completed their full instruction period. All on his own he cameto know the thousands of Hashomer Hatzair members in Wolhynia.Two months later he returned weary, more tattered than before but fullof life, and declared that he had cracked the nut. For now he knew theentire District and had found faithful assistants everywhere. A few dayslater he published a detailed Report covering each place separately. Thenhe vanished again, returning to Rowno only from time to time. On oneoccasion he told the story of his own hard life, the childhood withouthappiness and the frequent intervals of hunger.In due course he wished to proceed to Eretz Israel but was summoned tothe Warsaw Headquarters, from which he maintained his contact withWolhynia.In 1938 he was still planning to proceed to Eretz Israel. By the beginningof 1939 his passport was ready. The War broke out. The Halutzim pouredeastwards. He spent a long interval in Lida, and used the time in sendingHalutzim on to Wilna from which there were prospects of Aliya. The Move-ment was left in the hands of boys in Poland. He himself reached Wilnain January 1940.However, he only spent a month there, for the Movement in Poland hadbeen abandoned. In February 1940 he returned as a member of the Delegationto Warsaw, to handle activities under the Nazi Occupation. The other memberswere Mordechai Anilewitz, Tosia Altman and Shmuel Bratzlaw. Joseph co-ordinated activities and was justly regarded as the head of the Movement.The Delegation did a great deal. The Movement was restored and began toexpand. Two Kibbutzim were set up and Hachshara was organised as anunderground activity, the members engaging in urban work. Two under-ground National Councils and two Seminar Courses were held. The WarsawKen numbered more than a thousand members, who issued ten differentjournals in hundreds of copies and maintained contact with every other Kenin the smaller towns.Joseph's special function was contact with the various Institutions. Hekept in personal touch with Dr. Ringelblum, the heads of the Joint, theUnderground and representatives of Communal Institutions. He was theestablished Contacts man with the various centres. Though he had anexceedingly Jewish appearance he went everywhere, in spite of the dangerinvolved. In the Ghetto it was he who delivered the educational lectures.It was Joseph who organised Hachshara in order to make sure that theolder members did not break off their ties with the Movement even ifthey could see no way of continuing their activities.During his first Warsaw year he set up Hachshara at an estate whichwas found to belong to an Antisemite, whose only purpose was to exploithis cheap workers to the utmost. The lads worked from morning to nightand were fed only on leavings. This Hachshara was closed down, and hesought Hachshara elsewhere.The famous Hachshara farm at Czenstochow had been taken over by theWehrmacht, the German Army. He resolved to get the farm from them and298THE KALISH BOOKsucceeded. He also obtained the abandoned estate of a Jewish landowner nearZarki with the assistance of the Local Judenrat. There he established aHalutz Training Farm. He and Zvi Brandeis had travel permits as sickpersons, and within a few weeks transferred the older Hashomer Hatzairmembers to the Hachshara centres, two or three at a time.He devoted all his efforts to the issue of newspapers, first for the Move-ment and afterwards as an underground press. Only in these papers wasit possible to find military reports with expositions of war and politicaldevelopments. It was exceedingly difficult to get the paper out of Warsaw,and he therefore decided to publish special issues for other towns. Thesetook the form of three books, each of 160—180 pages. They were given aspecial cover bearing in Polish the name: “Agricultural Calendar for1942.” They contained a selection of the Warsaw press, news from EretzIsrael and the smaller branches, and were distributed by special undergroundmethods.Early in 1942 a Left-wing Anti-Fascist Resistance Organisation was setup on the initiative of the Jewish Communists. The other participatinggroups were the Left Poalei Zion, Hashomer Hatzair, Dror and the Z.S.Joseph was a member of the Command. Its significance was that it broughtthe various groups together, but it achieved nothing and did not last long.That Spring the Germans entered the Ghetto one night, took 50 Jews fromtheir beds and shot them in the street. Among them were leaders of theUnderground. However, Joseph escaped and concealed himself at Zarki. Themass transportations began on 22nd July, 1942, and more than 300,000 Jewswere removed from the Ghetto in 55 days. Joseph returned to Warsaw andbegan to make further plans. He found work in a wood-manufacturingfactory and became expert at forging stamps and documents.When leading survivors met to discuss what should be done, Joseph wasone of those who demanded that they should defend themselves; but therewere no arms. Hashomer Hatzair, Dror, Akiva and Gordonia togetherestablished the Jewish Fighting Organisation but there were neither arms formoney. Meanwhile the debate continued. The younger Ghetto residents wishedto fight and die, while the others wished to hold out as long as possible.But the younger people saw no prospects of rescue. They knew what wasgoing on in Wilna, and precisely what was taking place in Treblinka. AriehWilner managed to smuggle ten pistols and five hand-grenades into theGhetto, and some benzine was obtained for preparing Molotov Cocktails.Joseph continued to insist that proper preparations must be made for re-sistance.On 3rd September, 1942 the German Commissar Hansel came to the factorywhere Joseph worked and asked for him. Some of the workers went to findhim. As soon as he returned he was handcuffed and taken out to a closedcar. When another member of the Command went out to look for ways andmeans of liberating him he was stopped by Gestapo men in the street.They began to search him, he drew a knife and they killed him on the spot.Thereupon instructions were given for all underground members to moveto new addresses. The only one caught was a girl who was carrying arms.When Joseph and another Jew were being taken from the Pawiak PrisonTHOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK299to the Transportation Centre, they were conducted into one of the gatewaysas they marched and were shot. It is possible but not certain that thesecond Jew shot was an informer.In his last letter Joseph had written: “Don't believe the Germans anymore. All their promises are just Satanic tricks to split the community.If we are fated to die, let us die honourably. Resist the Germans by forceeverywhere. Organise the youth. Protect yourselves. Don’t go to the railwaywaggons!”Details of Joseph’s personality were described by Irena Adamowicz, apious Catholic who helped the members of Hashomer Hatzair and visitedIsrael in June 1958. The personal details shed additional light on Joseph’sinteresting personality and bring him even closer to us.“...Joseph went from Wilna to Warsaw at his own demand. He felt he wasthe father of the Movement and thought that there was no one else to dothe work. I last saw him in Wilna on 14th January, 1940. He went south-wards and reached Warsaw by way of Brisk (Brest Litowsk). He travelledas a returning Jewish refugee because he had a typical Jewish appearance,and that caused him much trouble. He used to travel a great deal to thesmall towns with a Judenrat Permit, which did not give the right of travelby train. But the main difficulty was to get him through the streets to therailway sation, and he was always very worried about whoever accompaniedhim.“His outstanding quality was his organising capacity and success in allnegotiations. In Radom the Judenrat caused trouble to the Movement. Josepharrived there and straightened matters out. He dealt with every issueenergetically and obstinately. He dedicated himself so much to each detailthat he was afraid that he would lose his mind. He used to say that he hada great deal to do before he went mad.“Other qualities were his level-headedness, a gift of distinguishing betweenmain issues and trifles and a power of swift decision. He used to deal withdetails a great deal but never forgot the main purpose, the aim to whichthe details were subordinate. If he made a mistake he was prepared toconfess it, but usually displayed ample self-assurance. Agriculture was hisaspiration. Wen he met Polish agriculturists he always impressed them as avery great expert.“Sometimes he would behave like a child. One day I met him in theNalewki. He began to pull me by the sleeve and dance. Passersby began tostare at us. It turned out that he had just heard that his Kibbutz, “Maanit”,had settled on the land. He also had a weakness for bright little objects, forfine notebooks and fountain pens. When he received something of the kindhe was as happy as a child. But he really loved working with his hands,and was always pleased when he could use them.“He was of middle height and thin, with a black mop of hair. He hadlarge black smiling eyes and his smile was a little bit lopsided. He was nota good-looking man but had an attractive exterior. His clothes were usuallydark grey.“Until the truth was known about the slaughter at Ponar in Spring 1942 he300THE KALISH BOOKbelieved that it would be possible to outlive the years of fury. But afterthat he ceased to believe and opened the eyes of others. He began to beactive, to travel. On one of these journey he was caught. I believe it wasat Skarzysko. He was placed against the wall and told that he had the rightto write a letter. But he told himself: If I do write they’ll think they’ll haveto kill me, so I shan’t write.” And sure enough some Nazi appeared andallowed him to clear off. He managed to bend down and pick up his moneywhich had fallen to the ground.“Together with his practical sense and level-headedness he tended toengage in adventures. When there was talk of the possibility of getting outhe told me he was prepared to go out and come back. I looked at him asthough he were crazy. On one occasion he told me that in his opinion theJews ought to go on wearing the yellow badge after the War as well.“He always spoke about the principal duty of every Halutz, which was togo up to Eretz Israel. He also believed in a World Soviet Republic that wouldbring redemption to all. But as long as there were frontiers it was necessaryto rehabilitate Jewish life.“In June 1942 I went to Wilna for the last time, and went to meet Josephbefore leaving. A few days earlier we had quarrelled as usual about differentthings. Now I came to make it up and say good-bye. We knew that therewere not many prospects of surviving.“I saw him for the last time during the great transportation from Warsaw,a few weeks or maybe days before his death. We met at the Jewish Cemetery.I brought him letters from Wilna. He took bread and eggs out of his pocketand we ate. He spoke to me about weapons and about the need to arangepeople on the Aryan side. He spoke in a business-like tone, without generalisa-tions.“This was at the time when the whole Ghetto was waiting for death.”Memorial Stone for Joseph Kaplan at Kibbutz Maanit.Adek Boraks of the well-known Boraks family reached Wilna from Kalishsoon after the beginning of the War, and helped to transfer members ofHehalutz to Soviet-occupied territory. His free and collokuial Polish servedhim in spite of his distinctly Jewish appearance as a passport with non-Jews, peasants, smugglers, etc. He was appointed a member of the Reserveleadership of Hashomer Hatzair. Between 1939 and 1941 he and the othersmoved from place to place together with the Jewish masses, but almostall of them returned to Wilna, including Adek, when news of the GermanOccupation arrived. He used to leave the Ghetto at night, remove the yellowbadge and try to find allies who would supply him with arms. He beganto be an expert at forging documents.One evening when he left the Ghetto and came to the house of a girl wholived outside, two Gestapo agents rang at her door and demanded to seetheir papers. She explained that he was her fiance, and before showing hisown forged documents he requested to see their authorisation. They merelyglanced at his papers and apologised before leaving.He left Wilna and found his way to the Warsaw Ghetto where he metthe representatives of the Joint, the Parties and whatever Jewish Communitythere was. He was the first person who brought them the whole truth insimple language. Naturally the majority either did not believe him or felt302THE KALISH BOOKsure that it would not happen in Warsaw. After receiving money promisedhim by the Joint and a travel permit, he began to make his way back.In Grodno he and his companions were arrested by gendarmes but escapedthrough the ruins of a bombed-out street in the darkness. When they reachedWarsaw by car they were caught again while they were trying to find away into the Ghetto. It is not clear how they got away, but they arrivedin the Ghetto chained and handcuffed, without overcoats or hats in thechilly night.On proceeding to the railway station to reach Bialystok and Wilna someextortioners tried to get money out of him. He did not answer them and theysummoned a policeman. "Where did you get this transit paper from? Fromthe Judenrat?” asked the policeman ironically. Adek did not lose his headbut became very angry and answered in his good street Polish: "Mister,from what Rat, where is that Rat, is there a town called Rat in Poland?I got it in Grodno and not in any of your Rats!” They cleared off. After-wards people said of Adek that he could even escape from the hands of theDevil himself.Adek returned to Bialystok where he met his Kibbutz comrades. Thecloset of these was Zerah, who had grown up with him in the Kalish Ken.After studying the situation he realised that he ought not to leave thisplace, for it had no Military Commander. He was the only one who hadever obtained any real military training. Discipline required him to proceedto Wilna, while logic told him that the needs in Bialystok were moreurgent. When asked to stay he said: "Discipline and responsibility requireme to go back to Wilna first, and then appeal.” The argument that he wasrisking his life did not help. Adek stood firm. It would not be a goodexample if a member of the leadership should engage in a breach of disciplinefor reasons of mere logic. He decided that he would not go back empty-handed but would smuggle gold coins in order to buy arms. The coins werethen sewn into the pads in the shoulders of his jacket. A Week later hesent a cable: "I have a job and would like to ask your advice. Edward,.”Which meant that he had arrived safely and there was money for weapons.Now it was decided that he should return to Bialystok and take charge ofthe military command. He prepared a code in order that they should beable to use postcards. Weapons would be called furniture, rifles would becupboards, dollars would be Stefan and so on. The key to the code wasin the hands of Adek, Joseph Kaplan and Rozka. In a single postcard hecould supply ample information which often made a dangerous journeyunnecessary.He needed plenty of patience. The partners were not in a hurry to supplythe arms freely. Promises were broken. Disappointments followed one another.Adek, Zerah and Yoshka (from Wylkowiski) planned the organisation ofthe "Cells”, each of five. Cell members were admitted one by one aftertwo or three talks face to face; sometimes even more. Each member knewonly the other four. The activities of the Cell were not discussed among thelarger Hashomer groups, as though they did not exist.In a debate on Forest and Partisans as against War in the Ghetto, Adeksaid: "Haverim, I want to clarify our atitude to the Ghetto once again.THOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK303Maybe there are better prospects for effective war in the Forest. But arewe going to be satisfied with that and abandon the masses to be led likesheep to the slaughter here too, as they were in Wilna, while seeking martialeffects in the Forest? I do not belittle sabotage activities. We would blowup so many bridges, we would explode so many ammunition trains, wewould cut so many telegraph wires. All these are of the greatest importance.But they do not offer any answer to the main question: How are we toorganise a mass response? How do we find a way of giving expression tothe resistance of the people? How do we lead to the revolt of Jewishmasses who are closed away in the Ghetto awaiting the fate of sheep led tothe slaughter ? Suppose we fight in the Forests. Do we then wash our handsclean because we have done our duty? That is a solution for individuals whowish to lend a hand to the War against Fascism.“But where is the communal, the national solution? Are we to abandonthe unorganised Ghetto with its old folk, women and children, and say:We have saved ourselves? Where is the responsibility to the history of thePeople? Where is the vanguard character of our Movement? I see ourMovement at the head of the masses in their revolt, not as an elect groupwho satisfy their own consciences but as the pioneers of a nation; for surelywe have educated our comrades to that end! The War of the Masses willhave to be fought in the Ghetto and we have to head it, together with otherswho think as we do. First and foremost the Ghetto. And first and foremostthe National War. The War of the Jews. They are killing us as Jews andas Jews we shall fight back. And we shall not give an answer as individualsbut as an organised community. That is the kind of thing which will haveits value in history.”About that time one of the fellows brought the first rifle to the Ghetto,and it was used for training. The butt was removed and Adek used tomove it from place to place. He was selected for this underground activity,and also organised the Cells.He directed attention to the establishment of a Fighting Front of all themovements which supported the principle of combat. The easiest way ledto the Communists. First meetings were held between him and their re-presentative. Later there was also a meeting with Shlomo Poporetz whorepresented the most nationalist and revolutionary section of the Bund. Inthis way a High Command was established between the Shomer Hatzair,the Communists and the Bund, consisting of Adek, Yoshke Kawe and Poporetz.This was the basis for the broader Front which was established in thecourse of time. Adek was sent to the Military Centre of the Command. Withthe establishment of the second Block consisting of the Hashomer Hatzair,Dror, the Zionist Youth, the Revisionists and part of the Bund, Adek’s sloganbecame: Unification of the two Blocks into a single fighting Front.In February 1943 Adek began to betray his nervousness at meetings. Hefeared an Action in the Ghetto. One day he announced with certainty thatthe Action would be carried out, and did not permit those who were on theAryan side to enter the Ghetto. One day later Zerah sent a slip of paperto the workers outside the Ghetto Wall: “Haika, the Action is over. Ourcomrades tried to fight. Here is the list of our losses: Frank, Yoshke,304THE KALISH BOOKIsruelik, Zivia, Rozka, Yankel, Sender. Nineteen in all, and the last on thelist — Adek.”This is how he met his end:“Adek's post was discovered. He shot with his pistol and the fellowsattacked the S.S. with their fingernails. Traitors had played a part here.And since Adek had lost the essential basis of defence and surprise fromambush he also had no power of manoeuvering. Gedalia managed to catchAdek's words: “We'll pay them back yet! Continue!" Their hands wereraised. The Germans searched their pockets. Adek stood at the head ofthe Squad, his face flaming and his eyes shooting fire. After that we nolonger saw Adek. The transport left the Ghetto, and from the distance wesaw how they were being hit over the head and how the fighters werebehaving “impudently" to the Germans.— Echoes came from afar. Jews who were in the same goods waggon andwho escaped the furnaces told about the remarkable commander and rarecompanion who decided together with his comrades not to jump out of thewaggon, but only helped others to jump.On the very threshhold of the Furnaces Adek and his companions organiseda revolt, so that the Jews should not enter of their own free will. Theywere killed just outside the furnaces, and fell proudly and bravely.★Adek (Elijah) Boraks was born at Kalish in September 1918. His fatherwas a progressive Zionist and the owner of a Trieotage Factory. He studiedat the Jewish Gymnasium and joined the Hashomer Hatzair Movement. In1933 he proceeded to Wolhynia on Hachshara. In the army he was aCorporal.During the fighting at Bialystok on 5th November 1943 he headed agroup in Smolna Street.RZECZPOSPOLITA POLSKAPOSTANOW1E N! EM PREZYDENIARZECZYPOSPOLITEJ POLSKIEJzoslal(a) odznaczony(a)LEGITYMACJAObywatelBOJtAKS. j.&filiMV.po&niertnxeNr. 4?916 KBZXZEM ..SEEBRNYH. 0£D£RU....VmUI.I...HILITAEINACZELNIK! WYDZfAlU ODZNACZEKJKANCELARit CYWILNEJWARS Z'AWAdn . 194 8r.1Certificate of Polish Order of “Virtuti Militari”.JACOB DAVID SITNERHe was born in Kalish in 1897 to a well-to-do orthodox family. His fatherwas one of the Wardens of the Kehilla and a wellknown communal worker.So was his mother, whose heart was always open to general distress.Educated in the traditional spirit, he helped to establish the Tseirei ZionMovement in the city and headed it during and after the First World War.Later he established one of the first Leagues for Labour Eretz Israel whichhad hundreds of members. He visited the small towns of the region, deliveredspeeches, organised and acted on behalf of the Central Office. In 1925 hemoved to Warsaw where he headed a large firm of transport agents, butthere as well he devoted much of his time and energy to the Poalei Zion (ZS)Party and was a member of its Warsaw Committee for many years. At onetime he was a member of the Party Council and later a member of theCentral Committee, which often used to meet in his home, where variousdiscussions were held during the most difficult period of the Movement.He and his wife Havera Leah — one of the oldest and most devoted inthe party — saw to it that every haver should feel at home, and heencouraged many members at times of distress and crisis. They were bothkind-hearted, delicate and liked by all. The theoretical monthly of the party,“Die Neie Gesellschaft” was founded on his initiative and with his help.He took part in establishing most of his party’s enterprises and institutions306THE KALXSH BOOKand was a Delegate to the Congress for a Labour Eretz Israel at Berlinin 1930. He visited Eretz Israel in 1935 and submitted a plan for estab-lishing a Histadrut enterprise for goods transport between Poland and EretzIsrael. His plan was approved but the implementing was delayed.He was one of the devoted and active members of the Underground andrepresented it in enterprises for social aid in the Warsaw Ghetto. He servedas Chairman of the Local Committee of Poalei Zion (SZ) in Warsawduring the days of the Underground. During the first Ghetto period hemanaged a Brushmaking Factory which employed members of the Kibbutzof Dzielna Street. For some time he manufactured jam at home. Afterwardshe went over to the brush-making shop. In October 1942 he was murdered.His wife Leah who was also active in the Underground gave her life inApril 1943 with their son Joel (Yulek who wrote poems which were publishedin the Polish Underground press). In a letter by the Party in Poland to theIhud Olami and dated 15th November 1943 his name is listed among theactive party leaders who died at their posts.ABRAHAM DIAMANTWe know little about Abraham Diamant. What is known is: He was anactive member of the Poalei Zion in Kalish, was a Corporal in the PolishArmy and fell on 1st or 2nd May, 1943, when he was forty-two years old.In the List sent from Warsaw in May 1944, Hersh Wasser writes about himas “the Corporal”:“He was one of the few soldiers of the Ghetto who as a mark ofdistinction was entrusted with a rifle — a very rare treasure among thefighters. Abraham Diamant was a worker aged 42, tall and broad-shouldered,whose face expressed gentleness and strength at the same time. A serious,concentrated man and an ideal comrade, he was prepared to share his lastslice of bread or spoonful of food with others. He had an absolutely firmcharacter, was daring and despised death — qualities which are not verycommon.“From his childhood he was connected with the Jewish Labour Movement,and was an active Poalei Zion member in Kalish. On his way from communaland political activity to sharing in the battles of the Jewish FightingTHOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK307Organisation he went through all the Nazi hells. The Germans exiled himfrom Kalish to Warsaw in October 1939 together with his wife and child.He had 20 zloty in his pocket and a little bundle in his hands, and lived inone of the deathly refugee camps. He felt the German whip, the pangsof starvation, distress and typhoid. During the first expulsion to Treblinkaon 22nd July, 1942 his wife and daughter were taken from him and sentto the death camp. In spite of all these harsh blows of fate, which brokethousands of other people, Abraham’s spirit did not fail. He became evenmore silent. The furrows in his forehead grew far deeper, his gaze becameangrier and his hands clenched into fists.”The idea of resistance and active battle against the raging Fascist beastfound a fervent supporter in him. He identified himself with the newMovement from the moment it was organised. The Polish Corporal, thebrave soldier, gripped the rifle in his hands once again.He did not wish for praise and honour. He used to tell his friends thatthe War of the Jewish fighters, and even their deaths, would not be auseless sacrifice. The struggle of the Ghetto fighters would be part of theWar of the Forces of Freedom against Fascism and the basis for a betterfuture for Jewish masses everywhere in the world. The Ghetto Fighterswould be the builders of the future.When the day of action came the fighter Diamant occupied the positionassigned to him at an attic in 32 Swiento-Jerska Street. That was 20th April,1943. On that day he picked off seven Germans with his rifle and silenced aGerman machine-gun nest. He stood on guard by day and night and wouldnot be parted from his rifle even for a moment. He repulsed German attackswith a savage fury. When the S.S. men surrounded the house and burstinto the upper floors, Diamant would not leave his post but returned fire.Only after the Germans had already reached the roof did he make his wayto another area together with other fighters. After that he was always onthe move, on patrol, on guard, on sorties, alone or with other fighters.He had no pity for himself, never hesitated even for a moment andresolutely started death in the eyes.On 1st. May he fought amid ruins in the burning remains of the house at 30,Franciszkanska Street, in which there was a large shelter for the civilianpopulation. A unit of the Fighting Organisation defended the entrance.All of a sudden news arrived that the Germans had discovered anotherentry to the shelter and were coming in. The fighters opened fire. TheGermans answered with hand-grenades. Three fighters headed by Diamantwent out through a different side of the shelter and attacked the Germansfrom the rear. Two Germans were killed and the rest dispersed. Ourobjective had been achieved for the moment. The fighters took up positionsin the ruins of the neighbouring house. A second unit of S.S. men approachedand a struggle for life or death began. Abraham’s shots did not miss theirmark. The Germans did not dare to approach their positions but shot withmachine-guns from the distance. All of a sudden Diamant began reeling.A bullet had gone to his heart. He wanted to hand his rifle over to HershBerlinski, who headed his group, but did not manage it. From the ruins hefell into a burning cellar. His body was not found. It was entirely burnt.ZERAH SILRERBERGComrades relate that Zerah was taciturn, close-mouthed, firm, deep-thinkingand used to give good reasons for his words. He was heavy but gentle andhad a sense of proportion. Nobody imagined that he could lie or do anythingthat was not noble or abandon anybody. Haika Grossman writes:Adek and Zerah were very close friends, and neither of them ever hidanything from the other. I never saw them in an intimate conversation andused to wonder how they could be such good friends. To which Adek wouldtell me: With a mere glance. The ripe masculine friendship was both consi-derate and reserved. — “Zerah, what will happen if I should die a naturaldeath.” Adek would ask. “You’ll die twice,” Zerah would answer. “Once fromthe illness and a second time out of grief at such an ordinary way of dying.”It was only rarely that their source of humour would dry up.One evening Adek asked whether the day would ever come when theywould reach Eretz Israel. And Zerah answered: Why don’t you ask whetheryou’ll remain alive? and that led to a discussion about survival after death.Zerah said that he did not care whether he would be mourned for, or whatthey would say about him, or whether they would cut his body up intopieces. “The important thing is to be here and fight here, as long as youhave life left in you.”THOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK309When the lungs of a haver were affected and he did not wish to go to thedoctor, Zerah tricked him. He fixed an appointment and sent the haver there,claiming that it was an important meeting. The fellow was insulted but beganto accept treatment and recovered.Zerah also took part in the debate on Forest Resistance or War in theGhetto. This is how Haika Grossman describes the discussion:“The deliberateness of Zerah always led to silence in the room. I do notknow how Zerah came to be so respected by all the haverim that they used tolisten to him so attentively. But they used to say: “Silence, Zerah has askedfor the word.” He spoke as though he were thinking aloud. Stressing his pe-culiar pronounciation of the letter L, he would talk very slowly, without anyapparent emotion. Yet everybody knew that Zerah was boiling, Zerah wastensely living through the problem. He began by saying: ‘Frank is right. Ifwe have to weigh the problem we are entitled to weigh it in terms of theWar against Fascism. Any other approach, no matter how dressed up in theideology of helping Jewry or helping yourself as best you can, means treachery.Anybody who says that the masses can be saved through the forest is eithermisleading himself or is purposely misleading others. How can we save themasses if we are in the Forest? Is that the way you are going to save theGhetto, the old people, the women and children? And will you leave the Waragainst the Fascists to the Gentiles? What? I see that there are some herewho wish to take us back to a discussion we finished with long ago. Doesn'tthis lead us back instead of forward? First of all it is impossible to savemasses. That is a Utopia, a dangerous illusion which leads to an acceptanceof Fate. It is possible to save only individuals, and even if somebody talksof saving masses, he only seems to mean saving individuals, consciously orunconsciously. And maybe he is counting himself among them? It doesn'tmatter if somebody is hurt by my words. Maybe I am being unjust. But thisis not a private or a personal matter, neither of mine nor of yours. If wewere only among ourselves we might be able to fix it up. But we have todecide how to educate masses, a Movement, and how and what we candemand from others. So first we must make sure that everything is in orderamong us; and as for the Ghetto and the partisans, I identify myself withthe opinion of our haverim in Wilna, with the opinions of Adek and Haika.”After that Zerah was sent to Grodno, to help the young Haverim to carryout the armed Revolt.“I still remember how the resolution was adopted. The room was very sad.The only bright thing was Zerah’s face. It burnt and glowed. He urged thatthe resolution should be acted on at once. We wanted him to stay with usanother day, to discuss matters, to prepare a plan. It was the first time thatwe saw the well-balanced Zerah so tense. At once, he demanded, at once!The earth is burning under their feet already. Many Jews have already beenuprooted. The transports are already on the move, the crowded railway wag-gons are passing the stations without stopping, and it is only through thetiny barbed windows that they are making their last despairing call to theworld, telling passers-by and railway workers that they are Jews from Grodno.Those transports disappear in the West and we know: That means Treblinka.Can we still do anything?310THE KALISH BOOK“Next day Zerah hurriedly packed his bag, took the only ‘Aryan hat' whichwas a kind of property of the Movement, and which Adek had used on former‘Aryan* journeys. (We used to say: The hat makes the man.) Yendza forgedhim a permit at short notice, and as before we accompanied Zerah to theExit. We entreated him to wait till tomorrow, for at this time of day Jewshad to work and nobody went out or came in. ‘I am going over the fence/he insisted. We accompanied Zerah to the fence. Adek, Zerah and I wentthrough the Ghetto streets in order to be with one another as long as possible.Zerah and Adek entered the courtyard. Before Zerah had climbed on top ofthe out-house in the courtyard one of the Jews who lived there dashed out,caught him by the leg and dragged him down. ‘I shan’t let you pass! They’llpunish us all because of you! Clear away from here’ And he added goodwaggoner curses. This was a huge, broad-shouldered fellow. He grabbed thebag in his powerful arms and began to hit out to right and left. Adek nimblycaught hold of him. The battle lasted several minutes. Zerah mounted theroof, Adek caught the bag, tripped the giant up, flung the bag up on theroof. Zerah jumped over the low fence and vanished.”Zerah spent a fortnight in the closed Ghetto, trained the leaders of the“Fives”, planned attack points, organised the bringing in of materials andarms. The weapons were neither good nor plentiful. Once again electric bulbsfilled with vitriol, iron knuckledusters, sticks and various other primitiveweapons. Zerah and Yocheved looked for a way to establish a United Frontwith other Movements. He looked for contact with the Communists, the fewremaining Bundists and the Revisionists, but he found them all helpless. Helooked for a way to the “decent Jews” of the Judenrat in order to get moneyfrom them. They warned him that they would not take part in any hot-headed or mischievous tricks.Zerah could see the end of the Ghetto, and wished to establish the organi-sational contact between the Grodno and Bialystok undergrounds. The majo-rity had decided to remain where they were and organise a defence as faras possible. Once again Zerah devoted himself to fixing defence points andallocating duties. He inspected the weapons and shared them out, gave instruc-tions for use and prepared a general plan.When the effectives demanded that he should return to Bialystok he didnot accept orders. And he returned only when the chapter of bloodshed wasover. When people were heard in the Bialystok Ghetto demanding a revisionof the policy of resistance, it was Zerah who stood in the breach.1 still remember his face, his compressed lips, his quivering voice and hispowerful but somewhat restrained appearance. He did not make any charges,he made no personal attacks, he only explained, convinced, showed why therewas no other way, that there were more failures in store for us besides ourfailures until now; that there was no other way except the way of completedevotion and self-sacrifice. That Adek was right when he had not abandonedthe positions, otherwise we would have emerged from the Action with amark of shame burning on our brows. We would have caused demoralisationin the ranks of the fighters and would have shaken their confidence in usas a leadership and a Fighting Movement. He asked to speak a number oftimes, and grew neither weary nor despairing. Gather your strength,THOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK311don't abandon the proper way, don't waste time on a debate that has neithersocial nor moral significance; that was what the piercing eyes of Zerah toldme."Following the liquidation of the Bialystok Ghetto the Underground made afinal attempt to accompany the masses and rouse them to revolt at theConcentration Point. Zerah and Yoshka undertook this task. Zerah was incommand of one sector and fell in the battle.Zerah Silberberg was bom in 1916 and was a member of Hashomer Hatzairfrom his childhood. He went to Slonim for Hachshara and was there whenthe War began.TEMKINI telephoned. Mr. Tanski was waiting for me at the other end. He wasvery happy that we were still holding out, but had no news for us. He hadalready had all the necessary permits but had gone off to have them approvedby the Gestapo. The Officer had inspected them with care, tore them to littlepieces and then scolded Tanski for still making efforts on behalf of the Jews.According to him we had to do something for ourselves. He wished us successand that was the end of our conversation. The last hopes of deliverance hadburst like a soap-bubble.In due course the secret of Tanski was revealed. He was the Manager forKoznikowski, and thanks to him Jewish workers were assigned to this place.It can almost be said that my family and I remained alive thanks to him.During the first Expulsion he housed all the workers and their families inhis cellars. He obtained dwellings in the Ghetto for us, took us through thebarriers in his motor-cars, and equipped us with all kinds of permits whichmeant work. He had considerable influence and extensive connections. Duringthe January Action he came to us with a car in order to carry us from ourhiding place to work. He helped anybody who wished to find a refuge on theAryan side.He was a mysterious figure. Opinions differed as to whether he was aFrom: “Three Hundred Hours in the Burning Ghetto”, by M. Berland, Yad Ve Shem,Jerusalem 5719,312THE KALISH BOOKGerman or a Pole or a Volksdeutsche. But it was also suggested that he wasa Jew, though we did not think that was likely.He fell in August 1943 after being arrested in his workshops on a chargeof false papers. The denunciations of the Kapos were what put him into thehands of the Germans. When he was arrested he seized the weapons of twodetectives belonging to the Criminal Police, and escaped in his car. But nextday he was caught on the denunciation of one of his good German friends,and was executed.Only then was everything known. Tanski was none other than Temkin ofKalish. His sister Mrs. Katz, her husband and daughter, worked for him. Hisfather, an old man of seventy-five, was reciting Psalms in our cellar. The sonhad wanted to take him to the Aryan side, but the old man wanted to beburied in a Jewish grave.From: “Three Hundred Haurz in the Burning Ghetto,"By M. Borland, Yad Ve-Shem, Jerusalem.ISRAEL SHARIHe fell on 13th April, 1943. But before that the Kalish tailor Israel Sharihad taken part in many battles and made his mark as a fighter and patrol-man. He was the Commander of a patrol unit and carried out very responsibletasks. He used to ascertain the objectives of the German columns, the numberof soldiers in this village or that, their arms, and similar information.On 23rd January 1943 we were fighting a savage battle with the Occupantswho attacked us suddenly. We retreated without losses. The Germans avengedtheir defeat on the village of Svatnitza which used to help the partisans. Afterseven days of wreaking havoc the Germans pretended to be leaving the villagein order to entice us back.Our Commander sent Shari and another two Jews there as scouts. Near acowshed Shari saw a German but the other saw him as well. The wholeneighbourhood was lit up and Shari buried his head in the snow. The Germansemptied a whole belt of machine gun bullets, but Shari killed him with asingle shot. The whole German orchestra then began shooting. Shari exploitedthe confusion and crowled back. A bullet hit him in the hand and he spenttwo months in bed.At last the Gestapo learnt where our Camp was, and they prepared a puni-tive expedition against us. They did not catch us by surprise. Israel Shari,whose wound had not yet healed, took his rifle in his hands.THOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK313“Retreat!” He shouted, “I’ll hold them up here!”It was clear to us that Shari had made up his mind to sacrifice himselfand save the Unit. After we withdrew he remained alone. He killed the Com-mander of the German Unit with two bullets and brought confusion into theGerman ranks for a moment. That moment saved us but then the Germanscame down on him. He fell like a hero. All honour to his memory.Einikeit, Moscow No. 150.MISHA ADELSTEINHe was bom in Kalish in 1923. In 1939 he settled in the village of Burskwhere he organised a group of Jews to acquire arms and go to the forests.On 16th August 1942 he went to Luberk Forests and joined a Company ofRussian Partisans. He wps appointed Commander of a Section at OtriadKartokhin.After the liberation he was killed by the Bandera Men.YOSSELE GOLDSHMIDTIn 1942 he escaped froni the Ghetto in Nowogrodek to the Poshtshe ofLipitsisonska. To begin with he was in family camps, and afterwards joinedthe “Orlianskaya Borha” Lenin Brigade. In September 1943 he was woundedin the head and fell into the hands of the Germans, unconscious. They shothim at ZheteL He was 24 years old when he fell.YEHIEL TENZERHis parents were poor and he worked hard from his youth. While stillyoung he joined the Youth Movement of the Left Poalei Zion. For some timehe worked as a weaver, and lost his place more than once because of hisexcessive activity in the Movement. For many years he was Chairman of theTextile Workers’ Trade Union in Kalish, which was one of the few unions inPoland to which both Jews and Poles belonged. He represented his Union inthe Institutions of the General Trade Union Movement and as the vital spiritof the Left Poalei Zion and its youth in Kalish. Tall, strong, healthy with afriendly expression, he was considerate to all who came to him. He workeda great deal among the youth, guiding and teaching. Finally he opened a coalshop, but struggled hard to make a living for his family, for all his time wasdedicated to his public activities. Often enough he did not demand paymentwhen poor people came to his shop.He was a Warden of the Kehilla and a member of the Municipality for hisparty. Party men where not the only ones who came to him for advice andhelp. He devoted his time and heart to all who were in need. He was theChairman of the Curatorium of the Borochow School and took part in variousother Kalish Institutions.When the War broke out and the District was annexed by the Reich, theJews were expelled. Tanzer moved to the town of Rzeszow (Reisha) in WesternGalicia and from there to Warsaw where he was active in the Undergroundof his Movement. For some time he worked at Tebens Metal Factory. Whenhe was imprisoned at the Poniatowo Concentration Camp he continued hiscommunal activity and took part in the Fighting Jewish Organisation at theCamp, where he was murdered. His name is included in the List of 320Jewish Communal Workers, scholars, scientists and artists who were murdered.THOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK315HAVA SHUREKKALISH WOMEN IN THE RESISTANCEVITKA KEMPNERVitka Kempner of Kalish has an honourable place among the women whofought in Vilna. She studied in Kalish, was an active member in the HashomerHatzair Movement and when studying at the Warsaw University was anactive member of the Avuka Students Society. In 1939 she crossed thefrontier and reached the Halutz Concentration in Wilna. In the Ghetto shewas a member of the Hashomer Hatzair Secretariat and helped to organisethe Fighting Jewish Organisation. Later she was in the Nekama PartisanGroup, where she commanded a Unit and headed a patrol unit. She receivedthe 4‘Red Flag” Order of Distinction. Later she helped to organise theHaapala (Immigration without Certificates) to Eretz Israel from EasternEurope.In June 1942 the Command of the P.P.A. Fighting Organisation decided onthe first act of sabotage against a train. The Haverim stole dynamite fromGerman bunkers. In a dark cellar at No. 3 Carmelite Street people workedby candle light to prepare a mine in a piece of metal pipe. It was verydangerous because of the lack of professional knowledge. The elementaryinformation they had acquired came from Soviet pamphlets which werestolen from the Archives of the YIVO (Yddishe Wissenschaftliche Institut).Vitka went out to find a suitable place to place the mine along the railwayline.Her dark hair became blond and Aryan. In the morning she went off towork among a group of Jews. She slipped away from them in the street,removed the Jewish hadge from her chest and back and mounted the pave-ment. Now she was an Aryan and went out of town, to the railway leadingto Vilioka. Germans were on guard there and civilians were not allowed toapproach. They stopped Vitka.She played the innocent, told them that she was going to the neighbouringvillage and did not know that she was not allowed to cross there. Theywarned her that if she was caught again she would be arrested. Vitka wentaway and appeared not long after at some other place that was not beingguarded at that moment. But then she found that there were Jewish workersnearby. Apart from that, a steep slope was necessary if the operation wasto succeed.So Vitka went out every morning from the Ghetto for three days, spendingthe whole day near the railway line and searching for the right place for theoperation. All the joie de vivre went from her face. She became silent and316THE KALISH BOOKher eyes seemed to look inward. She was thinking about the operation andthe responsibility.When the dawn rose on 8th July Vitka, Isa Matzkevitz and Moshe Brauseleft the Ghetto carrying the mine. Their objective was to blow up a Germantrain 7 kilometres south-east of Vilna. The operation had to take place atnight and they would have to be back in the Ghetto by dawn next day sothat could go out to work as usual.At the dawn Vitka reached the Ghetto, her legs torn and bleeding, buther face radiant. The mine had been planted and nobody had noticed them.There was a strength in her eyes which gave them an unusual brightness,while her face had a different expression. When she was asked what shehad thought during the long night she answered: “How to do the job withoutfalling into their hands. I was sorry that I had no cyanide of potassium withme.”News of the explosion arrived at 3 p.m. The train was destroyed, bothengines and ammunition waggons. The Germans were at a loss, for this wasthe first operation of its kind near Wilna where there were many garrisontroops. They did not suspect the Jews, for they were sure that the Jewswere already defeated and would not raise their heads. Such a deed couldonly be done by free men.It was a happy day for the Fighters in the Ghetto. They laughed in thestreets. Passers-by shrugged their shoulders thinking that the others hadgone crazy.Many coaches containing German soldiers and ammunition in the trainwhich was on its way to Polotsk were smashed. In the morning the peasantscounted about 200 bodies of soldiers, apart from those who were completelyblown apart and could not be counted. After their census the peasantscollected pistols, rifles, and many bullets.Vitka Kempner displayed her full capacity in the Forests. One night inOctober, 1943 she went 40 kilometres on foot carrying a suitcase full ofmines, and entered Vilna. There she blew up an electric transformer. Nextday she entered the Keilis Concentration Camp and took out 60 people tothe Partisan bases. In the Nekama Camp she organised the survey patroland headed it. She took part in blowing up a train near Oran where 200Germans were killed. With the aid of five other Partisans she set theTurpentine Factory at Olkiniki on fire. She distinguished herself at thebattles of Deinimova in January 1944, and captured two Gestapo agents.She took part in blowing up 2 railway engines and 2 bridges.In November 1943 she had to fetch important documents to Wilna. Onthe way she was caught by a German patrol which took her to the Gestapo.She escaped from their hands and vanished. Next day she brought animportant Kowno member of the Underground to the Base.A Society of Jewish women in Brazil has been named for her. Shesurvived and is now a member of Kibbutz Ein Hahoresh,THOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK317HANNAH ARONOVITCH-RACKMANIn 1940 the Nazis began to exterminate Jewish children. They expelledthe Jewish mothers from their homes, collecting them in a certain Squarewhich they surrounded with S.S. soldiers. A Nazi Officer delivered a speechto the mothers and called on them to hand over their children, who wouldbe sent to special Children's Institutions where they would be provided withbetter care.Unfortunately not all the mothers understood that this was all lies anddeception. Many of them handed their children over to the Germans. Whenthe polished German Officer tried to take Hannah Rackman’s child from herarms by force, she slapped him twice in the face. He put his hand on hispistol while she, according to a witness, stuck her nails in his face andtried to scratch out his eyes. She fell while defending herself in this way.RIVKA AND VERA SHUREKRivka and Vera Shurek were the wife and young daughter of AbrahamShurek of Kalish. According to the accounts of A. Sutzkever and B. Markthey were both active in the Bialystok Ghetto. They became famous in thestruggle against the Germans, who made special efforts to capture them alive.Both of them fell in a clash with a German patrol./YIZKORMAY GOD REMEMBER THE SOULS OF OUR BRETHREN OF ISRAEL WHORESIDED IN THE CITY OF KALISH AND BECAME MARTYRS AND HEROESDURING THE HOLOCAUST; THIRTY THOUSAND JEWS WHO WERE SLAIN,MURDERED, STRANGELD AND BURIED ALIVE; THE ENTIRE HOLY CONGREG-ATION OF KALISH WHO WERE DESTROYED AND HALLOWED THE NAME.MAY GOD REMEMBER HOW THEY WERE OFFERED UP WITH THE OTHERMARTYRS AND HEROES OF ISRAEL SINCE TIME UNTOLD; AND MAY THEIRSOULS BE BOUND UP IN THE BUNDLE OF LIFE. THEY WERE LOVELY ANDPLEASANT IN THEIR LIVES, AND IN DEATH THEY WERE NOT DIVIDED.MAY THEY REST IN PEACE WHERE THEY LIE. AND LET US SAY AMEN.THE ROLLOF HONOURTHE ROLL OF HONOUR321THE ROLL OF HONOURIN MEMORY OF THOSE WHO FELLIN THE WARS OF ISRAELLet the People of Israel remember their faithful andcourageous sons who gave their lives in the Wars ofIsrael. Let Israel remember their offspring and findblessing in them, and mourn the radiance of theiryouth and their splendid bravery, the hallowed readinessfor all deeds, dedicated souls of those who were slainin bitter battle. May the heroes of our Wars of Libera-tion and of Victory be set as a seal upon the heartof Israel for age on age.AVRUNIN, JOSEPH son of SAMUEL and ESTHERBorn 1925 in Tel-Aviv. Educated at the Ben Yehuda SecondarySchool and active in the “Sea Scouts”, where he was anInstructor. He was sent on an advanced course in MaritimeServices on board the Neptune and was killed in action atsea. He was brought to burial on 4th Tishri 5704 (1943).BET-HALEVI, ABRAHAM BEZALEL son of ISRAEL DAVID andHAYA PEARLBorn in Kalish on Lag Be-Omer 5673 (1913). In 1939 joineda Football Team which went to Australia, and remained thereto study at a High School for Science and Commerce. Uponthe outbreak of the Second World War he volunteered tojoin the Australian Army with the aim of returning toEretz Israel in its ranks. He fell in the line of duty on 25thTevet 5704 (1944).FEIERMANN, BARUCH son of YEHIEL MEIR and JUDITHBorn in Blaszki, arrived in Israel 1948 as a member ofMaHaL (Overseas Volunteers) and joined the Givati Brigade.Fell in battle on 14th, Tishri 5709 (1948) and was buriedat the Military Cemetery in Kfar Warburg.322THE KALISH BOOKFENICHEL, HAYYIM son of MENAHEM and NEHAMA nee ENGELof KalishBorn in Kfar Saba in 1947, graduated from his SecondarySchool, was an Instructor of the Noar Oved and a Sergeantin the Israel Defence Army. He fell in the Battle of Rafiahduring the Six Day War, and on 29th June 1967 was buriedin Kfar Saba.FRUMMER, ABRAHAM HAYYIM son of NAHMAN and JUDITHBorn in Tel-Aviv 1938. Secondary School education. Enteredin the Israel Defence Army. He fell in the Battle of Rafiahsuitability for Officers’ rank. On 22nd lyyar 5718 (1958) hewas mortally wounded during training, when a grenade hecarried in his belt exploded, and was buried in the MilitaryCemetery of Kiryat Shaul.GLOWINSKI, ARIEH son of ISAAC and HINDABom in Kalish in 1920, came to Eretz Israel with his parentsin 1935, completed his studies at an evening SecondarySchool. He was active in Gadna and the Hagana, volunteeredin December 1947, took part in the defence of the Sharonvillages, the opening of the road to Jerusalem, the battlesfor Lydda and Ramleh and the attempt to breach the FalujaPocket. He fell at Irak al Manshiah and was buried at Falujaon 20.10.1948. His remains were afterwards transfered tothe Military Section of the Nahlat Yitzhak Cemetery.GOTCHAL, ZVI son of JOSEPH and HANNAH nee ANZERBorn in Tel-Aviv on 2nd Tammuz 5688 (1928) and studiedat the Balfour Secondary School. After serving as Super-numerary Constable at Beit Shean he commenced his studiesat the Hebrew University on 29th September, 1947. Whenthe Call to Arms came he abandoned his studies and togetherwith dozens of his companions volunteered and was sent tothe Etzion Block. He participated in battles in and aroundJerusalem for the liberation of the Jewish Quarters. On1st May, 1948 he fell on the Katamon Front. He was buriedin Sanhedria, and on 9th Marheshvan 5712 (1951) his remainswere transferred to the Military Cemetery on Mount Herzl.INBAR (MELTZER), ALEXANDER son of ARIEH and ADABom in Haifa 28th December 1939, completed the TechnicalSchool of the Haifa Technical Institute. Captain in the AirForce, Navigator-Pilot. Died 7.6.1967 during the Six Day Warin an attack on the H3 Airfield in Iraq. Buried in Haifa on2.8.1967, after his remains were returned from Iraa.THE ROLL OF HONOUR323ISRAELOVITCH, ISAAC son of ABRAHAMBom in Kalish, 1923, received an elementary education andfound employment as a metal worker at an early age. Amember of Hashomer Hatzair, he came to Eretz Israel in1947 and joined the Palmah. Fell in the attack on the NebiYusha Police Station in Upper Galilee on 20.4.1948 and wasburied in the Nebi Yusha Military Cemetery.KAPLAN, AVNER, son of ISRAEL and RACHEL (daughter ofthe late Jerusalem Chief Rabbi Zvi Pessah Frank)Born 25th Sivan 5797 (1937) in Jerusalem, the first-bornchild of his parents, showed his devotion to his studies andrare spiritual qualities from his early childhood. Graduatedwith distinction from the Ohel Shem Secondary School inRamat Gan, was active in the Halutz Youth Movement wherehe was an Instructor, and later joined Nahal.During the Sinai Campaign in 1956 he was injured in thespine on the way to Sharm es Sheikh (Mifratz Shlomo).After his recovery he became a member of Tel KatzirKibbutz. He was killed in an accident at Tel Katzir soon afterPassover 1959.KOCHMAN, SIMEON son of YEHIEL and ESTHER RIVKABorn on 6th Marheshvan 5685 (1924). On finishing SecondarySchool he enlisted as a Supernumerary Policeman at KiriatHayyim and was an active member of the Hagana. Uponthe outbreak of the War of Liberation he left his work andengaged in defence activities. He fell in the Battle for BetAfa on 11th Tammuz 5708 (1948).LEWKOVITCH, JOSEPH son of ZVIBorn in Kalish, 1927. When the War broke out he was cutoff from his family, moved from camp to camp and sufferedstarvation and other distresses under the Nazis. In 1945 hewas liberated by the Allied Forces and joined a group ofHalutzim. With the aid of the members of the Jewish Brigadehe proceeded to Hachshara in Italy, reached Eretz Israel asa Maapil at the end of 1945 and became a member ofKibbutz Hulata. There he found his place in work and sociallife, and fulfilled his duties on guard and in defence. Whileon his way to aid Mishmar Hayarden on 5.6.1948 he wasinjured by a shell. He was buried in Kibbutz Hulata.324THE KALISH BOOKEITTMAN (AVTAEION), PINHAS son of BABBI JACOB ZEEVand GITTEEBorn in Kalish on 21st Marheshvan 5686 (1926) and cameto Eretz Israel in 1936. Went through Secondary School.At the age of 17 he responded to the wartime summons“to Arms or Farms” and proceeded to serve at Sdeh EliahuKibbutz, where he joined the Jewish Settlement Police. Inan affray with Arabs he was severely wounded but re-covered. After two and a half years of service in the SpecialPolice he became a student at the Agricultural Faculty ofthe Hebrew University. In December 1947 he enlisted andfought in the vicinity of Jerusalem. During the fighting atRamat Rachel he was severely wounded and died.EITRELSKY (AEON), DAVID son of MOSHE and DEBORAHBorn in Tel-Aviv 1925, received an elementary education.Served in the Palmah for five years. Upon completion ofservice joined an independent Kibbutz which settled at Nirim,where he was in charge of security. In the attack of 15thMay, 1948 the Nirim settlers under his command repulsedthe enemy but he himself was mortally wounded by shrapnel.He was buried the same day in Kibbutz Nirim.NAPARSTEK, SAMUEE son of DAVID and HANNAHBorn in Kalish 1920, ran away to the Russian Zone at theoutbreak of the Second World War. Served in the Red Armyfrom the age of nineteen and was sent to a Training Schoolfor Officers. After the War he came to Eretz Israel andimmediately volunteered for military service. He fought inthe Hills of Jerusalem and was wounded near Kibbutz Harel.Next day he went into action at Bet Jemal. On the way backhis car was blown up by a mine. He died of his wounds on19.10.1948 and was buried in Kiryat Anavim.PUEVERMACHER, YBRAHAM son of ISAAC and MINABom in Kalish 1924, came to Eretz Israel in 1935, received asecondary education. Joined the Hagana in which he servedfor seven years. At the outbreak of the War of Liberationhe enlisted in the Givati Brigade, participated in openingthe road to Jerusalem and the Battles of the South and theNegev. Fatally injured in the Battle for Bet Afa on 18.7.1948,and was buried in the Military Section of the Nahlat YitzhakCemetery. He was awarded the rank of Lieutenant post-humously on 23.1.1951.THE ROLL OF HONOUR325SILBERMAN, ISAAC son of ELIEZER and ESTHERBorn in Eretz Israel 1929, member of the Hagana from theage of fourteen. He studied at the Montefiore TechnicalSchool and worked at the Tel-Aviv Electricity Plant. InDecember 1947, after the United Nations vote approving theestablishment of the Jewish State, he volunteered and tookpart in the Battles for the Sharon settlements and Tel Aviv.He was sent to Military Hospital by order of the MedicalOfficer, but left it of his own accord and returned to his unit.On 26.5.48 he fell in the Battle for Latrun and was buriedthere. His remains were transferred to the Military Cemeteryat Mount Herzl on 17.11.1949.SHELAK, MOSHE YAAKOV (MELNIK) son of ZVI and SARAHBom in Kalish 1924, attended Secondary School. During theSecond World War was imprisoned in a Camp but shortlybefore the liberation escaped by jumping from a train.He came to Eretz Israel and volunteered for Aliya B work,particularly frontier crossing. Disguised as a Greek he ledimmigrants across the frontiers of Austria and Italy, andwas wounded several times by frontier guards. He reachedEretz Israel again in 1946. At the commencement of the Warof Liberation he joined the Palmah and served in the Portzim(Break-through) Unit of the Harel Brigade. On 10.6.1948 hewas wounded at Kiryat Anavim and died two days later.He was buried at Sanhedria and on 16th Marheshvan 5712(1951) his body was transferred to the Military Cemetery onMount Herzl.SHILOH, JACOB son of MOSHE and YONINA (SHELAH)Born in Kalish 1935 and came to Eretz Israel from Belgiumin 1949 as a member of the Youth Aliya. Educated in GanShmuel Kibbutz. Volunteered at 17, remained in the StandingArmy reaching the rank of Rav Seren (Major), and wassent to a course of Paratroop Training in France. Uponcompletion of the Course he received an International Prizefor Free Parachuting. Took part in all paratroop activitiesof the Israel Defence Army and trained beginners. In theBattle of Shechem during the Six Day War he was fatallywounded by a sniper and was buried in Afula on 7.6.67.326THE KALISH BOOKSHKLANOWSKI, SAMUEL ISAAC son of YEHIEL YEHUDA andSHOSHANABorn in Tel-Aviv 1925 and studied at Secondary School,member of the Hagana from 14. At the age of 17 he joinedthe Supernumerary Police and served at Shaar Hagolanuntil 1945. Upon the commencement of the pre-State fightinghe took part in the defence of the Tel-Aviv suburbs. He wassent to the Negev in December 1947, helped to guard theWater Pipe Line and the Supply Convoys to the Negev andJerusalem, in the vicinity of which he also fought. On 13thlyyar 5708 (1948) while training he felt that the safetycatch of the grenade in his hand had opened. There weremore than 20 members of his Unit in the Training Hall withhim. He dashed out and the grenade burst in his hands.He was buried in the Military Section of the Nahlat YitzhakCemetery.WACHS, ZEEV son of ISAAC DAVID and NEHABorn in Kalish in 1922, came to Eretz Israel and afterwardswent to France. During the Second World War he returnedand worked at the Government Printing Works in Jerusalem.In 1944 he volunteered for the Jewish Brigade and took partin its Campaigns. After demobilisation he went back to hisformer work in Jerusalem and lived in the Old City. Uponthe outbreak of the fighting at the end of 1947, and whilestill working at the Government Printers, he and his com-rades organised the defence of the Jewish workers at thePress. He was then called to the Jewish Defence Services andparticipated in the guarding of the convoys which broughtsupplies to the settlements round Jerusalem. On 6.4.1948 hefell in the Battle of Mount Castel and was buried in theMaaleh Hahamisha Kevutza. On 12th Kislev 5714 (1953) hisremains were transferred to the Military Cemetery at MountHerzl, Jerusalem.YITZHAKI, ARIEH son of ELIJAH ITZIK and DEBORAHBorn in Kalish, 1914, came to Eretz Israel with his parentsin 1924, studied at the Tahkemoni Religious School. From hischildhood he was an active member of the Betar YouthMovement, afterwards joined the Irgun Zevai Leumi and wasactive in the Underground. He fell while preparing explosivesin the vicinity of Tel Aviv during 1939, and on 21st Av5699 (1939) was buried in the Nahlat Itzhak Cemetery.THE ROLL OF HONOURTHE TALE OF KALISH JEWRY CLOSES HERE, UNENDEDThe Kallsh Book Committee In TJ.S.A*Standing, r. to I.: Hershel Arkush, Jacob Levy, Samuel Okladek, Samuel Roth, NahumMedien, Max Smolin.Seated, r. to 1.: Israel Diamant, Abraham Bandel, Joseph Arnold, Sam Berke,Peretia Walter,Editorial Committee lit IsraelStanding, r. to I.: Gershon Wrotslavsky, Ellezer Birnbaum, Menahem Shklanovsky,Zvi Arad,Seated, r. to I.: Mendel Sieradzki, Dr. Saul Zalud, Baruch Tall, Abraham Zohar.CONTENTS:PageFOREWORD 7YIZKOR 8MEMORIAL STONES — Baruch Tall 10THE HISTORY OF THE JEWS IN KALISH —Dr. N. M. Gelber 13THE MEN OF THE CITY 57The City of Blessed Memory — Dr. S. Zalud 58Jews in the Commerce and Industry of Kalish —Stefan Frenkel 72The Lace Industry — K. C. 76The Trade Union Movement — I. Klechevski 78Our City — Leon Solnik 83Five Years of Communal Work — J. M. Heber 85Blaszki — B. C. 86Stawiszin — Shraga Engel 89Religious Life in the City — Rabbi Dr. Meir Schwartzmann 90The “Magen Abraham” — Moshe Feinkind 91The Gaon Reb Abbele Harif — Mordechai Weil 94Rabbi Hayyim Eliezer Wachs — M. Kalishai 96Rabbi Ezekiel Liebshitz — A. K. 98Torah and Prayer — Aryeh Bornstein 100The Cantors of Kalish — E. Krotianski 101In the Yeshiva — Shlomo Yehiel Nobel 104The Jubilee of the Eruv — M. Ben Abraham 105A Pogrom in Kalish in 5638 — M. Menahemai 106A Blood Libel in Kalish — Hanski 107Kalish as a Family Name — Joseph Milner 108The Jewish Press of Kalish — A. K. 1101904—1920 — Peretz Walter 111The Clattering Machines — Simeon Horonchik 115The Beginnings of the Century — Morris Walter 121SOCIETY AND CULTURE 125The Jewish Political Parties 126Seeking for the Way — Hayyim Stein 131The “Lamifal” Training Kibbutz in Kalish — Edzia 133Cultural Life — Meir Packentreger 135Cultural Activities, 1918—1939 — S. Baum 136“Turn un Sport Verein” — Isaac Kleczewski 138Rowing Club K. W. 30 — S. Pinczewski 139The Budgetary Session of the Kehilla Council 1930 — M. M. 140Results of Elections to the Kehilla Council 1936 — A. K. 144What Have The Kehilla Elections Taught Us? 144The Jewish Hospital — Dr. P. Beatus 145PageA DECADE 148Kalish in 5687 149Kalish in 5688 152Kalish in 5689 156Kalish in 5690 159Kalish in 5691 161Kalish in 5692 163Kalish in 5693 166Kalish in 5694 168Kalish in 5695 170Kalish in 5696 172THE FINAL YEARS 177The Attack on the Market Dealers in Grodzisk — K. W. 179The Dreadful Fate of the Market Travellers — A. Avenavitz 180Competition — M, Warshawski 182The Only Way Out — Yedidia 183Kalish Miniatures — Baal-Davar 185My City — S. Rubin 186On the Bridge of Kalish — Observer 188During the First World War — Katriel Stein 189On the Island — L. Shurek-Halevi 190The New Year — M. Packentreger 194The Ninth of Av in 1914 — H. Solnik 196My Eyes Perceive You — Meir Packentreger 198Daily Life — Gershon Wrodawski 198Oppenheim House — Benjamin Zvieli 200The Old Bridge in Kalish — Joseph Sieradzki 201The Cafe Goers — J. Holz 203We are Taking Steps — Alexander Poznanski 20519, Ciasna Street — I. Holz 2073, Nowa Street — Bluma Wroclawski 208A Lag BaOmer March — M. B. 209Lag BaOmer Rambles — Roshem 211The Herzl Assembly at a Hashomer Camp — Bar-Saba 212The Gymnasium — Micia Jedwab-Katzir 214The Jewish Theatre and Amatenr Groups — W. K. 215Hehalutz — S. R. 217Map of the City 218The City Remains Solitary — Baruch Tall 219ORGANIZATIONS AND INSTITUTIONS 222The Organization of Immigrants from Kalishand District in Israel 222The Committee of Kalish Landsleit in Jerusalem 229The Kalish Landsleit Organization in Haifa 231Mission to Poland, 1946 — Joseph Arnold 232The Story and Activities of the Kalish Non-PartizanRelief in U.S.A. 236Kalish Immigrant Societies in the U.SA. —Kalman Aronovitch 242Kalisb Townsfolk in Australia 248PageTHE HOLOCAUST 249The End of the Community — Dr. Moshe Gross 251Kalish, Kozminek and the Camps — Wolf Lassman 275Kalish in August 1939 and After — Ringelblum Archives 281Some Figures — S. Glicksman 287Kalish in May 1962 — Abraham Milgrom 288The Finish — Dov Zielonka 289My Dream (Poem) — Halina Liebeskind 293THOSE WHO FOUGHT BACK 205Joseph Kaplan 296Adek Boraks 301Jacob David Sitner 305Abraham Diamant 306Zerah Silberberg 308Temkin 311Israel Shari 312Misha Adelstein 313Yossele Goldshmidt 313Yehiel Tenzer 314Kalish Women in the Resistance — Hava Shurek 315Hannah Aronovitch-Rackman 317Rivka and Vera Shurtz 317YIZKOR 318THE ROLL OF HONOUR 321Kalish Book Committees in U.S.A. and Israel 328THE TALE OF KALISH JEWRY CLOSES HERE, UNENDED 329ILLUSTRATIONSbetween Pages 32— 33between Pages 64— 65between Pages 176—177Arthur SzykKalish JewsKalish ScenesThe English version, prepared by I. M. LASK, wascompleted and printed on the Eve of Passover 5678 (1968).