DAVID AND SYLVIA STEINER YIZKOR BOOK COLLECTIONSTEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARYNO. 14221Piotrkow Trybunalski Memorial BookA tale of one cityTHE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY - NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERYIZKOR BOOK PROJECTNEW YORK, NEW YORK AND AMHERST, MASSACHUSETTSTHE STEVEN SPIELBERG DIGITAL YIDDISH LIBRARY PROVIDESON-DEMAND REPRINTS OF MODERN YIDDISH LITERATURE©2003 THE NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY ANDTHE NATIONAL YIDDISH BOOK CENTERMAJOR FUNDING FOR THEYIZKOR BOOK PROJECT WAS PROVIDED BY:Harry and Lillian Freedman FundDavid and Barbara B. Hirschhorn FoundationDavid and Barbara MarguliesThe Nash Family FoundationHarris RosenDavid and Sylvia SteinerRuth TaubmanOriginal publication dataTITLEIMPRINTDESCRIPTSUBJECTadd'l nameA tale of one city : Piotrkow Trybunalski / edited by Ben Giladi.New York : Shengold Publishers in cooperation with the PiotrkowTrybunalski Relief Association in New York, cl991.408 p. : ill.; 27 cm.Jews -- Poland -- Piotrkow Trybunalski.Piotrkow Trybunalski (Poland) -- Ethnic relations.Holocaust, Jewish (1939-1945) — Poland — Piotrkow Trybunalski.Giladi, Ben.THIS BOOK MEETS A.N.S.I. STANDARDS FORPAPER PERMANENCE AND LIBRARY BINDING.PRINTED IN THE U.S.A.( pi'o+rKo •'/ , <fir ^fl TALE OF one CITYPXOTJUCOW mi|fiUN.4LSKXISBN 0-88400-153-9Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 91-066446Copyright © 1991 by Copyright © 1991 by Ben GiladiAll rights reserved.Shengold Publishers, Inc.18 West 45th Street, New York, NY 10036Printed in the United States of America... How doth the City sit solitary.That was full of people!How is she become a widow!She that was great among the Nations,And princess among the provinces.How is she become tributary!My eyes do fail with tears.For the destruction of my people;Arise, cry out in the night.Pour out thine heart before the Lord,Lift up thy hands toward HimFor the life of thy young children.That faint for hungerIn the top of every street...Lamentations of Jeremiah—1:1; 2:11; 2:19.It was the best of times, it was the worst oftimes, it was the age of wisdom, it was the ageof foolishness, it was the epoch of belief, it wasthe epoch of incredulity, it was the season ofLight, it was the season of Darkness, it was thespring of hope, it was the winter of despair, wehad everything before us, we had nothingbefore us, we were all going direct to Heaven,we were all going direct the other way—Charles Dickens-A Tale of Two CitiesOVER THE ROOFS OF P I O T R K O WContentsAcknowledgments   10Introduction  11Preface   13When A City is Destroyed   14Once There Was A Town  21Chronology of Events in History of the Jews of Piotrkow  30THE GOLDEN THREAD  51Introductory Words  53The Last Chapter   54The Martyrdom of M. Calahora  61Notable Personalities  63THE SAGESRabbinical Portraits  66Rabbi Menachem David Temkin   70THE GREAT TEACHERSRabbi Yehuda Meir Shapira   73Rabbi Moshe Hayim Lau  76PERSONALITIESMoshe Feinkind  79Pinchas Bar-On   82Yakov Berliner  87Abraham Reuven Pinkusewicz  89HOUSES OF WORSHIPThe Great Synagogue  92The Various Chassidic Synagogues  98Organizations and Movements  106EDUCATIONThe Hebrew High School  115The Vocational School ORT  120Literary-Artistic Activity  123Jewish Publishing Establishments  129"FUN DER ALTER HEIM"A Stroll Through Our Piotrkow 134Conjunctions In the Past Tense  146Peretz Street  149City Stereotypes 151A Letter from Ben-Gurion 153Leopold Lewin  156THE TRACK OF THE STORM  159The Seven Fires of Hell 161The Beginning 197TESTIMONIESFirst Victims 200The First Transport to the Labor Camps 202The Unforgotten 204Piotrkower Chalutzim During the War  208The Last Stage 211The Cheerful Baker 214The Bunker On Fama 218From the Bunker to the Synagogue 221Massacre of Children 222Vicinity-Deportation from Gorzkowice  223What I Saw in Treblinka 227The Purim Massacre in Piotrkow 237My Parents  245The Topic of Resistence 246The Radoshitzer Rebbe 251The Long Day   257Piotrkow in Holocaust Literature 260Legacy to Grandson  266RECALLED TO LIFE  267Piotrkow—^Ir Waeim BTsrael  269Piotrkow After the War 271The Remnants Unite  275A Survivor's Happiness  278In the Jewish Brigade 284The Past Revisited  287In Memory of Jacob Maltz 289I Believe  292Remembrance of Things past  296Yidele 300Straight from the Heart 305The Gathering—1983   308The Unsung Heroes 312Unveiling at Yad Vashem  314Roman Mogilanski  316Megilat Piotrkow  319Notes from Piotrkow 321The Destruction of the Jewish Community of Piotrkow 323The Beginning 354HERE AND NOW—FAR AND WIDEThe Piotrkow Trybunalski Relief Association—A Centennial 357The Second Generation 367Our People in the Land of Israel  369Across the Continents  380From Piotrkow to London 389New York's Societyof Piotrkow and Vicinity  394The Jewish Nazi Victims Organization of America 395FOLKLOREThe Last of the Coachmen 397Chess—The Jewish Game in Piotrkow 403The Monument  406In the Hall of Names  408AcknowledgmentsAcknowledgments by an author of the support he has received from others inpreparing his work at times seem only perfunctory, little more than a symbolic gesture.This is not the spirit in which I wish to acknowledge my indebtedness to those whoassisted me throughout the period during which I wrestled with the arduous task I hadset out on.First, I would like to thank the Piotrkow Trybunalski Relief Association in NewYork, and especially its committee for the moral support, encouragement and substantialcontributions toward the production of this publication.My most ardent thanks go to Elazar Prashker for his guidance and inspiration.I wish to express my deep appreciation to Ambassador Naphtali Lau-Lavie and hisyounger brother Rabbi Israel Meir Lau for their spiritual support and precious friendship.Credit is thankfully given to the translators: Pearl Krupit (Yiddish), Mordecai Schreiberand Naphtali Greenwood (Hebrew). Their skillful, sensitive efforts greatly contributedto the spirit of this book. I am also grateful for the professional editorial help of MaydaRumberg.The most complex and delicate task of proofreading was performed by LorraineJustman-Wisnicki. My heartiest thanks for her devotion, which helped to achieve a highstandard in the accuracy of the text.I would like to express my gratitude to the second-generation children, whosecombined efforts helped me in the preparation and presentation of the book. They are:Suzanne Ajzenberg, Toby Schafer and Alex Rosenblum in the USA, Sheine Mankovskyand her friends in Canada and Tamar Bat-Zion Hess and Ahuva Erez in Israel. Togetherwith Hana Kozlowski, Professor Shragga Irmay and his wife Rina, they all lent a helpinghand. My special appreciation is extended to Israel and Elli Krakowski, who helped toget this project off the ground.Above all, I am immensely grateful to Mr. Moshe Sheinbaum, our publisher. Hisexpert guidance, his intellect, his professionalism and personal involvement trulyenhanced the value of the book.Finally, my most heartfelt thanks to my beloved wife Tova and daughter Irith, whocheered me on and helped me generously during the challenging stages of creation.I also thank all my compatriots and their children everywhere for their belief in me.B,G,10IntroductionA lot of water has passed under the bridge—in the Vistula, the Thames, theJordan or the Hudson—since we all said farewell to Piotrkow. We, its survivors,vividly remember the city, a miniature reflection of a lost world and a shatteredcivilization. Since leaving Poland, we have never stopped to think, talk or writeabout our home, about the glories of our forefathers and the cruel fate whichbefell them.And so, the magnificent, monumental Piotrkower “Izkor Book” was first publishedin Israel. And our Bulletin later began to appear in New York. Then the periodical“Heidim” came to life in Israel. It was a vast treasure of the written word devoted to ourglorious and tragic past and our hectic and meaningful present.“Before, during and after”: everlasting stories, essays, poems, chronicles, docu-ments, manuscripts and photos, all pertaining to the life and death of our People before,during and after the Holocaust; all accumulated over the years, with more fascinatingmaterial still flowing in. However, most of these written treasures could not be ap-preciated by many of our people, including their children, who do not read Hebrew,Yiddish or Polish. Their basic language is English, which has slowly become thelanguage of the world.Furthermore, the “Izkor Book” was published some thirty years ago. A lot hashappened since then. Much new and relevant material has appeared. The need for anEnglish book such as this became acutely important.In presenting this fascinating book, I have fulfilled an old dream. It may have beenone’s destiny to gather in one book all the compassion, the motivation, credibility,strength, heritage and G-d-granted inspiration in order to accomplish such a gigantictask, with the help of so many talented and skillful writers, of course. This book is a finaltribute to the memory of our Martyrs and is dedicated by the survivors of Piotrkow andtheir children worldwide.The most heartbreaking, difficult task in the editing of the book was the selectionof the material. So many important pages had to be omitted or condensed. A carefulattempt was made to create a true profile of our history and our life: a reconstruction ofthe bygone world destroyed by the Amalek.The treasures of our own Pompeii could only be recovered in our hearts and in ourmemories. Only then could they be translated into the written word.There are very few of us left and we are disappearing day by day, one by one. Soonhistory will speak, at best with the impersonal voice of scholars and researchers, at worstwith the poisonous voice of the anti-Semites and the falsifiers. It is therefore importantthat those of us who are still here to bear witness put everything on record and make it1112 / A TALE OF ONE CITYavailable to our children and the generations to come—an undistorted record, in all itstragedy and all its glory, so that the world will not forget one of the oldest and mostthriving Jewish communities in Poland.So, here it is. A labor of love laid out in the colorful, fascinating, touching,ever-changing and sentimental landscape of bygone days. A taste of heartfelt feelings.A long-nurtured dream. A legacy for future generations, a solemn promise finallyfulfilled: A Tale Of One City!Ben GiladiPrefaceOn October 25, 1990, I walked through the streets of Piotrkow with hundreds ofyoung American Jewish leaders. Fifty years earlier, I had walked through those samestreets with my school friends. Those friends are now gone.Now, as visitors and tourists, we were the only Jews walking among ruins of whatwas once a thriving, vibrant Jewish community. Jewish shops, Jewish homes, shtiblech(small synagogues), Jewish educational institutes all attested to more than 600 years ofmagnificent Jewish history in Piotrkow—now replaced by a neglected Jewish cemetery.My friends, young men and women from communities throughout the United States,eagerly sought out stories and memories from every crack in a doorpost where a mezuzahhad once stood, guarding the house’s inhabitants. The mezuzahs had long ago beenripped out by their current occupants.In the cemetery, they lifted and set straight fallen tombstones. They did not know asingle person or family laid to rest in that forgotten place, but they turned to me againand again for an account or an explanation of one of the names on a stone. These engravednames—^rabbis, community leaders, intellectuals, youth—^were all part of Piotrkow’sdistinguished past.Even more, though, these young leaders wanted to know about Piotrkow’s tragiclast days, those bitter days preceding the end of 600 years of flourishing culture andprominent scholarship. The interest of these young Jews in our calamitous past reiteratedthe need for a common language in which to tell our people’s story, a language besidesour ancestors’ Hebrew and Yiddish.Publishing this commentary on the Piotrkow community, an almost insurmountabletask, testifies to this group’s dedication, a dedication demonstrating an understanding oftheir responsibility to the future.The reward for Mr. Ben Giladi, initiator and editor of this project, will be thesatisfaction of knowing that this book’s readers will be enriched with a significant partof our history. This book will be a faithful testimony to events that took place in ourlifetime, a monument memorializing those whose deaths ended hundreds of years ofJewish creativity in the community of Piotrkow.Naphtali Lau-LavieAmbassador of the State of Israel13When a City is DestroyedMany years have passed since that day when the curtain rose and revealed beforeour eyes a scene more horrible than the human eye had ever witnessed. It was anappalling phenomenon for those who stood outside the abyss and could not offer anyhelp—a nightmare for the lost souls who survived and were suddenly forced to standbefore a world that behaved as though nothing had ever happened.In the years that have passed, time has helped us to forget the sorrow of this event;it has placed upon the community the responsibility for the present and the future. Butthe Jewish People cannot yet console themselves for the tremendous disaster whichbefell them; the more we are separated from that horrible time in our experience, thegreater is our responsibility to remember the people, to immortalize their buried splendorfor the generations that will follow.In this great Holocaust we lost our city of Piotrkow (Trybunalski) and her almost20,000 brothers and sisters, the residents of a magnificent “Kehila.” For about 400 yearsthis royal Kehila of Piotrkow had blossomed, and, in the last century, she had becomean “Ir V’em B’Israel.” From her beginning, she had produced ‘‘G’doley Torah” and“tsadikim,” “Talmidey Chachomim,” “Chassidim, Rabanim” and “Admo’rim” dynas-ties, as well as scientists, writers and freedom-fighters, respected “negidim” and“amcho” people, industrialists and laborers, bankers and tradesmen—a many-coloredmosaic and productive and active Jews who occupied an important position in PolishJewry.The Jewish historian. Dr. N. M. Gelber of Jerusalem, describes in his instructiveoverview both the city’s beginnings 750 years ago and the first blossoming of its Jewishsettlement. In this historic summary are pictured the struggles of the Jewish Kehila andits first steps beyond the periphery of the city, even before Jews were permitted to settlewithin the city itself. The rise and fall of the Jewish settlement and its communal andeconomic structure are described, as well as its first attempts at realizing an organizedKehila life, with religious, philanthropic and educational institutions. The historiandoesn’t omit the personal factors which contributed in shaping the Kehila: he sketchesthe dynasties of the famous families of rabbis—“admo’rim,” “Lamdanim”—^whoseroots were in Piotrkow. He also portrays the movements and aspirations of the “Chas-sidim and Mitnagdim,” the enlightened ones and the revolutionaries, and of“Chovevey Tsion” and Socialists active in the Jewish settlement in the city.Dr. Gelber depicts the life of the Piotrkow community up to 1914 and the beginningof the First World War. For the period after 1914, we have the credible, written accountof the Piotrkow Jews related by a man who was active in shaping many of the eventsthat took place between both World Wars and which ended on the eve of the destructionof the city. This valuable work was produced by Reb Yakov Maltz, who, for many years,manned the rudder of our Kehila and made unceasing efforts to publish what he saw.14When a City is Destroyed / 15His descriptions include the most perceptive accounts of the bubbling life of the city ofPiotrkow. However, not everything that occurred in our city took place within its borders.Piotrkow had no influence on what took place outside. Piotrkow was known of in everyJewish home which contained holy books, it had the privilege of having in the RabbinicSeat “G’doley Hatorah” of their generation, whose beginnings extended far from thatKehila. This was a shrine for groups of Tzadikim, who spread the word of Torahamongst their Chassidim throughout the land. Piotrkow was also the cradle of manynoteworthy families among Polish Jewry; such respected and legendary personalitiesarose there as the Tsadik and doctor. Dr. Bernard, who was known by the name of RabbiChaim-David Doctor, zts"l.More is told about these men in descriptions by Harav Shmuel Zanvil Zharski, z"l,a Piotrkow Talmid-Chacham and researcher, who died in Tel-Aviv while working onthis book, and by the writer and researcher of religious music. Rabbi M. Sh. G’shori.Our beloved Jews excelled not only in spiritual matters, but also in physicalaccomplishments. They gave the Jewish People human values and ideas. Among thoseaffected were the youth who left for distant places to fight for the oppressed and to furthertheir knowledge for the benefit of all. Their names are inscribed for perpetuity in thisbook.Our work would not be complete, however, if we did not mention those citizens ofour city who are alive today and who have contributed their blessed efforts on both sidesof the Iron Curtain. They are Professor Ari Shternfeld, bom in Shieradz, whose familyoriginated in Piotrkow. He is considered by scientists in Soviet Russia to be the one who“paved the road to ‘Chalel’ ” (outer space vacuums); he is one of the leading Sovietscientists in their space program. On this side of the “curtain,” there is the young scientist.Dr. Yakov (Kovi) Lubliner, z"l, son of Dr. Michael Lubliner, one of the “Tseirey AgudatIsrael” in Piotrkow; he is an educator in Los Angeles, ^ and the grandson of Rabbi SimchaOzer Lubliner, z"l, who was “Rosh Hakol” of our city during the 1930’s. The youngscientist is no more than 30 years old, although he, together with other Piotrkow Jews,experienced the road of destruction that led to the complete liquidation of the Kehila.He was liberated by the American Army from a concentration camp. He is now worldrenowned in scientific circles and is considered a “gaon” in solving mathematicalproblems dealing with calculating the movement of ships, satellites and rockets in space.The chain stretches for a hundred years, from Michael Heilperin, the Piotrkowerwho left for the freedom struggles in Hungary and then in America, until the final dayswhen the city fell.Alongside these bright portraits appear the figures of dozens of individuals who lefttheir mark on the city because of their intellect, good deeds, and service to the communitywith such devotion and loyalty as those of the notable Horowitz, Aibeshitz, Shidlowski,Michelson and Lifshitz families. These people created the healthy-minded economicsupport for orthodox educational institutions—Yeshivas, Cheders, houses of prayer, and“shtiblech”—and lent an air of royalty to the Jewish appearance of the city.But by describing the “pney” of the city, the folk masses are diminished—they who1 Dr. Michael Lubliner passed away in 1988.16 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe Jewish Cemetery in Piotrkowgave Jewish Piotrkow its coloration and folk character. A place of honor is given in thisbook to the “mokum” Jews, who used to wander about Trybunalski Platz with their sharptongues, who discussed world problems as well as city matters. No more does one seeon Yidn Gas (Staro-Warszawska) or Jerusalem Gas the “Shabes-Yidn” in their satingabardines and the Vochedike Yidn in their work clothes. Their shadows float overthe pages of this book.The history of the life of the Piotrkow Kehila closes with a chapter that is dedicatedto the rise and activity of the political parties in the city. The Piotrkow name is distinctlymarked on the maps and activity plans of all parties’ central headquarters in Poland,When a City is Destroyed I 17from the “Chovevey Tsion” and “Bund” to the “Agudat Israel,” with all their sectionsand branches. In the last 30 years of the life of the Kehila, there was a strong drive inthe parties that competed with each other for influence in the streets and for power withinthe Kehila. A summary of the inter-party strife in the city is given in the overviews ofthe various parties, as depicted through the eyes of the various authors who generallyguarded their devotion to their political affiliation. No less informative is the descriptionof the educational and cultural labors of the parties that wanted to educate, each in itsown way, the younger generation which was growing up in Piotrkow.Fifty-two years ago marked the beginning of the end of the creative life of JewishPiotrkow. As of that bitter day, September 1,1939, when Hitler’s forces attacked Poland,the tranquility of the Jewish homes throughout the country was disturbed—among themthose of our city of Piotrkow.Piotrkow, like all the other Jewish cities of Poland, sank into the depths of loneliness,need and murder; the concept of “destruction” was still, at that time, strange and theinhabitants of Piotrkow hoped that even in the shadow of fear they could arrange arelatively normal life and respect God. The efforts which the city executives madeexceeded their capabilities. Businessmen and volunteers created secret schools, con-ducted prayers in private, organized kitchens for the masses of the needy, collected fundsfor “matan b’seyter,” and provided health and sanitation facilities. They didn’t forget toprovide for spiritual and cultural needs. But when the machine of destruction was set inmotion during the days of the 3rd to the 10th of Mar-Heshvan Tsh"g (October 14—22,1942), these efforts were no longer of value. Only about 3,000 survivors remained inthe two labor camps in the city. Behind barbed wires and under the watchful eyes of theS.S. and Ukrainians, a Jewish communal life still fluttered, but it was the “gsisachadashim” (the new dying) of the Piotrkow Kehila following the severing of its vitallife’s breath in the crematoria of Treblinka and in the Rakov Forest.Some of the fearful occurrences, accompanied by dates, are given by the researcherof the Holocaust in “Yad Vashem,” Dr. Joseph Kermish, who based his research onaccounts given by witnesses who were residents of the city.A first-hand description was given by Naphtali (Lavie) Lau, who experienced theentire terror-filled road from the outbreak of World War II until the last “legal” Jewdisappeared from the city in November 1944. He describes the events as he experiencedthem in the house of his father, the last rav in the city, Rabbi Moshe Chaim Lau, h"id,who served for a long period as the central spirit prior to these events.Very instructive, too, are the descriptions given by the eyewitnesses. In theHolocaust chapter of this book, they tell of their experiences during that horrible era andpaint clear pictures of what happened to them, memories which are still fresh; men andwomen relate facts regarding acts so terrible that they exceed any fantasy. From thesehellish descriptions arise the pure figures of those who were led to the slaughter with“shma Israel” on their lips, who went into the crematoria for the sake of “KidushHashem.” In the witnesses’ descriptions we also find heroic deeds as well as spiritualand physical preparations to oppose the enemy and to repulse his murderous hand.Among those who engaged in open, as well as secret, warfare against the Nazi murderers.18 / A TALE OF ONE CITYthose from Piotrkow occupy an important place. Among them are war veterans andpartisans who are here among us and can serve as living witnesses to the superhumanbravery displayed by the Jews who did not surrender even on the threshhold of despair.We hold dear the chapters filled with splendid heroism written by our Piotrkowerin their battle on behalf of Jewish honor so that it would not be dishonored. Just astouching are the pages filled with the suffering and pain which were endured by themasses of our brothers and sisters who were led to their deaths.It has not been possible, however, to include everything within the limitedframework of this book. What is presented within these pages is no more than a drop inthe sea of suffering and agony of that horrible time during which Jewish Piotrkow wasforever cut off. Likewise, I could not present a “Chesed Shel Emet” to memorialize allthe pure souls of the victims of mass murder in our city, as we lack the details of all theirnames because the city’s “Pinkas” was destroyed.Our undertaking in publishing this book was made with the sincerest intent. If itspublication has been delayed, this has been due to the many technical difficulties whicharose as a result of the responsibility assumed by those from Piotrkow who undertookthis labor in Israel and the Diaspora. Piotrkow, whose Yiddish print shops have enrichedthe Jewish libraries and bookshelves of tens of thousands of Jewish families during thepast hundred years, was worthy of a memorial in the form of a fine informative book.Of course, even our long-lasting efforts to provide the details of the city have not helpedus avoid various difficulties and errors, which occur here and there throughout the pagesof this book. For this, the readers will have to forgive us, while thanking those whoexpedited it, for untiringly attempting to realize our goal.With this book we are unveiling a monument that we should have erected on themass grave of our dearest from Piotrkow. Now we erect a monument on the ruins of an‘Ir Ve’em b’lsrael”—Piotrkow.The Editorial BoardTel-Aviv, lyar 1958(Izkor Book)The Streets of Our Joys and Tears... I 19The Streets of Our Joys and Tears...20 / A TALE OF ONE CITYOnce There Was A Town...Elazar Prashker—JerusalemOnce upon a time... this is how legends begin. Once upon a time there was a townin Poland named Piotrkow. It was my town. Not a legend, not a dream. In this town therewas a Jewish community, where my cradle stood. I was bom as a scion of twentygenerations of Jews who had lived in that community before me. For twenty generationsthey kept their identity as children of Abraham, our ancestor, Moses, our teacher, andDavid, our king, and as disciples of Rabbi Judah the Prince, Rashi, Maimonides, and theRAMA. Yet they had undergone transformation and metamorphosis, which in the courseof time shaped a unique civilization known as the Piotrkow community. It was, indeed,a unique civilization. It was a living civilization which did not become static, but ratherunderwent constant changes while keeping its uniqueness. On the surface, the life of theJews in Piotrkow was not different from that of the Jews anywhere in Poland, yet therewere nuances which gave the Jews of Piotrkow a special character. It was somethinghard to define. Perhaps it had to do with the great personalities who lived and were activein this town. Or, it might have been the fact that Piotrkow was known throughout theJewish world as the place where Jewish holy books were printed.Or perhaps as the delicate balance which existed between holy and profane, betweenthe coarse and the refined, between the boors and the world of Torah. Or even for thecustoms which developed over generations, or the way of speaking, the humor, thePiotrkowers’ ability to laugh at themselves. Yes, there was something about the localitywhich distinguished it from others.This groupof Jews living inside the Christian Polish town behaved like a state withina state. Its contact with the hostile environment was minimal, limited to trade relations,despite the fact that the Jewish intelligentsia was well versed in Polish cultural life andin more than a few instances surpassed the Poles themselves in its knowledge of Polishhistory, language and literature. There was hardly any cultural or social encounterbetween the Jewish and the Polish intelligentsias in our town, not to mention such anencounter between the Poles and the more common Jews.Oh, what a vibrant life this small Jewish community lived, while waging its dailywar of physical and economical existence! All the political and cultural currentsdominating the Jewish world were represented in it, and were all engaged in a mutualbattle over every iota of their ideologies. The Jews of Piotrkow were divided in theirsocio-political views into several major camps—Zionists and anti-Zionists, religious andsecular, socialist and bourgeois. Inside those camps there were factions and subfactions.This, of course, is a rough division. In reality, all groups intermingled.The religious groups politically belonged to Agudath Israel, but were further dividedinto Chassidic sects, each with its own shtiblech, and into a large religious body of2122 / A TALE OF ONE CITYremnants of misnagdim, small property owners, artisans, and ordinary folk who prayedat the main synagogue, at the Shaare Zion synagogue known by all as the ‘ DeutscheShul,” and in the small houses of prayer in town.The Zionist camp included the General Zionists with their A1 Hamishmar factionheaded by Gruenbaum, and the Et Livnot faction of Levite-Gottlieb; the SocialistZionists of Poale Zion Right, and the Poale Zion Left; the Religious Zionists of theMizrahi; the Revisionists of Jabotinsky and the Revisionists of Grossman, and anotherhalf dozen Zionist youth movements, all of whom opposed the anti-Zionists of the Bund,the Agudah, and the Communists, who also had members and sympathizers in our town.All the parties conducted major wars among themselves, which climaxed during theelections to the community council, to the town council, to the committees of theeconomic and trade associations, and so on. Three weeklies were published in our townby political parties, who added their word to the sectarian struggle. In short, no one wasever bored in our town.But while the fighting went on, this small community was able to conduct orderlyautonomous communal life. The community council, which was a form of governmentof a quasi-state, had the authority to levy taxes from the Jewish community, and tookcare primarily of the religious needs of the community, as well as public health, educationand welfare. To meet all those needs a rather large budget always fell short of its mark.The livelihood of many families depended on the institutions funded by the com-munity council, and whose workers’ wages were paid by the council fund. To mentiona few: the council staff itself, including all its branches and their employees, thetax-collectors and the various inspectors, the rabbinate headed by the town rabbi, theneighborhood religious judges, and the emissaries of the rabbinical court. The rabbinatewas in charge, among other things, of all marital matters, synagogues and Talmudicacademies, including the town cantor and the choir, the synagogue personnel, the bathhouse and the ritual bath and their staff, male and female; the ritual slaughterhouse andthe butchers, the meat cleaners, the mashgihim and their assistants; the cemetery and itsTaharah staff and undertaker; the Jewish hospital and its doctors, nurses and midwives;the Talmud Torah school for poor children and its teachers; the orphanage and itsworkers, and so on.A large portion of the budget was devoted to welfare—help for the old and the sick,and support for the poor. Things became especially busy before Passover, when it wasfeared that many families might not have holiday food, mainly matzot and wine for fourcups. Months before the holiday, the traditional campaign of maot hitim was started.There were times when a full one-third of the Jews needed such help. Generally speaking,the community council was the one that took care of every calamity, either personal orcommunal, and the cry for help was always directed to the council.The voluntary spirit was extremely common among the Jews of Piotrkow. Helpingone’s fellow man and woman was considered by many a life-long goal and the fulfillmentof a basic mitzvah. Thus there were several philanthropic groups active in our town, andsuch charity organizations as Linat Tzedek (shelter), bikur holim (visiting the sick),hachnasat kalah (marrying the poor bride), hevrah kadisha (burial society), hevrat eruvinOnce There Was A Town,I 23(ritual group), and many more. The active members of those groups were mostlycommon folk who did this work for years and considered it a sacred mission, doing amitzvah for its own sake. It was personal volunteering, unlike the organized volunteeringdone by political parties or national organizations such as TOZ and ORT.Parallel to the activities of the community council, there was much activity in thearea of education, social and cultural affairs, sports and entertainment, financed bycontributions and done mostly by volunteers. In our community there was a network ofeducational institutions, beginning with kindergartens, traditional heders and yeshivot,elementary and vocational schools, and a Jewish high school which completed its ownbuilding several years before the Catastrophe. Education for the children was the mostimportant thing to every Jewish parent, and there was not a single Jewish child in ourtown who did not have the opportunity to study. The ORT school provided vocationaltraining. Orthodox boys had the Yesod Torah schools, and Orthodox girls the BetYaakov school. The Mizrahi school had a religious Zionist orientation. Hundreds ofyoung men continued their Torah studies in dozens of yeshivot, academies and shtiblech.Dozens of young men pursued academic studies after finishing the Jewish high schoolin our town, and many returned as lawyers, teachers, physicians etc.In addition to the ideological conflicts, the parties also attended to the cultural needsof their constituency, especially to the book clubs, choirs, bands (mandolins werepopular), sports clubs and the like. The Macabi sports club was the first and the largestin our town, and was formed by all the Zionist parties at the end of World War One. Itmade a major contribution to sports in our town. Besides sports it also organized a brassband which took part in national events.The literary circles called themselves by the lofty name “literary societies,” andbecame most popular among the young, especially among the girls. They offered lectureson Jewish and world literature, and even published a periodical which offered the proseand poetry work of the members. Also very active were the drama groups, which foryears presented plays from the Jewish and world classic repertoire. The choirs and themandolin bands continued the tradition of the Zamir (Nightingale) band, founded in ourtown in 1908, and from time to time offered public performances which were wellreceived by the public. Great success was accorded to the colorful review shows of theHashomer Hatzair, the revenue from which was earmarked for the summer campprogram. In addition, there were chess tournaments, and there were also live chess gameson the Dobroczynnosc Field.The Jewish public of Piotrkow also enjoyed the guest performances of Jewishtheaters from Warsaw or Lx)dz. Famous cantors visited our town from time to time andbrought joy to cantorial music lovers. The Kipnis-Zeligfeld duo gave several concertsof popular songs, which were sung for years by the entire town. There were also lectureson literary, cultural and political themes by guest lecturers, who were favorably received,and were attended by not-so-small audiences.The Jews of Piotrkow received the Balfour Declaration with great excitement. Therewere demonstrations and mass meetings. The dormant hopes of return to Zion wereawakened. The Zionist parties became rejuvenated and redoubled their efforts of settling24 / A TALE OF ONE CITYIn 1917, the Jewish community in Piotrkow celebrates the proclamation ofthe Balfour Declaration.the land of Israel. Fundraising for the Jewish National Fund and for Keren Hayesodintensified. The blue box entered the homes, and boys and girls from the Zionist youthmovements went each month from house to house to empty the contributions from theboxes.Business activities in our town were also vigorous. There were several private andtwo public banks—the Merchant Association Bank and the Cooperative Bank, knownto all as the “ Yiddishe Kasseh.” This bank was known for its good management and itsassistance to merchants and artisans with low interest loans. It also promoted thecooperative idea among the town’s Jews.The economic organizations—the merchant organizations (one representing mer-chants and the other storekeepers) and the artisan organizations (also two—2l generalone and a socialist) strove to protect their members against the discriminatory policy ofthe Polish authorities. The general trade association and the association of print-shopworkers fought for their employees’ rights.As in any other community, we also had our rich and poor, our secular intelligentsiaand Torah students, believers and heretics, the learned and the common folk, merchantsand artisans, market vendors and produce brokers, butchers and fishmongers, artisanapprentices and common workers, as well as a large number of religious functionaries,and, at the other end of the spectrum, an underworld consisting of thieves, pimps, whores;truly an entire civilization.Most of Piotrkow’s Jews lived by the divine command, “Six days you shall workOnce There Was A Town... I 25and do all your labor.” They worked hard and were barely able to support their families,bring home the precious, meager earnings to prepare for the Sabbath, for the Sabbathwas the crown of days, while the rest of the week was incidental. The Jew, therefore,toiled all week long to be able to have a proper Sabbath with ‘‘meat and fish and all thedelicacies.”Making a living was as hard for the Jews of Piotrkow as parting the Red Sea. Therewere hardly any external sources of work, and the Jews had to follow the dictum of KingDavid and make a living off one another. But this was hardly enough to fill one’s belly.In the years prior to the Catastrophe the economic conditions of Polish Jewry greatlydeteriorated. The hostile attitude of the authorities against Jewish sources of subsistence,the economic boycott by the Polish population, high taxes, the increase in anti-Semitism,and the thunder beginning to be heard from Germany, caused unrest among the Jewsand great fear for the future. These events were actually felt in a small community likePiotrkow. The Jews of the town fought with all their might to survive, but the odds wereenormous.The Jews were engaged in crafts and commerce, but they did not emphasizebusiness, which they considered incidental. The important thing was the spiritual life,the Sabbath, the holidays, the family celebrations. Those were the times when the Jewcast off the material life and became a spiritual and holy being. Let me tell a little bitabout the yearly cycle of holidays, the family celebrations, and the various customsthat determined the way of life of our town’s Jews. This subject deserves its ownbook, and I assure you that a few pages cannot contain even the folkloristic aspect ofthis tale.The preparations for the holidays and the holidays themselves were stirring eventsA Lag B’omer celebration in the woods.26 / A TALE OF ONE CITYin the life of the community. Each holiday had its own flavor, its special customs. Thelife of the community revolved around those holidays.Passover—^the festival of spring. The Passover flour campaign preceded the holiday.One had to provide the poor with the necessities for the holiday. God forbid one singlefamily should lack matzot or wine for the four cups! The smell of matzot baking arosefrom all the bakeries in town. Men carrying the newly baked matzot wrapped in whitesheets on their shoulders hurry to bring the bread of affliction for the eight days to theirhomes. The houses’ doors and windows are wide open. The contents of the homes havebeen taken outside to be aired. Spring is brought into the home. Women toil as they doa thorough cleanout. Men prepare the oven, and bring down from the attic the Passoverdishes. On the morning of the holiday smoke arises from all the yards—the hometz isbeing burned.The two nights of the Seder are observed. Everyone is seated around the laden tables.The master of the house presides like a king, wearing a white robe, and reclined overpillows. Next to him sits his wife, who is the “queen” for the occasion, and around themare the family members and the guests. They all recite the Haggadah together in a specialchant. The children huddle, exchange winks, and look for an opportunity to steal theafikoman. In the middle of the table stands the cup of Elijah, a symbol of yearnings forredemption. The children wait for the moment when the door is opened and Elijah inperson enters quietly, invisibly, to take a sip from his cup.Lag B’omer, a hot pre-summer day. School children, equipped with bows andarrows, accompanied by their teachers, go out into the fields and woods. Oh, what abreak from swaying over the books of the Torah and Talmud! The Zionist youth marchesin the streets with the Macabi band at the head, on its way to a mass picnic in theneighboring woods. I believe this custom was introduced after the Balfour Declaration.The Festival of Weeks —the holiday of the giving of the Torah. The sad days ofSefirah have ended. Jewish homes are decorated with green branches. The womenprepare dairy delicacies.Summer is now at its peak, and the days of mourning arrive, recalling the destructionof the holy temple. There is sadness in the air. The three weeks, the nine days, the NinthofAv.With the winds of autumn comes the month of Elul. The sound of the shofar is heardin the mornings coming out of the houses of prayer, making the heart of every Jewtremble. The Day of Judgement approaches. People go to pray Slihot, ask for forgive-ness. On Rosh Hashanah the places of worship are full. Before dark entire families goout to the Promshinsky Lake at the Wielka Wies suburb to fulfill the mitzvah of Tashlich.They greet one another with “may you be inscribed for a good year.”Yom Kippur. The streets are empty. All gather in the houses of prayer, spend all dayfasting, bent before their Maker, hoping for the mercy of a parent for a child, until thesun sets and the liberating sound of the shofar is heard. The Jews go out joyously to greetthe moon with a dance, and immediately after Havdalah they hasten to drive the firststake for the Sukkah into the ground, to fulfill the dictum “from strength to strength.”Suldcot—the festival of joy. Booths are built in the yards during the days precedingthe holiday, and the noise of children is heard, running about and preparing decorationsOnce There Was A Town... I 27for the sukkah. One has to obtain the lulav and etrog, which is not such a simple matter.It requires expertise in the quality of the etrog, as it does, for instance, to choose the winefor the four cups on Passover. But this problem is also resolved to everyone’s satisfac-tion. On the eve of the holiday the men sit together in the decorated sukkah and thewomen serve the holiday meal. Everyone is concerned that the rain should not interruptthe festivity. During the days of the holiday the men march ceremoniously to the houseof prayer, holding the lulav adorned with the myrtle branches and the willow branchesin one hand and in the other the silver box with the etrog, wrapped in flax, like a baby.On the eve of Hoshana Raba the “hoshanot” are immersed in water overnight to beused the next morning for the mitzvah of “striking the willow.”The joyous holiday of Sukkot concludes with the universal rejoicing of SimchatTorah, the Rejoicing of the Law, during which the Chassidim let themselves go andreach true ecstasy. This, of course, is also a children’s holiday, as the children dance inthe hakafot (circling) along with the adults, waving Torah flags and going up to the ark“with all the boys” on the morning of the holiday.Winter brings Hanukkah. The women prepare goose fat, and the smell of fried goosefat (grivenes in Yiddish) rises from all the houses along with the odor of hot jelly donutsand latkes. The children receive Hanukkah gelt (coins) and play with spinning tops. BothHanukkah and Purim are an occasion for parties and balls by all the organizations, whoseize the opportunity to replenish their empty coffers. Fondly remembered are the ballsof the Jewish National Fund and the Jewish high school. It is an occasion when the youthenjoys itself dancing to the tune of Katchka the fiddler and his band.It is winter now. Snow covers the streets and the frost pinches the ears. But the Jewsof Piotrkow are celebrating the beginning of blossoming in a distant land, the land oftheir dreams, the land of Israel. They celebrate the “Hamishaasar,” namely, the FifteenthDay of Shevat. They offer blessings over the fruits of the holy land—figs and dates,while the fruit children prefer is the charub, which for some strange reason is called“boxer.” How is one to explain the motives of popular etymology?Finally it is spring and Purim is here. It brings mirth and the noise against Hamanand the sending of Purim portions and costumes and Purim plays which take place whilethe Purim meal is in progress. A Jewish carnival.And soon preparations for Passover begin once again, and the circle is closed.This, in a nutshell, is a taste of the richness and thrill of the holiday customs whichevolved during generations in our town. Each holiday and its own food, each holidayand its children’s games, each holiday and its humor. Each action, each movement, andeven each thought and intention with its own name, its own official term, its ownexpression in juicy Yiddish, mixed with Hebrew, Aramaic, and corrupt Polish, spokenwith the proper intonation accompanied by the appropriate gesticulation and facialexpression. And this, of course, applies even more to holidays in which each custom andevent has its own coinage which is so popular and only understood by the people of ourtown.And not only the holidays. The Jews of Piotrkow loved happy occasions of all kinds.When a child was born the house was filled with joy. During the week between the birthof a male child and his circumcision, the school tots come every evening to the28 / A TALE OF ONE CITYnewly-newbom’s home and recite the Shema prayer, and the child’s parents give themnuts and sweets. On Saturday night following the birth, a party called the Male Sabbathtakes place, during which beer and cooked chickpeas in salt and pepper are served. Thecircumcision ceremony, during which the child is welcomed into the covenant ofAbraham, our patriarch, is a memorable occasion, culminating in a festive meal, as thetraditions and customs of the bris are followed meticulously. In the case of a daughter,the naming takes place on the first Sunday after the birth, during the Shul-gangceremony. When the child starts to study the Pentateuch, usually at the age of five, aPentateuch Meal takes place, and when he becomes thirteen, the Bar Mitzvah feast takesplace.Marriage was attended by many customs, beliefs and ceremonies. After the familiesagreed between them on the match, they would first have the Gans-Mal, and then theengagement ceremony, which was called Tenoim (conditions), during which an agree-ment was written down. On the Sabbath prior to the wedding, guests were invited to thesynagogue for the Oifruf (calling to the Torah). The groom was honored with the Maftirof the Torah reading, and the women standing at the Ezrat Hanashim would shower himwith nuts, raisins, almonds and sweets. The children in attendance would swoop downon the goodies and try to scoop up as much as they could. The wedding itself took placeat the Hertz wedding hall, with a band and with clowns, and one did the Mitzvah dancewith the bride. For seven days the Seven Blessings went on, during which guests woulddrop in and would be given food and drink.Days of mourning also had their particular customs and were strictly observed,namely, the customs of the funeral procession, the Shiveh, or seven days of mourning,the consoling of the mourners, the Shloshim, or thirty days following the burial, theYahrzeit, or anniversary of the death, etc.There were also religious celebrations—the crowning of the town rabbi; the bringingof a new scroll of the Torah to the synagogue in a colorful procession in the streets tothe sound of the band; the dancing with the Torah in the main synagogue on SimchatTorah, and many more. There were also a great number of secular events—plays,concerts, sporting events, banquets. The holy and the profane lived side by side inharmony.The Jewish people of Piotrkow underwent a constant process of secularization atransition from the old to the new. This process gained momentum after World War One.The rule of religion, which was dominant in past generations, was being weakened.Secularism was reflected in questions being asked, in a desire to know and understandinstead of believe, a yearning to break off the shackles of tradition, open the window tothe winds that blew in from the great world outside, new ideas, Zionism, socialism. Thisseculansm won the hearts of a great many young people in our town. Sadly enoughhowever, the young Jew who left the house of study, or who did not reach it in the firsiplace having absorbed, albeit all too superficially, the new ideas, all the different ismsfound himself trapped. ’t K '‘P of ‘he Jewish community of Piotrkow, unableto breakout. All doors were shut before him. The chance to emigrate was nil. The ZionistOnce There Was A Town... j 29youth kept knocking on the door of the “Palestine Office” waiting for certificates whichwere few and hard to get. In a small poor community the youth did not have much of achance to develop its abilities. There was little hope for a better future. The young personfelt frustrated and dispirited.But the youth did not give in. They struggled, they looked for a way out. They joinedparties. They found an outlet in cultural activities. This may explain the proliferation ofall sorts of dramatic, literary and musical groups, and the great variety of parties andyouth organizations. In retrospect, the dominant trait of this youth was idealism, thedesire for beauty, for social justice, for a better world.Harsh economic conditions, a hostile environment, inner conflicts, uncertainty abouttomorrow, and perhaps even a subconscious feeling that something terrible was aboutto occur, all this clouded the life of the Piotrkow community. Sadness was in the air,dripping poison into each cup of joy. One could read the fateful question in people’seyes—^What will be? All the great achievements of this wondrous community, all itsactivities and vitality, its stirring and exciting life were covered by the shadow of anexistential question.Our generation witnessed a cataclysm without parallel in human history. An entirecivilization was eliminated during the Catastrophe. Piotrkow was our world, our civiliza-tion. Beautiful and ugly, sublime and low, poor and rich like any other civilization, withonly one difference—it was ours. Our cradle stood there, there we grew up, there wecelebrated, mourned, dreamed and knew first love.But this world of ours was wiped off the face of the earth.A hundred years from now its traces will be completely gone. Even now they arehard to find. In the excavations of Pompeii and Herculanium two cities were discoveredwhich had been buried during a terrible natural disaster. In the place where Piotrkowstood nothing will be found, only the memories which we are putting down on paper,and the pictures which we have saved will remain as testimony of what once was andwas lost, the testimony of a people who existed for 400 years. Each story, each anecdote,each bit of humor which we collect, each fact and event from the life of that communityadds another tile to the mosaic which reflects this unique culture which once existed ina remote Polish town named Piotrkow.The book you are now holding in your hands attempts to piece this mosaic together.It tells the story of a Jewish town which once was and is no more.Jerusalem—April, 1991Chronology of Events in the History of the Jewsof Piotrkow1102-113812171233134714041435-1628143814461474148715441562Piotrkow, one of the oldest cities in Poland, as tradition has it, was established byCount Piotr Dunin during the reign of King Boleslaw Krzywousty.Hie city is mentioned for the first time in official documents.Prince Boleslaw of Sieradz grants the privilege of fishing in the Narew River tothe “Cisternian” Church.King Kazimierz the Great summons a gathering of the nobility in Piotrkow forthe purpose of creating laws which would pertain to all of Greater Poland.King Jagiello gives the residents of the city the right to produce and sell strongdrinks and forbids the importation of such products.Fourteen synods of the Catholic Church take place in Piotrkow.Piotrkow becomes the center for gatherings of the nobility.Important sessions of the Polish Parliaments take place in the city until 1867,when they are transferred to Warsaw.The Cobblers’ Guild is certified, followed by the Furriers’, Hatters’, Tanners’,Smiths’ and Locksmiths’ Guilds (1478), Weavers’ Guild (1532), Tailors’ Guild(1597), as well as Barber/Surgeons’ Guild (1700). The barber/surgeons wererequired to hang a plate outside their doors as a sign of their specialty.The status of the Merchants’ Guild, which attempts to remove those who arestrangers to the dty, is certified. Pursuant to this privilege, granted by KingKazimierz Jagiellonczyk, only Gentile merchants may enjoy the right to tradewithin the dty.Afire breaks out in the city and destroys it. King Zygmunt exempts the inhabitantsof the dty from all payments of taxes for a period of ten years.The Parliaments of Piotrkow generally discriminate against the Jews. The lawsand constitution, approved during the years 1496, 1532, 1562, etc., forbid Jewsto lend money to Christians against insurance, the purchase of land, entry into thecustoms house, leasing of salt mines, and for inns. “Dressing up” as lords withgolden belts and swords is outlawed. Simultaneously, Jews are required to wearyellow hats, yeHow patches and other clothing which differentiate them from theChristian population.30Chronology of Events in the History of the Jews ofPiotrkow / 311569 Edicts are again renewed forbidding Jews to live or trade in Piotrkow (accordingto the privilege of May 20,1569, King Zygmunt August permits the Jews to tradein the city, but only at fairs). Jews are forced to settle outside the dty on territoriesbelonging to counts and under their protection. They must travel from there to thedty for fairs and meetings of the tribunal; for this privilege they must pay theChristian Merchants’ Union 30 Ducats.1578 King Stefan Batory chooses Piotrkow as the location for the highest court(Trybunal) of Poland and Mazowsze. The city, therefore, receives the name of“Piotrkow-Trybunalski.”1585 In order to improve the economic state of Piotrkow, King Zygmunt III permitsthe holding of two fairs a year in the dty.1590 A blood libel is devised, stating that, in the village of Uszczyn, not far from Piotrkow,Jews killed a Christian child and used its blood for religious purposes. Many Jewsperish as a result of it. Because of this, and because of the conflicts between the Jewishand Gentile inhabitants of the dty, the Jews are driven from their dwellings surround-ing the dty and forbidden to return. Their difficult situation, however, forces them toreturn to their domidles and even to settle in the dty itself.1604 According to the status for doctors and barber/surgeons, as decreed by KingZygmunt III, it is forbidden for Jews to engage in healing the sick.1611 A flaxers’ union is established, which forbids non-members to work the flax inany form, or to seU hnen.1620 In an official survey, it is noted that the city is bisected by the Yiddishe Gas atthe Wolborz Gate.1656 The Swedes occupy the city, but after a two-month-long siege, they are expelledby Count Jan Konietzpolski.1657 The Swedes, under the leadership of King Karol Gustave, recapture the city, but,for the second time, they are captured by Jan Konietzpolski, who takes asprisoners the entire Swedish Army together with its chief commander.Almost aU of the 50 businessmen who live in Piotrkow are murdered by StefanCzamiecki’s soldiers because of the claim by the mayor, his assistants and theChristian inhabitants of the city that the Jews aided the Swedes in the capture ofthe city. The Bet Hakneset is destroyed.1663 An “auto-da-f6” takes place in Piotrkow. The Jews in Poland are shocked by thetrial of the martyr Matatyahu Calahora of Krakow that has taken place in theTrybunal of Piotrkow. Calahora was accused of insulting Jesus and Mary andsentenced to a cruel death, which is carried out in public in Piotrkow.32 / A TALE OF ONE CITY1670167516791684168916991720172617311740Adjacent to the dty, a wooden hunters’ palace, called “Bugai,” is built.Another destructive trial takes place in the Piotrkow Trybunal. The Jews ofPrashke (located in the Wielun region) are accused of having tortured a Christianchild in the forest, rolling it along in a barrel filled with nails and then hiding thebody in the bushes. The sentence is severe: the accused shall be quartered withan axe and the rest of the Jews shall be driven from the town of Prashke.King Jan Sobieski favors the Piotrkower Jews with a special privilege, whichlegalizes their living in the city. Prior to this, they had lived there with thepermission of the “starosta” Osohnski. The privilege permits the slaughter ofanimals and also deals with various articles in the production of meat. The Jewsare also permitted to have their own barber/surgeon and build a “mikva.” The“starosta” is responsible for protecting the Bet Hakneset from attackers, toimprison and punish them. In times of danger he must remove all the Jews andtheir belongings beyond the gates of the city.King Jan Sobieski reconfirms the privilege granted by King Zygmunt August,which gave the Christian Butchers’ Guild the right to confiscate animals whichare killed outside the slaughterhouse. A legal process begins which lasts a hundredyears and remains, in the end, undecided. Meanwhile, the Jews organize a separateslaughterhouse in the deserted “Juridica” castle. From Piotrkow magistratorialinventory, there are, in 1694, six butcher shops and the slaughterhouse at thecastle’s canal.A new Bet Hakneset, a wooden structure, is constructed in Piotrkow.A Smelters’ Guild is founded. The priest Linetzki visits the city and relates thatthe old “kosdal” is surrounded by a Jewish street, apparently referring to theFranciscan Church, later turned into military barracks by the Russians.The “Chevra Kadisha” (burial society) is founded with a section for Bikur Cholim(infirmary). (See 1805.)Rabbi Meir B”ar Elyakum Getz becomes the first Rav. He is simultaneously aRav in Task. King August II issues a decree according to which it is forbiddenfor Jews to come to Piotrkow during the Christian holidays, or to sell their waresthere. For violating this decree the punishment is whipping and confiscation ofgoods.A huge fire breaks out in the city, causing a tremendous amount of damage. Thedty becomes extremely impoverished. Anti-Semites use the anger of the populaceto incite the students against the Jews.Angry students attack the Jews, who hide in the Bet Kneset. The students discoverthem and beat them mercilessly, also demolishing the shul.Chronology of Events in the History of the Jews of Piotrkow / 331744 Attacks on the Jewish Quarter are thwarted. One of the Jewish defenders, theheroic martyr, Ephraim Fishl, falls in the clash with the pogromists. He is buriedin the old cemetery. On his monument is inscribed, “Killed on the 25th of Ab,1744.”1749 The Bakers’ Guild is certified by King August III.1758 According to a sentence handed down by the “Assessorial” Court in Warsaw,Jews must leave Piotrkow within three months.1759 An agreement, signed by the Piotrkow “starosta” Malachovski and the repre-sentative of the Jewish Kehila, grants the Jews permission to remain in Pod-zamtche and in Wielka Wies for the annual tariff of 4,500 Zlotys.1764 As shown in a census survey of Jews in Poland, there reside in Piotrkow 715 Jewsover the age of one year; these consist of 381 men and 334 women.1765 The Piotrkow Bet Hamidrash is founded by Rabbi Hirsh Piotrkower. Near theBet Hamidrash, a scale is set up and the income therefrom is assigned to supportthe Bet Hamidrash.1769 Conflicts arise between the Christian slaughterers, meat dealers and butcher shopowners. The Gentiles argue that, according to the guild privilege given them, forwhich they pay taxes to the government, the city and the church, they have amonopoly over the slaughter and sale of meat.1770 Pogroms are perpetrated on the Piotrkower Jews by the students of theJesuit School. The Jews defend themselves and there are victims on bothsides.1786 An earthquake and fire destroy many houses in the city. The Jewish Quartersuffers great losses.1787 For the second time, the “ Assessorial” Court forbids Jews to live in the “Christian”dty of Piotrkow, or to conduct trade and crafts. They may only live and trade inthe suburb, “Wielka Wies.”1791 The Piotrkower Shul, considered to one of the most beautiful in CongressionalPoland in the 18th Century, is built with the financial help of Moyshe Katzin,wholesale merchant and provider to the military.The Piotrkow Deputy receives a directive from his constituents to have a lawpassed in the Warsaw Parliament restricting Jews from settling outside a par-ticular “quarter.”1792 The two Jewish doctors in the city are accused of helping peasants avoid militaryservice. One of the two, Laybl Doktor, is sentenced to receive 100 lashes.34 / A TALE OF ONE CITY1793179417951797During the second division of Poland, Prussia, per the agreement of January 23,1793, receives a large portion called South Prussia. The city of Piotrkow isincluded in this occupied area.The teacher, Chaim, son of Tsvi Deutch-Goldstein, settles in Piotrkow. On thedeath of “Brit Avraham,” he composes a poem of lamentation. He also translatesthe book “Rinaldo Rinaldina” from Polish to Hebrew and rewrites it as a drama(Warsaw, 1949). He and the teacher Shmelke Rappoport, with his wife, Hinda,constitute the avante garde of education in the dty. Because of their influence,the children of the more affluent strata of the Jewish population begin to studyGerman and arithmetic. The religious circles oppose this activity, but it issupported by the Prussian authorities, which are interested in promoting theGerman language among the populace.After the intervention by the Piotrkower Jews, the Prussian occupational forcesdecree that an oil painting depicting the scene of the alleged ritual murder that aJewish mob, led by the Rabbi, was said to have perpetrated on a Christian child,now located on the outer wall of the Bemardin Church, be removed. Afterattempts by Christian believers, they permitted to hang the painting in a “comer”of the church; finally it returns to the outer wall. Not until 1825 do the Jews finallysucceed in convincing Warsaw to order the removal of the indteful painting,which is ultimately transferred to Warsaw.Piotrkower Jews establish a cemetery on the spot where, in 1657, a Jewish womanwho was killed by the soldiers of General Czamiecki during the Swedish war wasburied.The marriage limitations are abolished. Jews enjoy religious freedom and payfees for marriage permits and taxes equal to those of the Christian population.The Gentile butchers initiate a court action against the Jews and ask the court toforbid Jewish ritual slaughter and the sale of meat. The chamber does not disturbthe Jews, who are setting up a slaughterhouse in a deserted place during the timeof the procedures. During this time, Shlomo Razumovski leases the payments forslaughtering.Prussia publicizes a number of decrees which regulate the Jewish question. Onlythose who had previously lived in an area during the occupation will be entitledto settle in the new areas; professional Jews, who don’t meet both requirements,must leave the area within a given period of time. Those who do have the rightto remain receive a “Protectorate Lxtter.”Taxes for Jews are increased and contain the following tariffs: the Tolerance Tax,in the event a Jew finds himself in a place which is not his usual address; theProtectorate Tax for the right to live in the country and to practice his vocation;Chronology of Events in the History of the Jews ofPiotrkow / 35180118041804payment for permission to wed; and the Military Service Tax, payable only bythose who are not in the military service.Limitations are set on the rights of Jewish Kehilas and rabbis. They may onlyconcern themselves with religious purposes. The rabbinate may not passjudgement and the rabbi must be able to write and speak German or Polish.The rabbi and all other members of the clergy are to be chosen by theauthorities. The Yiddish schools must teach the German and Polish languages.The regulations forbid the Kehilas to implement excommunication or otherpenalties or to adopt measures by which the Jews shall be forced to follow itsdemands. The rules also determine that the “shoykhet” may do his ownslaughtering and sell the meat, something that has been, until now, in the handsof the Kehila. Jews may not lend money on interest, sell liquor to the peasantson credit, sell merchandise that is not for internal use, or work at peddling.The number of merchants is limited and artisans may work only in the cities.Since, in the regulations, it is suggested that Jews will not be able to earnenough from trading and craftsmanship, they are also granted the opportunityto receive parcels of uncultivated land in a measure which suffices for a villagefamily, in order to be able to earn additional income. During the first threeyears after settling on this property, Jews are permitted to engage non-Jewishlaborers. The decree threatens Jewish trade in Piotrkow, which has beenconcentrated exclusively in the hands of the Jews.After the decrees, which frighten the Jewish inhabitants, are publicized, a con-ference of Jewish Kehilas takes place on the 5th day of Elul 1797; their purposeis to take a stand and to consider ways of annulling them. Participating in theconference are representatives of 31 Jewish Kehilas, among them two fromPiotrkow: David Tibeles and Joseph Ben Jacob, as well as noted rabbis.The first Yiddishe “shul” in the city is established by the government.The government appoints Chief of Police Reinhardt as overseer of the “Jewishdty.” The Jewish Kehila pays 50 Florins for his position.The budget of the Piotrkower Kehila (3,235 Florins and 8 pfenningsincome and 3,235 Florins and 6 pfennings expenses) shows as excess of 2pfennings.The Kehila “apparatus” consists of: 1) Rabbi Lipman Meisels, annual salary 75Florins; 2) intercessor and translator, Shmelke Shlomo Rappoport, 50 Florins; 3)two cantors, Moshe Hillel, in the shul, and Joseph Marcus, in the Bet Medrash,for a total of 120 Rorins, and Jacob Isaac Flatow, the first bass, 20 Rorins; 4)attendants, 40 Rorins; 5) the sexton of the shul, 30 Rorins; 6) the helper of theshul, 30 Rorins, 4 night watchmen (Shmuel Feivelovitch, Gershon Brandeis and36 / A TALE OF ONE CITY1805180718081809181118121815two Gentile night watchmen), 100 Florins; 7) Sarah, the midwife, 24 Florins; 8)the Chief of Police, 50 Florins.The expenses of the shul amount to 358 Florins. There are two teachers, theintercessor Shmelke Shlomo Rappoport, with a salary of 120 Rorins, and his wifeHinde, 70 Florins.The “Bikur Cholim” breaks away from the “Chevra Kadisha” and becomesindependent, with Dr. Joachimson as its head.The constitution, which is made public after the Tilsit Agreement betweenNapoleon I and Czar Alexander I, proclaims liberty and tolerance for all religionswithout exception.The 58th point of the constitution of 1807, based on which Jews enjoy the samerights as non-Jews, is annulled for the reason that there exist vast differencesbetween the customs of Jews and non-Jews. Simultaneously, edicts which dis-criminate against the Jews are issued, forbidding them from purchasing land.At the head of the Kehila are: Chaim Segal, Leyb Berliner, Reb Josef, the son ofJacob, Reb Zachariah, Reb Nakhum, Reb Hirsh Piotrkower and Avram, the sonof Mordecai.Jews are subjected to military service. Only the Rav is exempted.The Jewish settlement grows. The general number of inhabitants amounts to3,967, among them 1817 Jews (45.8%) and 2150 Gentiles (54.2%).An additional tax is levied on kosher slaughter.The French leave the city.Jews between the ages of 20 and 50 are required to serve in the national guard.Only the Rav and the cantor are excused from serving. After long discussions,they exchange service for the payment of an annual fee.Jews are kept far from certain neighborhoods. Chaim, the son of Tsvi HirshDeutch-Goldstein, assumes the position of Kehila Secretariat following thedemise of Tovya Newman.The leader of the Kalisher Circle, upon the directive of the Minister of the Interior,gives Jews the opportunity to trade, manufacture and produce drinks. Eight Jewsreceive permission to produce and sell strong drinks.After the French leave Poland, the government of the Duchy of Poland complieswith the request by the “city-ites” to forbid the Jews the purchase of houses orthe rental of apartments from Gentiles, as well as the manufacture or selling ofdrinks in bars.Chronology of Events in the History of the Jews ofPiotrkow ! 37According to a judgment by the authorities, the right of Jews in Piotrkow to tradeand sell drinks is annulled. A decree is issued to drive Jews from the city.1816 Jews are permitted to engage in commerce without any limitations.1821 Yoshke Ziskind, nicknamed “Yoshke der Kleyner” (Little Yoshke), appearsbefore Czar Alexander the First, while he rides through Piotrkow, and begs himto cancel the kosher-meat tariff, known as “Korobke.”The Piotrkow Kehila is disbanded in conjunction with an order by the nationalauthorities. Instead of a Kehila, a “Vad Bet Hakneset” (Dozor Bozniczy) iscreated, which consists of three friends and which must, jointly with the Rav,work out the budget fulfilling the needs of the Kehila.1822 The authorities decree the expulsion of the Jews from Piotrkow. Onlybusinessmen may have this banishment postponed for two or three years.The “Chevra Kadisha” in the city is disbanded.1823 Jews who want to engage in farming and wish to receive government and nobilityland are granted permission to do so. They are promised that they will be excusedfrom paying taxes for three to twelve years, and also that they will be given woodand other necessities to help them along.1825 A tragic fire in the Jewish Quarter destroys all businesses and stores and forcestheir occupants to relocate to the center of the city (“Makom”). An anonymousYiddish poet describes the tragedy of those Piotrkower who were consumed inthe fire with these words: “How dismal is the day of the 4th of AvAVhen in flameswent up the city of Piotrkow.”An institution that specializes in documenting the citizenship status of theinhabitants is established in Piotrkow. The officers of the institution are Gentilesand the Jews take pains to see to it that they are not included in the records forfear of being subjected to military service.1826 In order to influence the members of the Kehila to participate in the “VadBet Hakneset,” they are exempted by special decree from the tariff for theKehila.1829 According to an order by the authorities, a representative of the village Jews isco-opted to the “Vad Bet Hakneset.”1831 A cholera epidemic breaks out in Piotrkow. There are many fatalities among theJewish population; among them is the city Rav, Rabbi Dov Berish Aderstein. Ina panic, the Jews leave the city and hide in the surrounding forests, abandoningall their worldly belongings.38 / A TALE OF ONE CITY18331834183618401845184618501851185418571858Following a quarrel, the new shul committee appeals to the authorities forpermission to lease the income of “Aliyot Hatorah” for the years 1834-1836. The“aliyot” will be leased by Nathan Kirschberg for 454 Zlotys. Other residents ofthe city recommend payments for the lease. Jacob Windheim registers a complaintwhich leads to a crisis in the shul committee, which resigns. Finally, Kirschbergresigns his rights and, in another litigation, Jacob Windheim leases the income,amounting to 612 Zlotys.The Piotrkower “ Vad Hakol” requests that the authorities forbid foreign teachersfrom settling in the city because the local teachers would then have no income.The financial status of the Piotrkow Kehila improves markedly. The Kehila Taxbrings 7,989 Zlotys into Piotrkow. A cantor, Lazar Perlmutter from Stawski, isengaged at a salary of 1,294 Zlotys.The Jewish Quarters Wielka Wies and Juridica are included as part of the city ofPiotrkow.Mayor Galinski nominates a Jew for the position of treasurer of their distillery,but the national authority is not in favor of this nomination; the mayor receivesthe blame and is forced to remove the Jew from his position.The first Jewish agricultural colony is established in the dty.Because of a misunderstanding between the “Chassidim” and “Mitnagdim” andthe intrigues that it causes, the authority asks them to remove the rabbi ofPiotrkow, Reb Aaron Yehuda Jacob, son of Naftali Hertz Meisels.There is a festive opening of the train line from Warsaw to Vienna. The citybecomes an important station for shipping products. The first factories are builtin the city.A Yiddish folkshul is opened by the government in Piotrkow. The shul isabolished after a short time. Only in 1858 is a permanent Yiddish shul establishedin the city.The first census made by the Piotrkow Kehila shows that out of644 families, only203 pay Kehila taxes. The others are not capable of paying even the minimum of20 kopeks.The Piotrkow shul is desecrated and robbed by the “Katsaps” (Cossacks), whostage a pogrom in the Jewish quarter of the city.The construction of the building housing the general hospital in the city iscompleted. In the hospital there are 50 beds for Gentiles and 20 for Jews.Rabbi Eleazer Shalom, son of Simcha Zev Morgenstern, assumes the post of Chief18591860Chronology of Events in the History of the Jews ofPiotrkow / 39Rabbi of Piotrkow. The Jewish inhabitants of Shedletz do not permit the Rav toleave their city; only with the intervention of the police are the Piotrkowermessengers successful in getting him out and bringing him to Piotrkow.Harav Morgenstem, a moral individual, is the Shedletz Rav; he creates a “KerenPidyon Shvuyim,” which serves to buy the release of Jews who have been arrestedas the result of the persecutions by the police and other authorities. He isconcerned with the plight of the poor and destitute in the city and personallycollects funds to help them. To convince the fish merchants in the marketplaceto lower their prices, he announces a ban on the consumption of fish. Only whenthe merchants, who begin to lose their income, promise not to raise their pricesdoes he annul the ban.The Jewish hospital separates itself from the general hospital and relocates toanother building, which it receives from the authorities for the price of 6,500Rubles.Nine Jewish families live in the Gentile Quarter of Piotrkow. According to law,only those Jews who possess the sum of 20,000 Zlotys are permitted to live there.The economic situation of the Jews of Piotrkow becomes more difficult after thecreation of the “Economic Society,” whose goal is to expel Jews from trading andother economic positions. The worsening of this situation is reflected in theamounts of the debts which remain unpaid for Kehila tariffs.The city becomes a commercial and administrative center. The number ofresidents increases; however, during this period, while the Russian governmentdisplays an interest in the industrialization of Poland and helps numerous citiesand towns to begin industrial undertakings, in Piotrkow it hinders the estab-lishment of larger factories, especially weaving mills. According to documentsin the provincial archives, there was a large number of workers in the city whomight influence the sta.t of a revolution against the military, which was stationedin the dty.A national census taken in the city indicates a total population of 11,159, with4,999 Jews, 5,843 Poles, 47 Russians, and 270 Germans.A folkshul for Jewish children is established.The rabbis, judges and officers of the Kehila are forbidden to leave their dwellingplaces without permission from the Vad Bet Hakneset and approval by theauthorities.1861The Russian powers lock up the Bet Hakneset after a memorial honoring fivepeople who were killed in a Polish demonstration against the Russian rulers. TheBet Hakneset, however, is soon reopened.40 / A TALE OF ONE CITY186218631864According to law, the Polish Jews have the right to participate in city and DistrictAdvisor elections.As a result of the “Polish-Jewish Brotherhood,” a slogan of the Polish nationalmovement, for the first time in Piotrkow the elections make David LeibMarkovitch a member of the Advisory Board and Bonaventura Teplitz andAbraham Brem “shtetl” representatives. Elected to the City Council are NathanGoldblum, Hersh Finkelstein and Jacob Rosenberg; representatives are MichalMichelson and Pincus Horowitz.The Jews of Piotrkow experience a difficult economic crisis.A Gentile officer, requesting anonymity, organizes a collection amounting to3,000 Zlotys. The monies are deposited with a special Jewish committee thatdistributes it amongst the needy.Jews leave the agricultural colonies and return to commerce and trade.Russian authorities arrest three Kehila representatives—Michal Michelson,Hersh Finkelstein and Jacob Rosenberg—because they sympathized with thePolish uprising. Another Jew, Moshe Neimark, who provided the revolutionarieswith 135 pairs of boots, is publicly whipped, as ordered by the Russian com-mander. A known participant in the uprising was the Piotrkower Jew, Fuks, whomthe Russians arrest and whose wife flees to France. Several other city Jews areplaced under strict surveillance.There are 12 factories in Piotrkow: 7 of leather goods, 4 of vinegar and oil, andone of ironworks.Reb Tovye Faybl, the son of Tsvi Hersh Belchatovski, jointly with Reb ChaimFrenkl establishes the first Hebrew print shop in Piotrkow. The machines andprinting letters were received via priests in Czenstochow who had been forced bythe authorities to liquidate their print shop in the Jasna Gora Church. In time,Piotrkow becomes a center for Hebrew and Yiddish printed matter, and itsreputation spreads throughout the world. In addition, the print shops improve theeconomic situation of the Jews in Piotrkow, providing many Jewish families withan opportunity to earn a living.After major efforts, the authorities carry out elections of the Vad Hakol inPiotrkow. However, the elections, which were postponed three times, cannot berealized because of the difficult economic situation and the clashes between theChassidim, Mitnagdim, and Freethinkers.Upon returning from his trip and a visit to the Czar in Petersburg, Lord MosesMontefiore visits Poland and remains in Piotrkow until after Rosh Hashana.Chronology of Events in the History of the Jews ofPiotrkow / 411866 David Neifeld, editor of the first Jewish weekly newspaper in the Polish language,“Jutrzenka,” which was published in Warsaw from 1861-1863, and who laid thefoundation for the Polish-Jewish friendship movement, settles in Piotrkow andopens a bookstore. His arrival strengthens the Polonizational cultural effortamong the Jews of the city.1867 Piotrkow is chosen as the capitol of Batzirk (province). National officers relocatethere.1868 Harav Baruch Tsvi Hirsh, son of Simcha Zev Rosenblum, is elected Rav inPiotrkow to replace the deceased Rav, Reb Eleazer Shalom Morgenstem. Evenin 1863, while being the Radziminer Rav, Harav Rosenblum is accused ofsympathizing with the Polish uprising and even in helping to collect funds fromthe Jewish population for the benefit of the uprising. The Rav is detained by theRussian authorities and placed in the Lublin Prison, from where he successfullyescapes, together with the Polish Chief of Police, dressed as a Russian officer.Following the amnesty, the Rav leaves the house of the head of the Lublincommunity, Iserl Wohl, where he has been hiding, and is elected Rav of Wegrov,whence he arrives in Piotrkow. Harav Rosenblum is a friend of GovernorKochanov, who comes from the same city and has known him since childhood.1871 According to the edicts issued by Governor Kochanov, which punish Jews forsympathizing with the Polish uprising, it is forbidden to wear traditional Jewishdress. The rabbis and all the clergy who wear such clothes are persecuted mostcruelly. The Rabbinate is forced to sign a commitment according to which itassumes responsibility for preventing women from shaving their heads aftermarriage. Men with beards and sidecurls, as weU as women wearing wigs orkerchiefs on their heads, will be detained and fined, perhaps even imprisoned.1878 The “Pozhame Komande” (the fire brigade) of the city is certified; Jews may alsoparticipate in it.1880 Moshe Shereshewski, the first official Zionist of Piotrkow, settles there. A highlyeducated “Litvak” and member of a rich and noted family, Shereshewski, imme-diately upon arriving, mobilizes 54 Zionists and embarks upon lively Zionistactivities.1881 The Kehila raises funds to distribute, at a modest price, flour, potatoes, wood andcoal among the poor Jews of Piotrkow, who have suffered a severe winter.1882 The second Bet Hamidrash is erected in Piotrkow by the banker, FishlAlexandrovitch.1884 After the demise of Harav Rosenblum z’'l, Rabbi Chaim Eleazer Waks, who hasdevoted himself completely to the idea of “Shivat Tsion,” and, even as far back42 / A TALE OF ONE CITYas 1870, collected money for the poor in Eretz Israel, is elected Rav. In 1886,Harav Waks, together with his father-in-law, Harav Yehoshua Trunk from Kutna(known by the name of Rabbi Yehoshua Kutner), the head of the Kehila, thewell-known rich man Pinchus Horowitz, and sexton of the Bet Hadin Moshe(Moshke) Wald, travel to Eretz Israel, where they establish the colony calledChitin, near Tiberias, and plant an orchard of “Etrogim.” In 1877, Harav Wakspublishes his “seyfer,” “Nefesh Chaya” (named after his mother Chaya Toybe),the first Hebrew “seyfer” printed in Piotrkow.1885 Piotrkow contains 732 trade and industrial businesses. Among the 600 merchantsin the city, 82% are Jews.Sunday night (Parshat Rosh Tarma), a fire breaks out in one of the houses of YidnGas. Twenty poor families who have been living there are left totally withoutpossessions. One of them, a porter, who tries to salvage his meager belongings,is burned to death. [“Hatsfirah,” no. 35,1885; related by Mr. Ben Michl; Michlwould seem to be Michelson, the translator]1888 A private Yiddish shul, with Russian as the major language and where Hebrewis taught, is established by the “Maskil” Shmuel Aba Mindl from Riga.1893 According to the newspaper, “Tydzien Piotrkowski,” the number of Gentile storesin the city increases and they are successful in competing with the Jewish trade.[“Hatsfirah,” no. 126,1891]1894 A philanthropic organization called “Chevra Latzedakah” (“Dobroczynnosc”) isfounded by the lawyer Gustave Levy, who distributes aid to hundreds of poorfamilies, both Jewish and non-Jewish.Reb Shlomo Belchatovski becomes the owner of the print shop which he inheritedfrom his parents. He improves and enlarges it and it is considered among thelargest Jewish print shops in Poland, as well as in other countries.1895 Menachem Mendl Shlossberg, in partnership with his son-in-law Anatole Frum-kin, constructs a large factory on the shores of the Bugai River. Jews fromPiotrkow and Lodz are employed in the building of the factory and also workthere.Pinchas Baron and two other friends establish a club named “Tomchey AniyimMechovdim.” All three are 13 years old and students in the “cheyder.” They ordera rubber stamp and printed “blocks,” appeal to various people to commit them-selves to making monthly payments, and their request receives the hoped-forresponse. The monies that are raised in this way are distributed among the needy.1897 In Piotrkow there are 36 “cheyders” under one Kehila Talmud Torah.Chronology of Events in the History of the Jews ofPiotrkow / 43Eliahu Pansky’s print shop is established and, in 1899-1900, it prints an expensivecopy of “Talmud Yerushalmi” with all the commentaries.1898 “Agudat Hatzionim” is founded; it opens with the first lending library in the dty.1899 400 “Shekels” are sold in Piotrkow, and through the “Oyster Hahityishnot” 600stocks are sold.1902 The first group of the “Bund” in the city is organized. The work is performedsecretly, mostly in the surrounding forests.1904 A treasury is established to aid young men who want to get married by offeringthem loans to arrange their affairs. The founders are Wilhelm Zilbershteyn, AdolfPansky, Izak Levit, Marcus Meirand and Gershon Reitberger.1905 The workers of Piotrkow take an active part in the revolution. The workers are avital factor in the Polish Socialist Movement.The first group of “Poalei Zion” and S.S. (Zionist-Socialists) is organized inPiotrkow.1906 In conjunction with the occurrences of 1905-1906, the workers’ organizationsfound a self-defense organization. Leading the Bundist self-defense is YechielKimelman. Because of his part in expediting the assassination of a RussianBatzirk policeman named Mushinski, Kimelman is imprisoned and sentenced todeath. The sentence is changed to life imprisonment in Siberia (Katorga), but theawful conditions in the Vladimir prison ruin his health and he dies in 1907.A Zionist conference in Piotrkow, in which the engineer Jan Kirshrot from Lodztakes part as representative of the Warsaw headquarters, decides on an electionplatform for the Duma. The platform must include the Piotrkow region.1908 A conference of rabbis from the entire country takes place in Piotrkow. The goalof this conference is to reform the Jewish community life and enforce the authorityof the rabbis. The conference is reprimanded by the Jewish-Russian weekly“Razoviet,” which sees it as a “Reactionary Gathering.”1910 A meeting of rabbis in Piotrkow elects delegates to the national meeting, whichis slated to take place in Warsaw.1912 In “Hazamir” there arises friction between the professional and labor factions.The former preach assimilation and the latter want to introduce national Yiddishcontent, such as bringing Yiddish books into the youth circles and into religioushomes, create choral and music circles, etc.Despite the ban on every political activity, the Zionist-Socialist activities areconducted in secret.44 / A TALE OF ONE CITY191419151916A “Cheyder Metuken,” where religious as well as secular subjects are taught, isestablished.The “Savings and Loan Treasury” is founded; its purpose is to help poor artisansand small tradesmen by granting them loans at low interest.Following the first clash in Sarajevo, the national officers leave the city in a rushand a citizen’s committee is created; it includes four Jews: Marcus Braun, YoelZygmunt, Kaminer and Lawyer Mikolay Kon (son-in-law of Max Braun).Immediately after the start of World War I, the Russians leave the city and theGermans take it over. After a short time, the Russian Army returns.Moshe Feinkind begins to issue a weekly newspaper, the “Piotrkower Shtime,”published by Shlomo Belchatowski. Only one issue of the newspaper appears. Assoon as the war breaks out. Governor Yatchevski forbids further publication ofthe weekly.Marcus Braun spends 2,500 Rubles in order to save the Jews from a pogrom whichthe Russian military are preparing to effect in the city. Incited Russian soldiersnevertheless pogromize the Jewish inhabitants. Twenty Jews are arrested forallegedly having commercial dealings with Germans. The Russian commandantPopov wants to shoot them, but after the intervention of Christian clergymen, hesatisfies himself with exiling the Jews to Russia. When the Germans return toPiotrkow for the second time, it is the eve of Yom Kippur. They force the Jewsto open their shops and the Jewish bakers to bake bread. When the Germanswithdraw, they take hostages in addition to those they had taken when they firstentered the dty. It is only as a result of the energetic intervention on the part ofthe “Birger Komitet” (Citizens’ Committee) that the hostages are set free. Duringthe Russians’ last retreat from the city on Friday night, they conduct a search inthe shul, looking especially in the “Aron Kodesh” (Holy Ark) for a “secrettelephone” to the German lines; during the search the “Sifrey Torah” are ruined.During the night of December 15-16, the Austrian Army drives the Russians fromthe city and occupies it. The Austrian powers deprive the Jews of their right tosell alcoholic beverages and tobacco, forbidding the publication of a newspaperin the Yiddish language. Hungarian soldiers break into the shul on Shavuot,yanking out the praying Jews, forcing them to go on foot to the outer parts ofBelchatov and dig trenches there.The District Director in Piotrkow issues a decree stating that Jewish stores thatsell vital articles and tobacco must remain open on Saturday and holidays.The “Hazamir” organization establishes the second lending library in the city.Owing to the severe economic hardships of the Jews during the war, inexpensiveChronology of Events in the History of the Jews ofPiotrkow / 4519171918kitchens are set up, “Dobroczynosc” and a second in “Linat Hatsedek,” where forthree kopeks one can get a nourishing meal. For those who can’t pay, lunches arefree of charge.Fearing epidemics, groups of Jewish youngsters organize to control the sanitationprimarily in the poorer areas. They also help clean the homes, change and launderbed linens, and perform disinfections.Hungarian-Austrian occupation forces permit the election of a city self-manage-ment committee. Of 50 councilmen, 13 Jews are elected; 2 Zionists, 1 Mizrachi,3 religious, 1 unaffiliated, and 6 assimilationists.The only Jew to be accepted in the police force is Berl Budkowski.Marcus Braun, Moshe Shereshevski, and Lawyer Joseph Kon are represented inthe District Council, which the authority has nominated.Together with the Polish population, the Piotrkower Jews take an active role inprotest demonstrations to free Poland from the occupation forces, as well as tocelebrate the 3rd of May and the 15th of October (Kosciusko’s date of death) withnational flags.M. Braun is elected by the city board as a deputy to the Piotrkower Parliament.In the Piotrkower Parliament, convened by the occupation forces, three Jewishdeputies serve.During the last two years of the Austrian occupation, 1917-1918, the economicsituation of the Jews improves because of the influx of Jews from Lodz and othercities, as well as industrial development.A huge step forward is taken by the Piotrkower Jews on the cultural level, andthe authorities create no difficulties. Institutions such as “Hazamir,” “Maccabee,”“Tarbut,” plus evening courses and other opportunities are created.In introducing the card system for food, cooperatives (“Tsarchaniut”) are estab-lished; their goal is the equitable distribution of products to the cardholders. Asa result, “Hazamir,” “Tarbut,” “Fareynnikte,” “Linat Hatsedek,” and the Artisan’sUnion form cooperatives.An attempt is made to establish the trade school which had existed before the startof the war at “Dobroczynnosc.”Poland becomes independent. On November 3, the city is liberated from theoccupation rulers. Along with the difficult economic situation, the Jews sufferedfrom waves of anti-Semitic accusations.An organizing committee to establish a “gimnazjum“ in Piotrkow is created.46 / A TALE OF ONE CITY1919192019211924As a result of the initiative of the “Endeks” (“Narodowa Demokracja”), thePiotrkow City Council accepts a decision to expel from the city those inhabitantswho have lived there since July 24, 1917, with the excuse that, because ofoverpopulation, food products in the dty have become more expensive. Thedecision is aimed at the Jewish merchants and manufacturers who came fromareas which the Germans had occupied, resulting in the revival of commerce andindustry in Piotrkow. The Interior Minister, Jan Statsky, however, who receivesthe decision for approval, rejects it with the response that such decisions don’tbelong to the jurisdiction of the City Council. In the meantime, the districtcommander issues a decree which forbids settling in Piotrkow without specialpermission from the City Council. As a result, the City Council summons a specialcommittee whose duty it is to examine the list of newcomers who have to beexpelled. The committee consists of nine members: 5 Gentiles and 4 Jews.Because of the determined stand of two Jewish friends on the committee, only 2Jews are expelled; they have allegedly behaved badly.At the first democratic elections for the City Council, 33 councilmen are elected;7 are Jews (4 from the Bund, 2 from “Tseirey Tsion” and 1 unaffiUated).A difficult year for the Jews of Piotrkow. They are boycotted by the “Endeks”anti-Semites at aU levels of life. In the public gimnazjum, Jewish students areseparated from their Gentile friends and seated on a separate bench. The boycottis also felt on community and commercial levels. Jewish industrialists leave thePiotrkow area as a group and head for other cities where the anti-Semitism hasnot taken on such frightening forms as in Piotrkow.A trade school is founded in Piotrkow and is later taken over by the “ORT.”After the uprising in Upper Silesia is quelled, a number of revolutionaries settlesin Piotrkow; they terrorize the Jewish inhabitants and plunder the Jewish stores.Finally, they are expelled from the city and settle in neighboring villages.On the initiative of the Zionist organization, the weekly publication “UndzerTsaytung” begins to appear. The paper serves the entire Jewish population. Theeditors are Jacob Baron and Joseph Berish Rosenblatt.The activities of the “Savings and Loan Treasury,” “Tropn Milch,” “Toz” and anorphan home are reorganized.The difficult tax burden of the Jewish inhabitants influences the Artisan Union toprotest; they send a delegation to the main office in Warsaw.The Jewish gimnazjum and the Medem School open new classes. Evening coursesfor the study of Yiddish are organized.The city management permits foreign societies to erect an electricity manufac-Chronology of Events in the History of the Jews ofPiotrkow j 4719251926turing plant in the city and suggests they also install plumbing and sewerage.Harav Meir Shapira of the “Agudat Israel” leadership and ex-Parhament Deputy,is elected as the Rav of Piotrkow. In the Kehila elections which take place thesame year, representatives are elected from aU the Jewish groupings, as follows:“Bund,” 6; “Agudah,” 5; Zionists, 2; Artisans, 2; unaffiliated, 2; “Mizrachi,” 2;and “Tseieye Tsion,” 1.The Bund begins to issue the weekly newspaper “The Piotrkower Vecker.” Itappears, with interruptions, until the start of the war.In the second democratic elections for the City Council, 8 Jews are elected out ofa total of 33 councilmen. Thanks to the bloc of Polish and Jewish Socialistcouncilmen, a Socialist city management is elected—P.P.S. and Bundists. Themanagement board behaves sympathetically towards the Jews. Several even fillpositions in the City Hall. Jewish unemployed receive aid and work in cityinstitutions. Subsidies are also given to Jewish institutions such as orphan homes,Talmud Torah, “ORT” and others.In the circular which the City Council distributes to contractors who work for it,it is clearly stressed that in hiring workers, they may not differentiate on thegrounds of religious or political background. Because of these circulars, ap-proximately 30 Jews are employed in communal and investment work.A founding meeting takes place for “Friends of the Hebrew University inJerusalem.”In the month of March, Dr. Abraham Leipuner, one of the most worthy physiciansin Piotrkow, passes away.On April 5, the hall of the “Dobroczynnosc,” a general meeting of the division ofthe “Central Society for Emigration” takes place.On April 30, a founding meeting of the “Commercial Bank” (Bank Kupiecki)takes place.There is a bloody attack by a bunch of rowdies on young people during the LagB’omer celebrations in the Sulejow Forest.The Central Jewish Orphans’ Society in Poland, “CENTOS,” opens a dormitory for30 orphans, the majority of whom come from the pogromized Jewish families on thePolish-Russian border, brutalized by Malarovitch’s soldiers. The dormitory is locatedin the “Dobroczynnosc” building. Trades are studied on the “ORT’ school.In November, the Kehila approves a recommendation for a grant of 200 Zlotysfor the “Kupat Poalei Eretz Israel.” Piotrkow is the first Kehila to accept such adecision and it causes strong repercussions in the world.48 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe “Artisan’s Bank,” after only a brief existence, is forced to close because ofcash problems; it merges with the “Savings and Loan Treasury.”1927 In January, the sheet metal Workers’ Guild is established. Watchmakers andgoldsmiths belong to it. The eldest in the guild, David Greenspan, has the rightto award trade certificates to apprentices and masters of this guild.Because of the outstandingly difficult winter, the Kehila is forced to distribute500 tons of coal to the needy.On Saturday, March 19, the day of Pilsudski’s birthday, the anti-Semitic rabble“goes on a spree” and showers Jewish homes and stores with stones, accompaniedby insulting anti-Jewish names.The Rav of Piotrkow, Harav Shapira, who has stayed in America for the benefitof the Lublin Yeshiva, sends $500 from there for Passover assistance.1928 The representatives of the “Bund” in the City Council offer a resolution that thismunicipal body ask the culture ministry to introduce Yiddish as a major languagein government schools that Jewish children attend; also, to give existing Jewishschools a subsidy and separate powers. The recommendation is refused. Incontrast, a recommendation made by the P.P.S. is accepted, according to whichthe folk-high and trade schools of the national minorities in Poland must be givenofficial rights and subsidies or be taken over by the government.The authorities approve the regulations of the “Literary Society,” founded twoyears earlier. A theater group is active in this society; its founders are: JacobBaron, Sh. A. Zygelman, Motel Lenchitsky, Menachem Horovitch, and others.On December 30, in the City Council elections, 8 Jews were voted in: Bund, 4;Poalei Hon Ts. S., 1; civil bloc, 1; Agudah, 1; and Poalei Agudat Israel, 1.The number of Jews in Piotrkow is 13,119 of a total population of 46,524.1929 In June, the first national exams for students take place in Czenstochow. They arefor students who have completed the “ORT” school in Piotrkow.1930 On Monday, June 23, a large protest-demonstration against England takes placebecause of its abolition of immigration limitations and permission for freeimmigration to Eretz Israel. In addition to the Zionist parties, the Artisans andMerchants’ Unions participate, as well as representatives of Jewish institutionsin the dty.1931 The City Hall (City Management) stops payment of unemployment assistanceand opens kitchens for the unemployed. The kitchen for the Jewish unemployedis located in the “Dobroczynnosc” house.Chronology of Events in the History of the Jews ofPiotrkow / 49193419351936A street near the Strava is named for I. L. Peretz at the recommendation ofcouncilman I. Maltz.In May, Kehila elections are held. From the 14 lists, 17 Kehila councilmen(Dozers) are elected. The elections take place without the participation of the“Bund,” which boycotts the Kehila as a “clerical” institution.The “Agalah,” the vehicle of the tax office, with its cruel ’’sequestrators,” causesterror among the poor small tradesmen and craftsmen, who are unable to pay thehigh taxes. Bailiffs remove everything from the Jewish homes. The Merchant’sUnion tries to intervene to make the Agalah cease its activity, but without success.The cost of the basic renovation of the shul amounts to about 30,000 Zlotys. Forthis purpose, Kehila Chairman Wilhelm Zilbershteyn gives a contribution.Harav Shapira leaves the “Kisey Rabanut” in Piotrkow and is received as theLublin Rav, where he simultaneously leads the local “Yeshiva ChachmeyLublin.” Harav Shapira has been Rav in Piotrkow for more than 6 years.City Council elections are conducted according to the new system of countyelections. The Council remains in Socialist hands. Because of these new limita-tions, the Jewish population is not well represented. Only representatives of the“Bund,” who finding themselves on the same list as the P.P.S., are elected. Mr.Jacob Berliner becomes city councillor.Harav Moshe Chaim Lau is elected as the Piotrkower Rav by the Kehila council-men. He is a great scholar and wit, with a great deal of worldly knowledge. He isknown for his oratorical ability, even in the Polish language, whenever he appearsat official national solemnities. He successfully fulfills the role of religious leaderof Piotrkow Jewry. During Hitler’s occupation he, despite many opportunities,does not leave his congregation, but accompanies the Jews on their journey to death.In February, because of unending intrigues on the part of certain groups in theKehila, the “Starosta” dissolves the Kehila council and appoints Mr. LeonShereshevski as commisar over the Kehila and its institutions until the end of itsterm.Because a large number (perhaps one-third) of the Jewish population is in needof Passover assistance, the “Joint” complies with the request made by Mr.Shereshevski and allocates funds for that purpose, on condition that Messrs.Shereshevski and Broyda (Director of the “ORT” school) personally distributethe money.In September, new Kehila elections are held. In accordance with the decision, theBund returns to the elections. Together with the Bundist Artisan activists, it issuccessful in controlling the Kehila.50 / A TALE OF ONE CITY193819391953At one of the Kehila meetings, a decision is approved to protest the agencies andthe decree forbidding kosher slaughter.Simultaneously with the increased terror aimed against the Jews in Germany,public anti-Semitic attacks on Jews in the city start to increase. The followingincidents occur: (a) on Slowacki Street, in the middle of the day, a Jewish porternamed Getzeles is mugged and beaten until he faints; (b) poison is thrown into afish pool belonging to a Belchatover Jew named Levkovitch. The damageamounts to tens of thousands of Zlotys; (c) on Lazienna Mokra Street, hooliganstry to set fire to a Jewish house, having thrown flammable material through awindow; (d) a Jewish woman (Esther Weiss) who has come from Eretz Israel tovisit her relatives is beaten.Pickets in front of the Jewish stores prevent Christian customers from entering.Even Jewish drivers and porters are driven away from their destinations, wherethey usually earn enough for a piece of bread.In the forum of the City Council the ’’Endeks’ ** councilman requests an immedi-ate ban on kosher slaughter as being “inhumane,” but the unanimous response ofthe P.P.S.’s and Bundist representatives cool down the incited anti-Semites.The authorities’ attempts are renewed to remove the Jews’ right to a Jewishhospital they have supported with great effort, loyalty and sacrifice, as well asgreat strength and money for many years.At a meeting of the employees (January, 1939), a protest is voiced against the“Endeqa” and other Polish nationalists; they are sharply reprimanded for harmfulanti-Semitic acts in view of the fateful situation in which Poland finds itself.On April 23, elections for the City Council take place. There are only two Jewishlists: “Bund” and small merchants (7 councilmen) and Poalei Zion Ts. S., unitedwith the ’’Linke Poalei Zion” (2 councilmen).The club “Maccabi,” which has met with noteworthy success in various branchesof sports, has prepared a gala sports celebration at the city’s stadium for Septem-ber 3. Two days earlier, however, the war breaks out and the dty is bombed.Within two days, it has been captured by the Germans, who put an instant end toall the plans and to the entire Jewish life of the city of Piotrkow.According to a Soviet encyclopedia, there are 46,000 inhabitants in Piotrkow (ascant 200 of them Jews).Izkor BookTheGoldenThread5152 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe Great Synagogue of Piotrkow* *scNearly fifty years have passed since the divine command, “Remember what Amalekhas done to you. . . do not forget!” has acquired a new meaning. There is no doubt inanyone’s mind as to who the Amalek of our generation is.One of the questions over which we have agonized is how to find a way to obeyboth parts of this sacred command—to remember, and not to forget. The monstrous factthat over 150(!) so-called “scientific” books have been published to date about theHolocaust, each claiming to be accurate in its assertion that this event never tookplace—despite the fact that our generation still feels the horrors of that catastrophe andhas Auschwitz numbers tattooed on its arm—is proof enough that we have not beensufficiently successful in passing on the legacy of the Shoah. Even among our ownpeople the subject does not occupy its proper place.One can offer many reasons for this; let me mention two.First, we speak of the enormous number of six million. The human mind and heartcannot fathom such an astronomical number, and surely it is hard to identify or empathizewith it. If we speak of one community, or one family, or one Anne Frank, we can feelempathy, we can relate personally to that person or persons. But we cannot relate tomultitudes. To paraphrase the words of the Talmud, “You can only grasp a little bit at atime.”Second, we have spoken and written about the death of six million, but we have notspoken much about their lives. One cannot grieve over the news of the death of an unknownperson who did not speak to us or leave any imprint on our soul. Only when we appreciatea thing can we miss it and cry for it. The younger generation of Jews under fifty, as well asthe Jews of Asia, Africa and America—^and certainly non-Jews—cannot feel the legacy ofthe catastrophe of European Jewry if they know nothing about the lives of those Jews, theircommunities and their history. One should retell the story of how Jews lived the life ofsanctifying the divine name, not only how they died with that name on their lips.The book of our beloved friend, Ben Giladi, who hails from our own native town ofPiotrkow Trybunalski in Congress Poland, deals successfully with this awesome andglorious subject, and provides an answer to these two questions.The book does not speak of millions, but rather deals with the history of adistinguished community, allowing us to relate to it personally. The book dwells notonly on the destruction, but on the construction; describes not only the flames thatengulfed the town at the end, but also the fire of enthusiasm displayed by its peopleduring times of activity and creativity. Here is a story of a major Jewish community, itspersonalities and institutions, that became known throughout the Jewish world.As the youngest son of the town’s last rabbi, the scholarly Rabbi Moshe Haim Lau ofrighteous and sacred memory, and as the younger brother of Naftali Lau-Lavie, author ofThe Seven Fires of Hell, based on his personal experience during those years of darkness, Iam deeply grateful to our dear Ben Giladi, who in this book has accomplished what wasincumbent on all of us to do: the sacred mission— Remember... do not forget!Rabbi Israel Meir Lau, Chief Rabbi of Tel AvivThe son of the last Rabbi of Piotrkow53The Last ChapterJacob Birnbaum—BostonIf I forget thee...To the blessed memory of my Parents and my sister HannahThe month was August, 1963; the place Mount Zion, in Jerusalem. The hot rays ofthe sun swept through the assemblage of some 70 people who had gathered from nearand far for this solemn occasion. From Tel Aviv and New York, from Montreal andBuenos Aires, from Paris and Boston, we had all come to pay our respects. The day wasTisha Ba’av, a day of mourning—a day in which Jews the world over recalled thetwice-repeated catastrophe which has occupied so central a role in our people’s historyand religion: the destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem, first by the Babylonians andlater by the Romans. On this day the prayer service at Martef Hashoa, atop Mount Zion,was to memorialize a third, more contemporary, destruction, one that many of themourners themselves had witnessed, one that had annihilated their families and friends.We stood there on Mt. Zion, blood relations. .. well, not really. Though Abraham,Isaac, and Jacob joined our origins as we gathered from the remoteness of our exile, theblood that bound us to this moment and this sacred site was of much more recent descent.We were the sons and the daughters of Piotrkow Trybunalski, her last Jewish sons anddaughters. We were now waiting to witness the unveiling of a tombstone dedicated tothe memory of the magnificent Jewish Community of learning that had graced thatancient Polish city.The origins of Piotrkow Trybunalski dated back to the reign of the Polish KingBoleslaw III, in the years 1102-1138. There is no known specific date for the settlingof the first Jews in the town; however, early chronicles Indicate that, in the year 1487, alaw was passed in Piotrkow which put severe restrictions on Jewish merchants whichforbade them to engage in any kind of commerce. Piotrkow was at that time the sitewhere the High Tribunal met regularly to issue legislation governing all of Poland, hencethe name “Piotrkow Trybunalski” (the Tribunal). In the year 1557, the “PiotrkowConstitution” was adopted; it put many restrictions on the behavior of Jews and permittedthem to settle only in designated districts.During the five centuries of its existence, the Jewish community of Poland enjoyedperiods of relative tranquility, though interrupted from time to time with outbursts ofvicious anti-Semitism usually attributed to the infamous “blood libel.” However, despiteall the anti-Semitic restrictions and persecutions emanating from the government, aswell as from the church, Jews were able to develop self-government and create institu-tions of learning which produced some of the great scholars of the time.Shortly before the outbreak of World War II, the Jewish community of Piotrkow54The Last Chapter / 55showed great progress in its communal development. In addition to its renownedreligious institutions, which provided high levels of Jewish culture and education, thecommunity also supported a Hebrew Gymnasium (equivalent to eight years of highschool and junior college) and a well equipped ORT trade school. Jewish Piotrkow alsomaintained a sports club named “Maccabi” which was housed in its own modernbuilding; a Jewish hospital which was well equipped and manned by trained anddedicated personnel; a large orphanage in the center of the town; beautiful gardens andplaygrounds; and several libraries which contained Yiddish and Hebrew books andoffered spacious reading rooms where the youth of the town congregated. There was aJewish amateur theater, three weekly Yiddish newspapers, and a Jewish musicalassociation called “HaZamir,” with Bensman, a composer renowned throughout theJewish musical world, as its musical director.Little now remained to bear testimony. The buildings, even if extant, had beenstripped of their Jewish identity—one could be sure of that. Most of the people were nolonger alive, victims of Hitler’s gas chambers and crematoria. All that remained werememories—memories strong enough to make me lose for a moment the exhileration ofbeing a Jew in Jerusalem. Instead, I was standing in Jerusalem Street in pre-warPiotrkow, Poland, in the city of my birth and childhood, where I went to school anddreamed about the future. Scenes of a distant past and a distant land came rushing to mymind, creating an inner feeling touched with nostalgia and pain.... It is the middle of a late springtime Sabbath morning in theJewish quarter. The cobblestone streets seem deserted and silent.The stores and businesses, so bustling with activity the day before,are now padlocked and covered with heavy iron shutters. Not eventhe ever-present “Droshkas” (horse-driven taxis) dare disturb thestillness of the Sabbath atmosphere. Soon the service in the GreatSynagogue and the Beth HaMidrash will be over, and from thechildren running in front of their elders will echo the sounds oflaughter and chatter. At home, preparations are being made forthe festive Sabbath meal, which is sure to include, besides thedelicious food, a constant interspersion of singing and talking.After dinner we will walk to the park, meet with friends, play someball, and then treat ourselves to a visit to the Botanical Garden toimmerse ourselves in the beauty of that park in bloom, so fittingfor a relaxed Sabbath afternoon. As darkness approaches, we willall rush home for the Havdalah service, which brings this wonder-ful day to a spectacular end.Soon it will be Lag B’Omer, one of Jewish Piotrkow’s mostfestive days. Preparations for the Lag B’Omer parade had beenunder way for weeks. Finally, on that festive day, the variousyouth organizations will congregate, each before its own head-quarters, proudly displaying their colorful uniforms. Theyoungsters from HaShomer HaTzair will be in green khaki56 / A TALE OF ONE CITYblouses and blue ties, the Gordonia and HaNoar HaZioni all cladin their own distinctive colors. And then, somewhat separate fromthe rest, there will be the militant BeTar in their brown uniformswith matching caps. As the starting hour of the parade approaches,all of the youth groups, with their flags proudly waving in the earlymorning breeze, will line up behind the Maccabi sports troupe,who will be dressed completely in white and headed by themarching band. As the parade marches through the cobblestonedstreets of the town, the multitude of people who jam the sidewalkswill loudly cheer the marching assembly. The marchers willproceed towards the outskirts of the town, heading for the RakovForest. There, after the encampment, the traditional soccer gamebetween the two rival teams—HaKoach and Maccabi—will takeplace. It will be a day of happiness long remembered by all.Meanwhile, back home in front of the Great Synagogue, anothercelebration will take place, this one organized by the religiousleaders of the town. Hundreds of students from the many religiousschools will celebrate the religious aspect of the day by listeningto the inspiring speeches of their respected mentors. Lag B’Omeris the spring classic, an unforgettable yearly event in the town ofPiotrkow.I looked around me, a little shocked at the vividness of my recollection. Many ofthe mourners assembled at Mount Zion had taken part in the Lag B’Omer celebration.I wondered how many still recalled those joyous days in the detail that I did.The memorial service was about to begin, or so I expected from the sudden hushedsilence. But I stood for one more moment, unable to remove my eyes from the cold,white marble structure representing the once vibrant Jewish community of 20,000 souls.Up from my memory came the beloved image of another structure.The Great Synagogue played a central role in the lives of generations of PiotrkowJews. In addition to Sabbath and Holiday Services, all major events in the life of theJewish community were observed within the massive, exquisitely decorated walls.Happy events were commemorated there, observed within its massive, exquisitelydecorated walls, as were tragic occurrences. The lives of many Rabbis and outstandingscholars were eulogized there. The synagogue was also the meeting place for thecommunity when in imminent danger of pogroms of other calamities. On only twooccasions in its 150 years of existence were there no prayer services on Friday evening.The first of these happened in the year 1861, when the Czarlst Russian militaryoccupying authority closed the Synagogue after it served as the site of a memorial servicefor five murdered Polish Freedom Fighters. The second such time was in August, 1914,shortly after the outbreak of World War I, when Russian soldiers and their localsupporters entered the Synagogue and ripped apart its furnishings with the lame excusethat they were looking for a secret telephone connection to the German Headquarters.The Jews of Piotrkow were rightfully proud of their Great Synagogue. It was aThe Last Chapter I 57magnificent structure built in the Moorish style. Like a fortress, it was built on thegrounds where a 17th century Synagogue had previously been destroyed by Jesuitstudents during an anti-Semitic outburst in 1740. This Great Synagogue of Piotrkow,which was known throughout Poland for its beautiful interior, was built in the years1791-1793. It was a massive building with exterior walls measuring one and one-halfmeters in thickness. Upon entering the synagogue, one first experienced subduedlighting until the eyes inevitably were struck by the breathtaking sight of the magnificentgilded artwork on the eastern wall. The carvings, which were executed by the famousartist David Friedlander, depicted the Ten Commandments, replicas of the musicalinstruments which were used by the Levites in the Temple in Jerusalem and a carvingof a golden crown held by two lions, used by the Levites in the Temple in Jerusalem,and a carving of a golden crown held by two lions, one on the right, the other on the left.Over the crown soared a black eagle with fully extended wings. With its beak directedto the south, the eagle faced the beautifully decorated ark containing the holy Torahswhich it symbolically protected. Across from the ark stood the golden menorah withflickering lights and two cherubim on either side. Supported by four columns, andexquisitely decorated by murals depicting the holy places in Jerusalem, stood the firstand second balconies, where the women prayed. Perhaps the most admirable of thesynagogue’s artwork was that which adorned the ceiling. Painted in Rococo style, usinga rainbow of colors, was a tapestry of heavenly bodies and astrological signs whichappeared to be moving through the firmament. Hanging from the ceilings were elegantlydesigned, immense, brass chandeliers, which were illuminated on various holidays. Inthe middle of the synagogue was a large, raised platform where the Torah was read. Thecantor’s pulpit was next to the ark against the eastern wall, and next to it was anenormous, handsomely carved chair of honor for the Rabbi of Piotrkow. The last manto occupy this chair was Rabbi Moshe Chaim Lau, a martyr of blessed memory. Beforehim our Chief Rabbi had been Meir Shapiro, founder of the world renowned LublinYeshiva.It took the Jews of Piotrkow thirty years to collect the funds needed for theconstruction of the Great Synagogue. Many famous artists took part in its completion.In the 150 years of its existence, many of Europe’s great men entered its gates andadmired its beauty. Among them were the Russian Tsar Alexander the First, who visitedthe Synagogue on his way to the peace conference in Erfurt. Eight years before that, itwas visited by the Commanding General of the French Expeditionary Army, while inretreat from Moscow; and, according to legend, the Great Synagogue of Piotrkow wasvisited by Naix)leon Bonaparte himself.Praying in the Great Synagogue and listening to the magnificent voice of the greatCantor Apter, accompanied by a boys’ choir, still lingers in my memory. Actually, I didnot worship there regularly. My maternal grandfather was a follower of the ChassidicRabbi of Rospsha, so our entire family worshipped with the Rospsha congregation twoblocks away from the Great Synagogue. On many occasions, however, we stopped overon our way home to sit for a while in this beautiful setting and listen to the cantor.Suddenly, my thoughts were interrupted as the mournful, familiar words of “ElMoleh Rachamim” began the Memorial Service: “Merciful G-d... spread thy heavenly58 / A TALE OF ONE CITYrest upon the pure souls of the Martyrs of Piotrkow who perished for Thy name. . .My thoughts went back to my last visit to the Great Synagogue of Piotrkow.The time was shortly before my immediate family and I leftPiotrkow to settle in Dombrova, a town in the southwesternindustrial region of Poland. I was a teenager with no thought ofwar or Holocaust. Yet, the message that I heard on that day madean indelible impression—one which stayed with me throughoutthe years. The words were those of the last Rabbi of Piotrkow,Rabbi Moshe Chaim Lau, whose Shabbath Shuva sermon on thatday dealt with the topic of “Kiddush HaShem”—Martyrdom. Atthat point in time, the subject seemed so remote, more applicableto a historic time, to the ages of the Crusades or Inquisition.However, Rabbi Lau, who was in the process of writing a bookabout the very subject of his sermon, poignantly noted that thehappenings in Germany, including the rise of anti-Semitism ingeneral and Hitlerism in particular, forecast a terrible future forJews, a future when the issue of “Kiddush HaShem” would bemost relevant to every Jew in Europe.Several years later. Rabbi Lau was to deliver the last of hissermons to the remaining Martyrs of Piotrkow. He did so as heled them to their final march to the train which was to transportthem to Treblinka. A witness from that scene later related that hespoke with a fervor and enthusiasm no less in intensity then thatwhich he used to convey from the pulpit of the Synagogue. “Bettera living death than a dead life,” said Rabbi Lau, “and to be killedas a Jew is to die as a saint.” He called upon the Jews “to fulfillthe will of G-d with joy” and to continue to sing and praise theAlmighty. Rabbi Lau succeeded in elevating the spirits of hispeople, although each and every one of them knew of the im-minence of the inevitable fate. As the former Rabbi of Preshow,in Slovakia, he was begged by his students and friends to returnto Preshow, where arrangements had been made to accommodatehim, to save him from the “Action” (mass murder). Rabbi Lau,however, refused to acquiesce to their wishes, and insisted onremaining with his people to the very end. During the gradualdeportations, he inspired the Piotrkow Jews to resist; to resistphysically and mentally, to resist the Nazi enemy, and to resist theJudenrat which attempted to force Jews to collaborate in thedestruction of their Brethren. I thought of that last sermon I hadheard and how Rabbi Lau had lived up to those hard standards hehad set. I wondered whether or not he had ever finished his book,Kiddush HaShem^ and if his work has survived the war.The service ended with the recitation of the Kaddish by the entire assembly, andThe Last Chapter / 59then the people began to leave. Somber faces, tearful eyes, some sobbing. Twenty yearsafter the tragedy and the wounds were still fresh. Not a word was spoken—no wordshad to be spoken. And the survivors left with an ever stronger commitment: To live indefiance of all odds, and, as the few remaining eyewitnesses, to tell the story of thedestruction of their community.Piotrkow During the First World WarChildren waiting for their food provided by the charitable Linas Hatzedek in 1917.60 I A TALE OF ONE CITYThe religious school “Yesodei Hatorah” in 1934.Inquisition in Piotrkow—The Martyrdom of Matatiahu Calahora Over Three Centuries AgoIn 1663, Piotrkow be-came the site of anti-Semiticbrutality. The educatedJewish apothecary,Matatiahu Calahora, a nativeof Italy who had settled inCracow, committed theblunder of arguing with alocal priest, a member of theDominican order, aboutreligious topics. The priestinvited Calahora to disputehim in the cloister, but theJew declined, promising toexplain his views in writing.A few days later, the priestfound on his chair in the irnp n';*Tchurch a statement written in .K* K ri s* 5 k pGerman and containing aviolent arraignment of the This picture was found about 80 years ago in a museum incult of the Immaculate Vir- Lwow, by noted historian Gershim Bader.gin. It is not impossible thatthe statement was composed and placed in the church by an adherent of the Reformationor the Arian heresy, both of which were then the object of persecution in Poland.However, the Dominican priest decided that Calahora was the author, and brought thecharge of blasphemy against him.The court of the Royal Castle cross-examined the defendant under torture, withoutbeing able to obtain a confession. Witnesses testified that Calahora was not even ableto write German; as a native of Italy, he used the Italian language in his conversationswith the priest. In spite of all this evidence, the unfortunate Calahora was sentenced tobe burned at the stake. The alarmed Jewish community raised a protest, and the case wastransferred to the highest court in Piotrkow. The accused was sent there in chains,together with the plaintiff and the witness. But the arch-Catholic tribunal confirmed theverdict of the lower court, ordering that the sentence be executed in the followingbarbarous sequence: First the lips of the “blasphemer” were to be cut off; next his hand,6162 / A TALE OF ONE CITYwhich had held the fateful statement, was to be burned; then the tongue, which hadspoken against the Christian religion, was to be removed; and finally the body was tobe burned at the stake, and the ashes of the victim loaded into a cannon and dischargedinto the air.This cannibalistic ceremony was faithfully carried out on December 13,1663, in themarket-place (plac Trybunalski) in Piotrkow.^New Bulletinmmti Ft IB mtn m mn m wm "3^ ^mmn^ w im\wnm n mnm'in rif ufi tun iwn mri im%m m m 'i mm nm wb TmRynek Trybunalski, in 1663. The Kadosh Matatiahu Calahorawas tortured and martyred there. On the far left, the passage toPlac Czamiecki.1 ‘TOstory of Jews in Russian and Poland,” by Semen Markovitch Dubnow, 1916.Notable Personalities of PiotrkowHayim David Bernard (1758-1858), Polishphysician and Chassidic leader. Born in Dzialos-zyce, near Piotrkow, Bernard is reputed to havebeen the son of the poet and physician, IssacharFalkensohn Behr. At the age of 14, Bernardarrived in Berlin and later qualified as aphysician in Erfurt. The liberal policies of KingFrederick William II enabled him to becomecourt physician at Potsdam and a medical officerin the Prussian army—a considerable achieve-ment for a Jew. After Napoleon’s conquest ofPoland, Bernard was appointed medical inspec-tor for the western regions of the Grand Duchyof Warsaw (1807-15). A typical product of theGerman-Jewish Enlightenment, he at firstremained aloof from Polish Jewry, but a spiritualcrisis led him to approach Rabbi David of Lelov,who introduced him to Rabbi Jacob Isaac Ha-Levi Horowitz, the Seer of Lublin. Bernard,known thereafter as R. Hayim David, became aRabbi Hayim David Bernard.strictly Orthodox Jew and a follower of the Seer.He grew a beard, although he retained western dress and never mastered Yiddish. Asthe Warsaw Jewish archives have shown, he was a leading communal figure. Amongthe Jews and Christians whom he treated, Bernard was venerated as a saint. He spentthe rest of his life in Piotrkow, both as head of the local hospital and a wonder-workingChassid. For decades after the physician’s death, his grave was a center of Chassidicpilgrimage.(Editor’s note: The descendants of the Great Tsadik, the brothers Saul and RobertDessau, recently restored the “Ohel” of Dr. H.D. Bernard—the shrine of many Chassidicpilgrimages of yesteryear—at the Jewish cemetery in Piotrkow.)Ernestine Potovsky~Rose (1810-1892), U.S. feminist and social activist, was bornin Piotrkow, the daughter of an Orthodox rabbi. Early in life she rebelled against hertraditional upbringing and, at the age of 17, she left home and traveled in Europe. In1832, while in England, she met the English social reformer Robert Owen and becamehis disciple. The same year she married William Rose, a jeweler and silversmith by trade.In 1936 the couple moved to New York City, and Ernestine traveled throughout the6364 / A TALE OF ONE CITYErnestine Potovsky-Rose.United States giving lectures on government,religion, free schools, the abolition of slaveryand women’s rights. In 1850 she helped to or-ganize the first National Women’s Rights Con-vention. Along with Susan B. Anthony and othermilitants, she founded the Women’s SuffrageSociety.Although Ernestine seemed to attach no par-ticular significance to her Jewish background,she did engage, in 1863, in a long-publicizeddebate with Horace Seaver, the abolitionisteditor of the “Boston Investigator,” whom sheaccused of anti-Semitic opinions.Michael Heilprin (1823-1888), born inPiotrkow, was a linguist, scholar, encyclopedist,and author. In 1842 Heilprin and his family wentto Hungary, where he joined the Hungarianliberal movement and became well known as awriter and revolutionary poet during the revolution of 1848. After the suppression of theuprising, Heilprin went into hiding and fled to Paris. He emigrated to the U.S. in 1858and taught in Hebrew Education SocietySchools. After, moving from Philadelphia toBrooklyn, he became editor of Appelton*sNewAmericanCyclopedia. He was considered one ofthe foremost writers on European literature andpolitics. In the 1880’s Heilprin was active in thework of the Emigrant Aid Society and advocatedthe establishment of colonies for Russo-Jewishrefugees in Oregon, the Dakotas and New Jersey.Compiled by Lorraine Justman- WisnickiMichael Heilprin.Notable Personalities of Piotrkow / 65Saul Dessau before the Ohel of his ancestor, Dr. Hayim David Bernard, at thecemetery in Piotrkow that he and his brother Robert recently restored.THE SAGESRabbinical PortraitsSpiritual Leaders of the Community Over the Last Three Centuries1) Rabbi Meir Getz (1685-1732), the first Rabbi of Piotrkow and Lask (sharing thepulpit in both cities), served for 13 years after a hard and painful life. He was a greatscholar and an active man, paving the way for the great Rabbis that followed him.2) His son. Rabbi R. Elikim Getz (1705-1738), replaced his father for a short periodat age 30 after serving as presiding dayan for 7 years. He was a great, learned man andpassed away at the age of 32.3) Rabbi Hanania Liepmann Miesels (?-1811), a great scholar famous throughoutPoland, was advisor to many Rabbis and helped them in writing their books. He lived along life but had no children. After his death, two local Rabbis tried for the position andRabbi Abraham Zvi Pacanovski was chosen.4) Rabbi Abraham Zvi Pacanovski (1777-1819), the great Rabbi of Piotrkow andson of the well-known speaker. Rabbi Eliezer from Pocarow, was the descendant offamous Rabbis. He authored the important and famous book Biety Abraham, publishedposthumously by his father after he passed away at age 42. He served the Kehila for onlyseven years. His great-grandfather was Rabbi Zvi Hirsh Piotrkower, a very rich manwho built a big walled house for a synagogue, a beit midrash and a Kehila center. Manyarticles were written about his life, one of them by Jacob Krakovski of Piotrkow.5) Rabbi David Isaac Bromberg (7-1827), the son of Rabbi Reuben, also ofPiotrkow, was a well-known lamdan and was called “The Sharp One.” He was a studentof famous Rabbis and attracted many students to his yeshiva. He acquired the positionafter a great fight between his supporters and those of Rabbi Abraham Zvi and laterdecided to move to the nearby city of Ujazd. He wrote the books Beth David andChidushai HaRadak, edited the book Beth Israel by the Magid of Kuzman, and was astudent of Przysucha “Ha Yehudi Hakadosh.”6) Rabbi Nathan Neta Piotrkover, the young son of Rabbi Zvi Hirsh, headed theRabbinate from 1763-1766. He died at a young age and not much is known about him.7) Rabbi Moshe Pietrekowski (7-1814), a known lamdan, had pupils from all overthe country who would come to study at his yeshiva.8) Rabbi Aharon Pietrekowski, the son of Rabbi Moshe (7-1831), was very sharp.He was a dayan in Lask and studied with his father and with Rabbi Abraham ZviPacanovski. He was known for his knowledge in and out of Piotrkow and also as akabbalist. He was a student of Rabbi Fishel of Strikov. He was very good in math andstudied logarithms. His son. Rabbi Itzak, followed him as a Rabbi.66Rabbinical Portraits / 679) Rabbi Yakov Karo (1771-?) was the son of the Gaon Rabbi Arieh Leib, who hadto leave his post in Krotechin because of “blood libels” and settled in Germany. RabbiYakov served only briefly in Piotrkow and then left for Silesia.10) Rabbi David Isaac Buchner (?-1827) shared his fame with another Rabbinamed David Itzhak Bromberg. Both published books. Rabbi Bromberg wroteChidushei HaRadak and Beth David Rabbi Buchner also wrote Beth David onDeuteronomy. After serving in Piotrkow he later served in Czestochowa. His ideasappear in several books.11) Rabbi Dov Bersh Edelstein (7-1827) served the city for two years after beinga Rabbi in Chmelnick. A descendant of a very famous family, he died of cholera duringan epidemic which claimed many lives. His life was written about in the book OlatChodesh by the great Rabbi Sinai Safir of Brezsin.12) Rabbi Leibusch Meisels (7-1848) served the cities of Kilikov, Zamosc and, fora short time, Piotrkow. His son Rabbi David was a Rabbi in Nashelsk, a real Gaon whoadvised many Rabanim on various subjects. His son printed the hooks Ahavat Davidand Chidushei HaRadak.13) Rabbi Baruch Zvi Hirsh Rosenblum (7-1883) died at age 65. He served theKehilot of Rodzin and Vengrow prior to Piotrkow. In Rodzin he was accused by theRussians of supporting the Poles and put in prison. The prison commander, a Pole, helpedhim and they both escaped. He had to go into hiding for four years until his pardon wasannounced. In 1865, he began to serve in Vengrow; in 1868, he left for Piotrkow, wherehe stayed until his death. He had good relations with the Piotrkow chief of officers andgot permission to have an Eruv. He influenced Halachic literature and many Rabbis usedhis answers in public actions.14) Rabbi Eliezer Shalom Morgenstern was Rabbi of the cities of Cichow andShedletz prior to becoming the Rabbi of Piotrkow. He was one of the best students ofthe Holy Saba of Radoshitz. He served from 1858 to 1867. He was known as a greatteacher and preacher and attracted many followers. The time he served was one of thebest for the Jewish Kehila.15) Rabbi Isaac Kaczka was known as Yitzhakal Charif. He was a great lamdan.He served as the chairman of the Beth Din after the death of Rabbi Pacanovski and wasvery famous in his generation. His grandson, Rabbi Hanoch Kaczka, published many ofhis writings, which were praised by the Rav Kook and Zennenfeld, one of the knownChassidim of the Holy Saba. In 1831, on his way to a simcha, he was almost killed as aspy and miraculously was saved by a guard. This was said to be the work of Elijah theProphet.16) Rabbi Hayim Waks (1882-1889) was born in Tarnogrod near Lublin. As ayoung man he served there as a Rabbi and later served in Kalish. In 1884 he becameRabbi of Piotrkow. He was very learned in Torah and was approached by many Rabanimto answer their questions. He was also a practical man who believed in settling in EretzYisrael and bought a citrus grove there in 1876. He sold Etrogim from Eretz Yisraelduring Sukkot. In 1886, as an old and frail man, he visited Israel. He wanted people towork the land but realized they were not ready. He decided to buy additional housing inorder to increase the area of Jewish settlement and relieve the congestion and crowding.68 I A TALE OF ONE CITYThe books YeshuatMalca of the Kulna Rabbi and Nefesh Chaya of the Piotrkow Rabbitell of their visit and reception in Jerusalem and their encouragement to Chalutzim inPetach Tikvah to stay although conditions were bad and many had died of malaria. Afterthis visit, he worked hard to help the Yishuv and was elected the president of the KolelPolin Warsaw, which he served till his death. While visiting his in-laws in Kuzmitz in1889, he had a stroke and died. He was buried in Kalish after a Rabbinacal Decree, sincethree cities claimed him. All the great Rabbis and scholars came to give him the lasthonors and his grave became a tent where many came to pray. He left seven daughters,married to rich Chassidim, and one son. His second wife died in Piotrkow in 1910 andis buried there. Many of his family later were victims of the Holocaust. His grandson,Rabbi Isaac Kalish, and a great-grandson, HaRav Menachem Zinger, survived and livedin the U.S. and some of his descendants live in Israel as followers of the Rabbi ChaimEliezer Alter. He son-in-law. Rabbi Yosef Kalish, published a new edition of his bookNefesh Chaya in the years 1931-1937. His grandson, Rabbi Israel Yeshoshua Aibeshitz,lived in Israel and published a book with his writings.17) Rabbi Simcha Yair Rosenfeld (1831-1911) served for many years in differentcities. In 1890 he became the Rabbi of Piotrkow. He served the community until his lastday and really loved the city, where he found many wise and learned men. The peopleof Piotrkow loved him too. An excellent speaker, he maintained close connections withmany great Rabbis of his era. At his funeral, scores of Rabbis from other cities honoredhis memory.The Tsadiks of Wolborz.The Court of the Wolborz TsadiksR. Isachar Dov-Ber Hacohen Turnheim of Wolborz (1803-1878) founded theJewish community of Wolborz and became its Rabbi in 1862. People flocked to himsince he was known as a miracle-working Chassid. He was blessed with a Cantor’s voiceand organized a choir accompanied by drums, bells, and cymbals. After his demise, hisson, R. Jacob Moshe, took over the reins of the Wolborz Court.The House of the Tsadiks of PrzedborzR. Teshaya’le We/(/riet/(1770-1831) was the TsadikotVrzedhorz. He settled in thatsmall town with other Tsadiks of Poland, as was the custom. He was a descendant of R.Meir Getz, the fust rabbi of Piotrkow. He was one of the “Holy Group” of Lublin, whoseleader was called the ‘*Holy Jew” or the “Seer” R. Weltfried replaced the Seer, afterthe latter’s death.His son, R. Immanuel of Przedborz (1802—1865), became the next Rabbi. He wasbelieved to have resuscitated a dead child.His son, R. Abraham Moshe of Rosprza (1841-1918), replaced R. Immanuel asRabbi of Przedborz. He had at one time been accused of having violated the blood ritualduring Passover, whereupon he settled in Rosprza.His brother, R. YehezkelYehiel (?-1919), at that time officiated as Rabbi in Piotrkow.(Note: Przedborz, near Piotrkow, was an old community and considered to be the70 / A TALE OF ONE CITYcenter of scholarship in Poland. Its synagogue, constructed of wood, was built by KingKazimierz the Third and his Jewish wife, Esterka),The Branches of the Radoszyce DynastyR. MeirMenahem Finkler (1862-"1912), was descendant of R. Yisahar Ben Rados-zyc, who was called a second ‘‘Baal-Shem-Tov.” His activity was the pursuit ofChassidic virtues: Modesty, the visit of tsadikSy a love of Israel, fervent prayer, a beliefin brotherhood, charity, enthusiasm, etc. He was a Rabbi of Radoszyce, and later ofPiotrkow.His son, Itzhak Shmuel Eliehu Finkler of Piotrkow (1902-1945), replaced him asRabbi. He died in a Nazi camp. (The entire moving story about Itzhak appears in thisbook.R, Moshe Brukman (Brukazh), the “Paver” of Piotrkow (1790-1881), began hislabors as paver of roads, slept on the ground in fields and forests. He was a poorconversationalist, but was considered to be a tsadik with a following of at least onehundred thousand people. He was capable of healing with the sheer power of his spirit.When he settled in Piotrkow, he was entreated to intercede in cases of mental illness,especially the ''dibbuks.'' He acquired great wealth and contributed enormously to thesettlers of Eretz Israel. His fellow tsadiks looked upon him with skepticism and slightdisfavor; they considered him to be somewhat of a wizard.Izkor BookRabbi Menachem David TemkinThe seat of Rabbi Simcha Yair was occupied by Rabbi Menachem David Temkin,son of Reb Michael Temkin, grandson of Rabbi David Temkin, one of the leading rabbisof Warsaw. He was bom in 1861, and studied in Brisk under the famous scholar RabbiYosef Ber Soloveichik. He became one of the leading students of the leading scholar ofhis generation. Rabbi Yehoshua’le of Kutna. He received his rabbinical ordination inBrisk. A gentle and exemplary person. Rabbi Temkin became one of the beloved rabbisand sages of Piotrkow. He came from an environment replete with the love of study ofTorah for its own sake and dedication to the world of Halacha.While in Warsaw, he married the only daughter of a wealthy Jew, Reb Moshe NatanHalber, who left his son-in-law a fortune and a large house in Warsaw. His home wasalways humming with the great sages and leaders of Polish Jewry. The Gaon of Kutnawould always stay in his house while visiting Warsaw. Even as a young man, he becameknown as a leading scholar.After thirty years of affluence, he awoke one day a poor man. His friends, the sagesof Poland, headed by the Ostrovtze Rebbe, counseled him to assume a rabbinicalposition. At that time the Piotrkow needed a rabbi following the passing of Rabbi SimchaYair. The Ostrovtze Rebbe went to Piotrkow and stayed there for several weeks until heRabbinical Portraits / 71persuaded the leaders of the community to accept Rabbi Temkin as their rabbi. At firstthey refused to offer him the position, arguing that it would be the first time they wouldhave a rabbi who had not served in any other rabbinical post. But they were persuadedby the Rebbe, who promised them that Rabbi Temkin would serve them well. In 1913Rabbi Temkin arrived in Piotrkow as the town’s rabbi. He was elected as chairman ofthe rabbinical conference that took place in Lublin on September 12-14, 1916 at theinstructions of the central authorities in Warsaw.His Trials as Leader in Time of EmergencyAfter World War I broke out, the town suffered great hardship, and Rabbi Temkin’srole became most difficult. The town came under military occupation and then passedfrom one civilian authority to another. Each time, the rabbi was told that, as spiritualleader, he was responsible for the entire community; if any rules were broken, he wouldbe held responsible. The warnings affected his health and a heart ailment hastened hisend.An interesting incident during that time led to the rescue of two Jewish soldiers fromexecution, following a charge of espionage. One night in October 1914, the bell rang atthe rabbi’s office and two armed soldiers marched in. They handed him an urgentsummons from the office of the military governor and told him to sign it. He did nothesitate and signed. But because of the excitement, he fainted. His family membersrevived him. They opened the envelope and found an order that said: “To the Rabbi ofthe Local Jewish Community. You must appear personally tomorrow at six o’clock inthe morning at the military court at the Russian High School building. Your appearanceis mandatory, and you must be on time.” The rabbi turned pale, since it was already pastmidnight; he needed to take along a lawyer or a Russian interpreter, and it was too lateto do either. Finally he decided to invite the writer, Moshe Feinkind, who would serveas his spokesman. In the morning the two walked over to the Russian high school and,when they arrived at the court, they showed the summons. Only the rabbi was allowedto go in. Feinkind remained in the lobby. The rabbi appeared before the court and facedthe presiding judge, a general, and he two officers who served as members of the court.On the bench of the accused sat two bearded Jews, whose pale thin faces expressed fearand despair. The rabbi showed his credentials to the presiding judge, who sat comfortablyin an armchair, wrapped in his fur coat.Because of Early FriendshipSuddenly the general turned toward the rabbi and smiled, asking in Russian, “David!What are you doing here?” The rabbi did not utter a word. The general continued, stillsmiling benignly, “Don’t you know me? I used to be a frequent guest at your house.”The rabbi finally remembered who the man was. He had been the commandant of theBrisk fort when his father, Reb Michael Temkin, was the quartermaster of the fort. Therabbi’s father and the general had become friends, and the former would visit thegeneral’s home and play with his children.72 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThis unexpected reunion eased the rabbi’s heart,and he started telling the general his life story, how hecame to Piotrkow and what his position in that townwas. At the general’s order, the chat was interrupted;it was expected to be resumed after the trial. Theindictment was read: the two soldiers were accused ofpassing information on to the enemy. According to thetestimony of some Russian soldiers who had been withthem in the trenches on the front at the village of Serocknear Piotrkow, each time a shell was fired by theenemy, the Jewish soldiers would shout “Shema Is-rael” in a loud voice. This went on for several days.Eventually the entire unit was killed except for thosetwo Jews and five Russian soldiers. According to theinterpreter, those two words signaled the enemy not todirect the fire at the Jews. The Jewish soldiers nowfaced execution.In reality, the rabbi had been summoned to thattrial to witness the sentence that was to be pronouncedat the end of the session, and, as a clergyman, he was expected to be with the defendantsduring their last minutes. The rabbi, who had taken heart from his conversation with thegeneral, asked for permission to express his opinion. Permission was granted. Heexplained to the judges what the words “Shema Israel,” which had been repeatedlypronounced by the Jewish soldiers, actually meant. He told them that it was the holiestprayer known to Jews, especially in a moment of grave danger or disaster. He eloquentlypleaded the case of the innocent soldiers, who had meant no harm and had only calledout to their maker from the depth of their predicament. The rabbi’s defense reached thehearts of the judges and the soldiers were acquitted.The old general who presided at the trial agreed to issue a certificate to the rabbistating that he had always been a loyal subject of the Russian rule, as the son of a familywho for many years was dedicated to the affairs of the Russian army in many places inthe Empire. The general stressed that Rabbi Temkin should be treated as a distinguishedpersonage who carried the burden of a spiritual leader and who was a first-class citizen.The rabbi considered that certificate a real tribute and guarded it as a valuable document.After his demise it was publicly shown at the home of his son-in-law, Avraham Cohen,the brother of the famous Lodz industrialist Asher Cohen.^31m nnsnRabbi Temkin.Izkor BookThe Great TeachersRabbi Yehuda Meir ShapiraRabbi Yehuda Meir Shapira was bornin March 1887. His father was RabbiYaakov Shimshon of Schatz (Bukovina),son of Rabbi Yehuda Meir, son of RabbiDov of Host, son of Rabbi Yehuda Meirof Shpitovka, son of the famous tzaddikand friend of Besht (the founder of Chas-sidism). Rabbi Pinchus of Kuritz, a des-cendant of Rabbi Natan Shapira, author ofMegalahAmukot of Cracow. In his youthhe caused a stir in the world of the Torahwith his wisdom and great knowledge.This is confirmed by the great sage. RabbiShalom Mordechai Svedron of Berzan, inthe ordination certificate he issued for theRabbi Meir, in which he writes, “I saw ayoung man named Meir, and I offered theblessing Yotzer Ha’meorot (creator of thelights).”Rabbi Shapira had studied with hismaternal grandfather. Rabbi ShmuelYitzhak Schor of Munstritz, author ofMinchat Shai, mastering all aspects of Torah and knowledge; soon he became knownas a great scholar. A wealthy Galician Jew named Rabbi Yaakov David Breitman ofTamopol gave him his daughter’s hand in marriage.He became totally dedicated to the study of Torah at his comfortable home inTamopol. In a short time the ^^genius of Schatz became one of the leading lights of hisgeneration. His home became a meeting place for rabbis and scholars who would directtheir questions to him; his answers always hit the mark and were accepted favorably,which drew much attention to him. He was seen as a rising star in the world of Halacha,and he proceeded to publish his first book, Imrey Daat. Around that time he was offeredthe position of rabbi of the town of Galina in Galicia and he quickly accepted it, althoughhis in-laws were against his becoming a servant of the community. In Galina hecontinued to learn Torah and tried to start a school for children and a yeshiva for youngmen. The neglected town became a center of Torah. His first yeshiva in Galina, whichRabbi Yehuda Meir Shapira.7374 / A TALE OF ONE CITYhe headed, became a source of famous rabbis who followed in his footsteps.But Rabbi Shapira’s restless spirit would not let him remain in Galina. He becamea public champion of Torah and faith, and in public gatherings he raised his voice againstthe neglect of young people and proclaimed himself spiritual father to the yeshivastudents who, because of lack of attention, were condemned to waste away. He hadlabored successfully in Galina for ten years, but he started to feel that the place was toosmall for him; in 1922 he became rabbi in Sanok.Public Leader and Delegate to the SejmIn Sanok he also found much to do. Here, too, he did a great deal for the community,and his fame increased. Legends spread about his dynamic personality. He became amember of Agudath Israel and did a great deal for that movement. From Sanok he wasoften invited to appear on the podium on behalf of Poland’s religious Jewry, as a speaker,he fired up the masses. He was chosen to head Agudath Israel and was elected delegateto the Polish Sejm (parliament).On Adar 16,1924, he was chosen rabbi of the great town of Piotrkow, which boastedmany sages and writers, devoted Jews and Jewish scholars. In 1923 he had proposed ata great assembly of Agudath Israel in Vienna the study of a ‘'daily page” of Talmud andthe establishment of universal yeshiva; both proposals were received with loud applause.When Rabbi Shapira became the rabbi of Piotrkow, he was only 37 years old; notsince the days of the Gaon author of BritAvraham, who had become rabbi of Piotrkowat a young age, had anyone been appointed so young to serve as a rabbi of a town thathad known so many great rabbis and sages. He served as rabbi of the town while spendingmost of his time away because of his frequent trips on behalf of the Lublin Sages Yeshiva,which he had organized. But his leadership was felt in Piotrkow, as he was dedicated tohis work in the community. This imprint was felt in all matters, great and small. Hisfiery sermons inspired people, and he became extremely popular; his speeches alwaysdrew an overflow crowd.Head of the Lublin Sages YeshivaRabbi Shapira’s crowning achievement was the establishment of the Lublin SagesYeshiva. He brought together exemplary people, old Chassidim, heads of OrthodoxJewry and public leaders who proceeded to establish the great yeshiva which was hislife’s dream. The Piotrkow community gave him a great deal of help. Many of itscommunal leaders supported him because of his great influence and their admiration forhim. While serving as rabbi in Piotrkow, he was fortunate enough to see his dreamsfulfilled, and even took part in the first conclusion of Talmudic study (siyum), whichoccurred on the 15th of Shvat, 1934. He was able to teach Torah to his students after thefoundation was laid for the great building of the yeshiva, an event that was joyouslycelebrated at his home in Piotrkow. It took seven years to complete the building; heworked day and night raising funds for the cause. In his short life he was able to see thisproject completed.The Great Teachers / 75In 1926, Rabbi Shapira published his responsa book Or Hameir, a second editionof which was published by his brother in New York in 1951. In lyar, 1931 he becamepresident of the rabbinical court in Lublin and moved to that city, having served inPiotrkow for six years. His many cares gave him no rest after he settled in Lublin, andhe would often tell his friends that he missed his rabbinical position in Piotrkow. Becauseof his difficult work in Lublin he became prematurely old, and despite his young age hishair turned gray. He suddenly took ill and on the 7th of Heshvan, 1934, after living inLublin for two and a half years, he departed this world at the age of 46 and eight months.Nearly one hundred thousand people attended his funeral, and religious Jewry in Polandand elsewhere went into deep mourning.Izkor BookRav Shapira with his talmidim.Rabbi Moshe Hayim Lau—^The Last Rabbi of PiotrkowFor several years, Piotrkow waswithout a chief rabbi, and rabbinicalmatters were handled by local Jewishfunctionaries. Only three years beforethe outbreak of World War II, RabbiMoshe Hayim Lau was appointed to thatpost. A native of Lvov, he was bom onlyar 14, 1892 to Rabbi Zvi Yehuda andhis wife Leah Hinda, and was the scionof a famous rabbinical family in easternGalicia, a descendant of the holy SHLA,author oiBayitHadash and Turey Zahav,and of Rabbi Menachem Mannes HaleviIsh Horowitz, the head of the rabbinicalcourt in Altona, Hamburg and Wandsbek.The great community of Lvov, capi-tal of Galicia, where he grew up, was astronghold of Torah and piety in Polandfor seven hundred years. In his youth, heserved leading scholars, and for severalyears he studied in a rabbinical academyin Lvov with Rabbi Yosef Teomim,author ofPeriMegadim, who was the head of the rabbinical court in that city. The schoolwas crowded with rabbinical students, and the voice of Torah was heard everywhere.Moshe Hayim spend days and nights studying all branches of Torah and acquired greatknowledge and skill. He also pursued Jewish philosophy and had a great knowledge ofsecular subjects. He was ordained by the last poskim, the Rabbi of Baijan, Rabbi SholemMordechai Hakohen Shvedron, Rabbi Meir Arik of Tarnow-Buczacz, and Rabbi ShmuelAngel of Radomishl.Rabbi Moshe Hayim was elected at a young age to serve as the rabbi of Schatz(Sochava) in Bukovina. He devoted most of his energy to bringing the youth closerto the life of Torah and mitzvot. He was successful in his work and became a majorinfluence with youth, since he understood young people and was able to lead themin the ways of truth, Torah, and purposeful living. Besides possessing greatknowledge, he was also a great orator. He was a wonderful conversationalist, andanyone who came to him to discuss problems or express doubts left encouraged. Soonhe became well known in his own country and abroad and many important com-munities asked him to serve as their rabbi. From Schatz he moved to Pershov, an oldand renowned community in Slovakia. There he founded the Torat Hayim yeshiva.Rabbi Moshe Hayim Lau-Lavie.76Rabbi Moshe Hayim Lou—The Last Rabbi ofPiotrkow / 77which attracted hundreds of students from Slovakia, Poland and Austria.Rabbi Lau became even better known in the Jewish world because of his bookKiddush Hashem and his writing about the Jewish mother and family. His essays andarticles were enthusiastically reviewed by the Jewish press in Poland, Czechoslovakiaand Austria, but he was best known as a great speaker who could move the masses andaffect the individual. He had many students who became religious and communalleaders, both in Israel and in the diaspora.In addition to his educational work and the training of a new generation of rabbis,Rabbi Lau devoted much of his time to the Jewish public in general, and was one of theprime movers for the establishment of educational and vocational institutions forchildren who did not continue their studies in the yeshivot and Batei Midrash. He wasone of the advocates and founders of the religious schools for girls, Beit Yaakov, andthrough his initiative many such schools were started throughout Galicia.After his cousin, the Gaon Rabbi Meir Shapira, the head of the rabbinical court inPiotrkow, was chosen rabbi of Lublin, Rabbi Moshe Hayim was chosen for the post ofhead rabbi of the court ofPiotrkow. He derived deep pleasure from the great library thathe had brought with him, with over ten thousand valuable books. In Piotrkow he soonbecame popular, and his talks and speeches made a strong impression on the public;many came to hear him. His influence was unusual, and he created a pious atmospherearound him and brought many back to the teachings of Judaism.The subject of “Kiddush Hashem” is unique to the Jewish people, and in almostevery generation individual Jews and entire communities have had to sacrifice them-selves for the sanctification of the holy name. Rabbi Moshe Hayim seems to have feltthat he would have to sanctify the holy name with his own body, and he proceeded towrite a comprehensive book on the subject. He did an enormous amount of research forthis book, gathering material from many sources, old and more recent, adding his owninnovations; Torah scholars who read the first copies praised the book as a valuableaddition to halachic literature. He wrote other manuscripts with innovations in Torah,Halacha and Aggadah, as well as responsa, which he planned to prepare for publication.Unfortunately, they were lost along with his great library. He conducted a correspon-dence with other sages on such wartime questions as the agunah (a married womanwhose husband is missing)—^among them Rabbi Hayim Ozer Grudzinski of Wilna,Rabbi Menachem Zemba of Warsaw-Praga, and the Gaon of Chivin, Rabbi Dov BeirishWeidenfeld.After Piotrkow was occupied by the Germans, Rabbi Lau sought to use his ties withthe leaders of the German minority to make things easier for the local Jewish community,and during the early stages of the occupation he was able to avert many evil decrees.During the first year of the Second World War, the problem of wives whose soldierhusbands were missing, either because they had died in battle, were taken prisoner, orhad escaped to the Soviet Union, became acute. The rabbi formed a special courtcomposed of the judges of Reb Mendel Weiss and Reb Moshe Temkin, joined by thejudge from Aleksandrow near Lodz, Rabbi Hanoch Henich Sherfinski, who was knownfor his expertise in Halacha. The court took care of dozens of women whose husbandswere missing.78 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe rabbi paid special attention to this matter, with which he had been familiar fromhis younger days during World War I, and devoted a great deal of time to each case,while looking for ways to free the women from their indefinite status. In the course ofhis work he added his own commentaries to Section 17 of the Shulchan Aruch—EvenHaezer, which deal with this matter. But this valuable composition, based on Rabbi Lau’svast experience in this area, was lost along with his other important writings, includinga Hebrew diary of the German occupation of Poland until the day the rabbi was sent withthe last members of his community to Treblinka.During the Nazi occupation he worked tirelessly on foiling Nazi schemes againstthe Jews, and was in touch with various persons in Slovakia trying to help people escapeand alert Jewish institutions in England and Switzerland. The Pershov community,where he had previously served as rabbi, did a great deal to save the rabbi and his familyand bring them to Slovakia. But he chose to remain in Piotrkow until the very end.In Heshvan, 1943 the rabbi, along with thousands of members of his community,was transported by the “death” train to the extermination camp of Treblinka, whilemembers of his community from Pershov were brought there at the same time. He didnot become discouraged, and continued to lift the spirits of his followers. Even at thatfateful moment, when the end was near, he would keep saying, “For you shall go outjoyously.” In other words: Joy enables a person to overcome trouble, hardship andsuffering. He resembled a captain whose ship was sinking in a stormy sea, as he waitedto be the last one to jump into the treacherous waves when all hope of rescue was gone.He and his congregants died as saints, and with their death these holy communities cameto an end. May their memory endure in the hearts of the survivors. He left three sonswho live in Israel.Izkor BookPersonalitiesMoshe Feinkind (1865—1935)Reb Moshe Hacohen Feinkind, mayhe rest in peace, the son of Reb Pinhas,was born on the first day of Shevat, 5621(1865) in the town of Turk, the districtof Kalish to a Chassidic family. Hismother was the great-granddaughter ofthe Gaon Reb Avraham Avli Gumbiner,a Jewish scholar famous for his com-mentary on the Shulkhan Arukh, “TheShield of Abraham,” who was bom inthe year 1637. His grandfatherMoishele, the rabbi of Pudembitz (in theenvirons of Kalish), was known by hisnickname, “Clever Reb Moishele.” Heparticipated in the Kosciusko rebellionof 1794.In his father’s house, MosheFeinkind received a traditional religiouseducation, studied in the “Heder” andthe “Yeshivas” and especially in Brezh-in, a town close to Piotrkow—Lodz,with his uncle, the town rabbi, Reb IsraelFeinkind, may he rest in peace.At a young age he showed a penchant for general science and for Jewish scholarship.He went to Berlin, where he studied philosophy, history, literature and Jewish history.He attended lectures by Professors Dr. Kassel, Dr. Lazarus and Dr. Steintal. He was amember of the Union of Jewish students from Russia and, because of his participationin their demonstration against the ambassador of the Czarist Russian government, Orlov,he was expelled from Berlin and returned to Poland. In order to support himself, hetaught Hebrew and German in private homes in Lodz.In this city he began his literary work. He translated poetry of the German classicistsinto Hebrew and published it in the Noar Hatzioni periodical “Nitzanim.” From 1884he became one of the regular contributors to “Hatzfira” (in “Hatzfira” he published along biography of Dr. Ludwig Philipson), “Freund” (Petersburg^ “Undzer Leben”(Warsaw), and also published articles and reports in German Jewish periodicals and79Moshe Feinkind.80 / A TALE OF ONE CITYnewspapers such as “Algemeine Zeitung des Judentums,” “IsraelitischeWochenschrift,” and ‘'Judische Literaturblatt.”After marrying Freidl, the daughter of Blume and Leibele Ehrlich (her father wasan enlightened scholarly Jew and a respected member of the Piotrkow community),Feinkind moved to Piotrkow, where he taught Hebrew and German. After leaving theteaching profession, he supported himself by working as the private secretary of thefamous lawyer Mieczyslaw Hundzinski, an active member of the conservative, anti-Semitic “National Democratic” party, who greatly admired Feinkind’s broad knowledgeand command of many languages. He took part in the public life of the city, was one ofthe founders of the “Hovvei Zion” group and, later on, the political Zionist organiza-tion.In 1906 he headed the group that established the first M. Krinski (from Warsaw)Hebrew school in the city, where students learned in Hebrew. It bore the modest nameof “Reformed Heder.” Ultra-Orthodox fanatics declared war against this school, and atthe head of its defenders stood Moshe Feinkind, who courageously fought back. He didmuch to spread the Hebrew language and the Zionist idea in our city. Around him wereconcentrated all the devotees of the Enlightenment, the graduates of the Jewish schoolsand the children of the Orthodox and the fanatics. He guided them, helped them in theirdesire to obtain knowledge and understanding and loaned them books from his richlibrary. He appeared in clubs and at gatherings and lectured on Zionism and literature.He did it all with enthusiasm, wisdom, and charity.In the period of the first World War, when the “Agudat Zion” and “Tarbut” beganwidespread activity, he was right in the thick of the Zionist and cultural work. On the20th of Tamuz, the date of the death of Zionist leader Theodore Herzl, he would give apublic lecture as part of the memorial ceremony he had arranged, on the creator of thepolitical Zionist movement and his work.In 1914 he brought out the Yiddish weekly entitled the “Piotrkow Jewish Voice,”but when World War I broke out that same year. Governor Yatshevski forbade thepublication of the paper. Hence it appeared just once, published by ShlomoBelchatowski’s press.At the end of 1916, the Austrian occupation authorities held municipal elections.Fifty town council advisors were elected: 37 Christians and 13 Jews. M. Feinkind wasone elected from the Jewish list.At the festive opening session of the City Hall, when declarations were read byrepresentatives of the various parties, town councilman M. Feinkind announced that hewas joining the declaration of the “Jewish Union” and added “that he would strive,among other things, to achieve for Jews in the independent Polish state equality ofnational and civil rights.” He also announced that he constituted the “Volksgruppe”(people’s faction) at City Hall.In the following years he dedicated himself to organizing the craftsmen in the cityand in adjacent towns, he participated in setting up a cooperative league for supplyingraw materials to the Jewish craftsmen and in expanding the organization’s charitablefund; for many years he served as chairman of the organization and those unions. Whenhe was forced by reasons of health and by his literary work to end his activity on behalfMoshe Feinkind (1865—1935) / 81of the craftsmen, he was honored, as a token of thanks and recognition, by being namedtheir honorary president.Within the realm of his public activity, it should be pointed out that he was amongthe founders of the ORT professional trade school, which trained hundreds of boys incarpentry and locksmithing. For many years he was a member of the national committeeof the Polish craft organizations.As a gifted writer, he was famous for his historical book The Kuzari, which waspublished in 1910.In the period of the first World War he published a Polish-language Jewish weeklycalled “Glos Zydowski” (“Jewish Voice”). He published articles and short stories in the“Lemberger Tagblatt,” in the “Lodzer Tagblatt” and in “Express,” a daily paperpublished in Warsaw, as well as in other periodicals. He signed many articles with apseudonym: A. Rottman, Servus, Moshe Penkanson, and A.B.C.He made a name for himself with his monograph in Polish titled “The History ofthe Jews of Piotrkow and Environs” (1930) [Dzieje Zydow w Piotrkowie i okolicy].His also published books including Good Jews in Poland; Women, Rabbis andKnown Polish Personalities; History of the Lodz Ghetto; Things from the Past; ThePolish Jew, These books include selections of articles and stories published in peri-odicals, as well as new writing. They constitute an important source for the history ofPolish Jewry and Jewish life in recent centuries, according to Jewish and otherauthorities.Moshe Feinkind was a good conversationalist, noted for his sense of humor and hisknowledge of Jewish folklore, and he had an encyclopedic mind. He was also a man ofcharming appearance, who enchanted all who met him. He died on Monday, the secondof Sivan, 5695 (June 3, 1935) of a heart attack. In his will he left his extensive library,which contained rare books of historical value in Hebrew, Yiddish, German, Polish andRussian, to the YIWO Institute in Vilna, and his modest financial resources to thecharitable organization of the craftsmen’s association.Izkor BookPinches Bar-On (Baran)Pinchas-Arie-Leib, son of Shmuel Ber andYehudit, was bom on Hei beTamuz Tarmav(1882) in Piotrkow, a descendent of a family ofgreat Rabbis and Zadikim in Poland. His great-grandfather was Rabbi Ber from Radoschitz,founder of the Radoschitz dynasty. He wasamong the most important pupils of the LublinRabbi and famous as miracle worker (Ba’alMofeth). His son, Reb Israel Itzhak, grandfatherof Pinchas-Leib, continued his post as Admor inRadoschitz. His second wife, Devorah, whobore him two daughters and one son, Pinchas’father, married, after her first husband had died.Rabbi Eliezer-Shalom Morgenstern fromSchedlitz, who moved to serve as Rabbi inPiotrkow. Devorah, the “rebetzin,” a very wiseand clever woman, knew all the distinguishedfamilies of the city and everybody admired herand asked her for advice.Pinchas Bar-OnPinchas’ mother Yehudit, born in Radom, came from the family of Reb Arie-LeibZunz (the “Harif’) of Plotzk. He was the author of many books dealing with the Talmud.Pinchas’ first teacher (Melamed), Reb Moshe, taught him the alphabet; he began toread at the age of 3. Then, when he was 5 years old, he was taught the “Chumash” byReb Ozer Frisch. At the age of 7 he moved to another “Cheder” and began learningGemara. Because of his talents and diligence he was sent to learn with private teachersand his tuition fees were paid by the community (since his parents could not afford it).When he was “bar-mitzva,” he had already begun his public activities. Togetherwith two friends, he established a charitable society, and approached prominent peopleof the community for donations to be distributed among the poor. When this becameknown, there was a great public storm, and his Rabbi was chided for letting his pupilsquit learning and deal with trivial secular activities. Especially angry was his elderbrother Nathan-David, who was a sort of “father figure” to him; upon his insistence the“society” was annulled.Slowly but surely, Pinchas was discovering the taste of “Haskala.” He met the localHebrew teacher, in whose house he found a rich library of Hebrew books dealing withnew explanations and “midrashim” of the “oral” Torah; as he said, “My eyes wereopened to see anew the ‘Mishna’ and ‘Talmud’ and I felt like going out of darkness intoa great light.”At this vulnerable point of his life, before he was even 18, he was married by his82Pinchas Bar-On (Baron) / 83family (in a ‘‘shidduch”). He was learning at the Gur Rabbi’s shtibel, and outside helooked and behaved like a “Chassid.” But, after tasting the “haskala,” he wouldn’t let itgo. Aside from his holy studies, he read everything that came into his hands, such asbooks about nature and astronomy, etc.; he was expanding his self-education all the time.He was doing this with a group of young men who gathered every evening and were asenthusiastic about new opinions and books as he was. They read and discussed all sortsof books, while one of them was always on guard lest somebody might come and catchthem. They searched out the secrets of the world and its creation according to JohannKepler and Kopemikus; they learned arithmetic and Hebrew grammar, the Rambam’sbooks, and every new explanation of the Bible.At the same time Pinchas began dealing with “Kabbala” and reading Spinoza. Hewrote, “these books meant everything for me, I read them all the time, under the Gemarain the shtibel and when walking around, during meals and between prayers. Theforbidden books were divided in small pamphlets among all members of our group,because we had only one version of each, and this way it was easier to hide them—be-cause if they were found it often meant loss of money (the expenses of people learningin the shtibelv/exe usually paid by their wives’ families) and even a forced divorce. Wedid not deal with fiction, but just with science and research books. We were worriedwhat would happen after we finished all the Hebrew and Yiddish books in these subjects;maybe then we’d have to learn foreign languages to continue our studies into all secretsof the ‘divine’ haskala.”They were also reading the Hebrew newspapers and magazines of that period—“Hazefira” and “Hameilitz”—as well as the Yiddish ones, like “Die Friende” etc.When a new newspaper, “Hazeman,” appeared, P. Bar was among its first readersand subscribers. “Hazeman” was called “the red newspaper” because of its waragainst the Russian Tsar and his restrictions on the Jewish population. After thedefeat of Russia in the 1905 war (against Japan), there were many riots and terroristincidents against the ruling regime and even more against the Jews. Strikes wereeverywhere and, among the Jews, only the socialist Bund supported them. After the1905 declaration of the constitution, “Hazeman” published these two headlines daily:“The Pogromchiks Are Still At Large” and “The Jews Have Not Yet Been GrantedEqual Rights.”When the “Mizrachi” was established, Pinchas was among the first to jointhis religious-national movement, which drew many orthodox people and rabbisto its lines. He was greatly influenced by Rabbi Reines Z.L., who headed theLida Yeshiva. His logical system of teaching the Talmud seemed to many a fineblend of Torah, wisdom and knowledge, a blend which was the goal of P. Bar-Onthroughout his life.When World War One broke out in 1914, Bar-On was 31 years old and had to goto the army, but, after some medical check-ups, he succeeded in getting an exemption.There were now new influences of “Haskala” coming from Berlin and Vienna, and inhis home he was giving Hebrew evening classes for adults, together with Jacob Maltz,Mr. Rosenblum and Mr. Bimbaum. A new school for Hebrew and the Bible (both taughtby Bar-On) was established, as well as preparatory classes for general Hebrew high84 / A TALE OF ONE CITYschool. The teachers there, beside him, were Josepf-Dov Rosenblum and Mr. Zlotnik.Eventually this became a high school with many more teachers, while he remained theprincipal teacher for Hebrew studies, replaced by Mr. Rosenblum when he emigrated toEretz Israel. In the celebrations of “San Remo Day” in Piotrkow in 1917, on the occasionof the Balfour Declaration, he was among the chief speakers. At the end of his speechhe even donated his gold watch and chain for the building of the Jewish homeland. Sincethen he appeared on every occasion, lecturing about Zionism and immigration toPalestine. There was a big gathering in the city’s movie theater, in which the Zionistideas were explained to all by P. Bar-On in Hebrew, Mr. Halperin from Lodz in Yiddishand a third speaker in Polish. Another gathering was assembled in the great synagogueafter the death of Yechiel Chlenov z”l.P. Bar-On’s living came from selling coals, but most of his time was dedicated toteaching Hebrew. At night, all his friends came to his open house, reading newspapers,talking politics and guessing who would win the war. Some sided with the Germans,hoping they would bring more education to the people, and some said it was bad to prayfor a new ruler. But all agreed that it was time to talk about making “aliya.”And the time came. In 1921, in the middle of the school year, P. Bar-On sold all hisproperty in order to buy travel tickets and, together with his wife, left Piotrkow by train.It was Purim and he read the “Megilah” on the train. At the Polish border, he changedtrains and, with other immigrant pioneers, stopped in Vienna for several days. FromVienna he took a ship to Alexandria, Egypt, and from there traveled by train to EretzIsrael.It was Rosh-chodesh Nissan when he arrived there, penniless. One of the otherPiotrkow immigrants helped him with a three-pound loan. He settled in the outskirts ofTel-Aviv and began searching for work. Soon he was informed that there was a vacantpost for municipal secretary of Hadera. Even though the small town (Moshava) wasafflicted by malaria, which especially afflicted new immigrants, he dismissed the dangerand received the job. He celebrated Passover in the company of the Piotrkow people inTel-Aviv and the next day he was to arrive at Hadera and begin his work. But just thenthe Arab riots of 1921 broke out and there was no possibility of leaving Tel-Aviv. Onlyafter a week was he able to go, and he immediately began his duties as secretary-generalto the town council. His first task (assisted by Mr. Harkavi, the legal counselor of theJewish National Board, “Havaad Haleumi”) was to demand of the British MandateGovernment restitution for the damages caused to fields and houses by the Arab rioters.He lived in Hadera for the rest of his life, and besides his jobs in the town council assecretary and late treasurer, he was the bookkeeper for foreign investors who boughtlots in Hadera but remained abroad. In Hadera he met many of his students and convinceda lot of them not to return to Poland, however difficult their conditions.At first, Pinchas settled in a vacant room in the local hospital for malaria patients;but when their number increased, he had to leave and rented a room with one of thefarmers. Finally he bought a lot and built a permanent residence. Again, his home becamethe gathering place for scholars, especially friends from Piotrkow. Each new immigrantfrom there knew his address and came to visit. His salary as secretary was not high, buthe managed to save and send some money to needy people abroad.Pinchas Bar-On (Baron) / 85A group of the first Piotrkower Halutzim in Eretz Israel.In 1926, his wife died after an illness, and he was terribly depressed. Some yearslater, in 1929, his former student Hadassah (Pessa) Staszewska came to Palestine and,after a few months, they were married. They had two children, a son, Uri, and a daughter,Ahuva.When the State of Israel was founded, Pinchas felt, like many others, that his dreamshad come true. He began writing a detailed diary about all that was happening in theyoung State, and kept it till his last day. Despite his declining eyesight (after severaloperations), he followed every event and wrote about his reactions, joys and sorrowsregarding the development of the Jewish State. Earlier, at the end of 1946, he had beenforced, due to his deteriorating health, to take early retirement from his secretarial work.After that, he lived very sparingly on the rent from the shops in his house. Even thoughmoney was scarce, he still saved enough to buy books, including the new HebrewEncyclopedia and the new Ben-Yehuda Hebrew Dictionary. In spite of his weak eyesighthe was reading a lot and each new book made him happy. He was exchanging letterswith all his friends and students from Piotrkow, in Israel and abroad—^those whosurvived the Holocaust and those who came before it. Many of his brothers families86 / A TALE OF ONE CITYdied during World War Two; he took some consolation in the establishment of Israel,and was extremely proud when both his son and daughter served in the Israeli Army.In his diaries of those days, Pinchas writes a lot about politics, international andlocal, and one can sense the attention and joy with which he regarded every event in thenewborn Israel.Pinchas Bar-On died in his sleep on Rosh-chodesh Kislev Tashtaz, November 15,1955. Ixt his blessed memory be with us forever.Izkor BookY akov BerlinerYakov Berliner, bom in Piotrkow, was abarber by trade. Until World War I, he workedin Warsaw. During his free time he studiedJewish, Polish and Russian literature. Hebelonged to the existing proletarian literaturecircles and was a regular in the home of I.L.Peretz. Toward the end of the war, whenpoverty and anti-Semitism made life in War-saw very difficult, Yakov Berliner returned tohis hometown, Piotrkow, and started to workat the barbershop of his uncle Pinkusewicz.Berliner began his public community ac-tivities in Piotrkow at the end of 1917, whenthe ‘‘Hazamir” became the Bundist movement.By vote of the new managing committee, Ber-liner was picked as a member. He immediatelyassumed an important position in the Bund. Hebecame their representative in various com-mittees which the ‘‘Joint” had created for theJewish people. Their goals were to distributerelief to the poor and to assist the existingcultural and economic institutions.In the vote for city council in free Poland, held at the end of 1919, Berliner was thefirst on the list from the Bund and he was chosen with three other councilmen, RachelWolinska, Abram Weisshoff and Z^alman Stashewski. With the rise of state health carefor workers, he became an official in that area, and although at first he had noqualifications, his intelligence and hard work soon won him recognition from theleadership.He was intelligent and devoted and these qualities gained him respect and friendshipfrom all those who came in contact with him, even when they were political opponents.Berliner’s community work brought him great acclaim and also brought popularityto the Bund.In 1924, elections were held for the Board of the Health Care Fund and the Bundobtained two mandates: for Yakov Berliner and Abraham Ruven Pinkusewicz. In thesame year, Yakov Berliner was voted onto the managing committee of the Jewish Kehila,where he was very active.He was active in many important institutions and societies, but his main activity wasin the City Council and its various committees. While on the City Council, his publicpresentations were renowned for their brevity and logic, but he could also be very severe87Yakov Berliner / 88when he had to answer the Councilmen’s obnoxious attacks on the Socialist majority inthe City Council and in the management, which was organized through a block of thePPS and the Jewish Socialist councilmen. This opposition made venomous public attacksagainst Berliner’s block and used common anti-Semitic tactics when they fought reformsaimed at helping the working class.The City Council made Yakov Berliner a member of the Committee which ran theHospital. On this committee, Berliner had to fight the Polish interests, which wanted totake the Jewish Hospital and incorporate it into the General Hospital.Little is known about his battles behind closed doors and his success in overcomingthe evil decree against the Jewish Hospital; it was in the best interest of all to shun thepublicity.He was reelected every time to serve on the City Council. The Bund was not involvedin the Jewish Kehila at the beginning of Berliner’s thirty years of public service, but inSeptember of 1937, the Bund gained a majority in the Jewish Kehila and Yakov Berliner,the first candidate on their list, became the first leader of the Bund Party.Berliner remained involved with the Jewish Community until the outbreak of thesecond World War. The city was quickly occupied by Hitler’s outlaws. The Commanderof the city ordered that the management of the Jewish Community should be transferredinto a “ Judenrat.” However, Yakov Berliner refused to participate as a member of the“Judenrat.” He chose underground activities in order to lead his fellow Socialists andorganize resistance. In April 1941, a courier from the Warsaw Underground was arrestedby the Gestapo. She carried a full list of the Piotrkow Resistance members. All of the“Judenrat” Bund activists were arrested. Yakov Berliner went into hiding. He sur-rendered shortly afterward in order to avoid atrocious sanctions by the Gestapo againsthis captive friends. They were all deported to Auschwitz. Yakov Berliner, one of themost dignified personalities of our home town, gave his life for high ideals and forhumanity.Izkor BookThe Legend of a ManAbraham Reuven PinkusewiczBen Giladi-New YorkIf you remember our pre-war home town,you probably remember this tall, handsome,witty and charming man. You could meet him inthe City Hall, where he played an important roleas a councilman in representing the Jewish com-munity of Piotrkow. If you attended a meetingof the Jewish “Kehila,” he was there handling allthe complicated tasks of secretarial and publicrelations work as a trustee of the Board. Youcould see him on the streets riding his motor-cycle on his way to a meeting of the JewishHealth Society (TOZ), where he was the guidingforce or on his way to the “ORT” school, theorphanage home, the ‘'Kropla Mleka” center orto many other places where life pulsated inPiotrkow. This man was simply part of the crea-tive scenery in our life; he was respected andadored by most of the people. His name wasAbraham Reuven Pinkusewicz but they called Abraham Reuven Pinkusewicz (Pinkus).him Pinkus.Pinkus was the son of a barber-surgeon (felczer) and started his medical educationearly in life. Unfortunately, after finishing at the Russian “Alexandrovka” high school,he could not continue his studies due to economic difficulties. Forced to support hisfamily, he started to work as a medical practitioner at the Jewish Hospital in Piotrkow.Here, over the years, through self-education and outstanding administrative ability, hebecame the hospital’s administrator and the chief assistant to the great Dr. Weinzier. Hespent many sleepless nights tending to the seriously ill or even balancing the hospital’sshaky budget.Pinkus was one of the most popular personalities in Piotrkow, and his great talent wasfor friendship. I never knew anyone with such an ability to gain friendship simply by givingit. Even his political opponents acknowledged his many virtues. For example, Jacob Maltz,the spiritual leader of the Labor-Zionists was his best friend and companion. They wouldhave political discussions; however, their human relationship was really unique.8990 / A TALE OF ONE CITYHis cozy apartment at the Jewish Hospital was always full of people. The door wasopen to all. They came to satisfy their hunger, some the hunger for spiritual fulfillmentand some the hunger for food. I remember how he greeted everyone with a warm, broadsmile on his face. I also remember all those wonderful, mysterious pieces of equipmentin his place. He had a complete wine distillery and made all kinds of wine. Hisachievements in the photographic field were remarkable. Not only did he take excellentpictures, but he also developed them in his sophisticated laboratory. And so, this manreally applied his creativity to all matters in life.Pinkus had a religion, and this religion was the Jewish Labor Movement— the“Bund” party. He used to reply, when asked, that as far as he remembered, he was alwaysa “Bundist” heart and soul. In the Piotrkower political arena he played a prominent role.As a youngster, he already directed party meetings and various committees. As a memberof the City Council, he was known as the most courageous defender of the Jewishcommunity, fighting off the vicious attacks of the “Endeks.” The survivors of the“Bund's” younger generation remember Pinkus with admiration and nostalgia. He wastheir mentor and educator in the branches of “Skif,” “Soms,” “Zukunft” and “Mor-genstem.” As an expert in sports, he inspired not only political and cultural ideas butalso physical fitness.Pinkus was a great nature lover. He gave the younger generation a longing for greenpastures and wide horizons. Full of vitality and zest, he played with the youngsters andshared their dreams.The theatrical circle enjoyed his great ability as an actor. He performed manydramatic roles in plays of literary, historical and sociological interest.He also played excellent bridge. He wrote the editorial column in his party'snewspaper weekly. He was a connoisseur of books, being an avid reader. He was anamateur in radio and an expert in art; and I could quote many other things that he wascapable of.One bright, intense memory pierces my mind. It could involve any clear, happysummer day, it could happen in the “Wolborski forest,” at the old racetrack in Piotrkow,or at the green, charming farm “Kleszcze” not far from Bugai. It was a wonderful thing,this summer camp of “TOZ” for the poor children of Piotrkow, the place where theyalso shared a bit of sunshine. For the youngsters, the summer camp was the land overthe rainbow. There they played, learned, sang and were not hungry. Their most preciousinstincts were awakened. On such clear summer evenings, all these youngsters listenedto Pinkus. He was the man who had brought this recreation project into existence.And after his chat, the beautiful, Jewish song “Arum dem faier” could be heard farand wide.Pinkus fell in love with Hela Gelade and they were married in 1933. They had twowonderful boys, Moishele and Fishele. After his marriage, life became even more intenseand stimulating for Pinkus. However, the inevitable came—September 1939.They had kept running from the Germans until they came to a place near the oldPolish-Russian border, where Pinkus worked in a hospital. In 1941, the sudden Germaninvasion separated the family. Pinkus was sent to Russia; Hela with the boys returnedto Piotrkow ghetto to her parents. After the war, in Bergen-Belsen, Hela, who had lostAbraham Reuven Pinkusewicz / 91the children, received the most wonderful news: Pinkus was alive in Moscow. Therewas a letter from him at the Piotrkow Magistrate. He asked about his wife and the boys.She hurried to Poland, came to Piotrkow, and here another letter awaited her. A Russiandoctor, a friend of Pinkus, wrote and informed her with the deepest regret about thetremendous loss he and his friends had suffered on June 1st, 1945. Pinkus, the symbolof all humanity, had died.New BulletinHouses of WorshipThe Great SynagogueThe exact year when the first Jewish “shul” in Piotrkow-Trybunalski was built isnot known. Perhaps it was before the expulsion of the Jews in 1657. There was alreadya ‘‘Bet Hakneset,” which the Poles destroyed when they expelled the Jews fronS the cityproper and the surrounding areas. The first official document allowing Jews to erect a“Bet Knesset” was issued by King Jan Sobieski III on September 16,1679 in Jaroslow;it gave the Jews the right to live in Piotrkow, to trade, to cook meat and to build asynagogue.In 1689, the first “Bet Hakneset” in the area was built and referred to as “Podzamcze”(near the castle); it was not far from the Franciscan church. The shul was a woodenedifice, taller by far than all the other buildings in the city. In 1740, the shul was set onThe restored synagogue, now a district library.92The Great Synagogue / 93fire by Jesuit students who were never caught. Today’s shul was built during the years1791-1793.Thanks to Dr. Rabbi Chaim David Bernhard ztz”l, the Piotrkow Jews possessed ashul that brought praise, admiration and honor to the synagogue movement in Poland.Piotrkow Jews “davened” mostly in the shul and later also in the nearby “BetHamidrash,” “Chevrot” and Chassidic shtibleck But the shul was always the holiestplace for all religious Jews. At times the shul was packed as on “Shabat Tshuva,” “ShabatHagadol,” when the rabbi would give his sermon, on “Simchat Torah” for “Hakafot,”“Erev Yom-Kippur” at “Kol Nidrey,” when even non-Jews would be present, includinghigh officials of government agencies who were in the city at the time.In 1813, the French general, who was withdrawing with his army from Russia,visited the shul (old Jews tell that Napoleon himself did so, too). In 1821, Alex I, duringhis trip to the peace conference in Erfurt, also visited the shul.The shul was open every day from before sunrise until 10 a.m. One “minyan” afteranother would “daven.” In the afternoon, shortly before sunset, the shul was againopened for “Mincha” and “Maariv” services. There were times, during severely coldspells, when the shul was unbearably cold, but the usual “davenners” would not bedeterred and would still arrive on time.On certain occasions and at times of distress, the shul would be opened at midday,when all the Jews were called on to say psalms for the problem to be solved or for theperson to be helped. The celebration of the completion of a new “Sefer Torah” for ashtibel v/o\xld end with bringing it into the shul. Sentences meted out by the governmentcourt also took place in the shul, which was then illuminated by black candles. A boardcovered by a black cloth, similar to a coffin, was placed not far from the “amud.” A“Sefer Torah” was removed from the “aron kodesh,” in the presence of which the properperson gave his oath. This kind of act evoked fear among those present and seldom cameto pass, because the entire city became involved and every effort was made for the twosides to come to terms. The Czarist authorities at the time ordered that, during govern-ment holidays, memorials and forgiveness ceremonies be held in the shul and, therefore,the children of the government schools, led by their teachers, came to the shul. One ofthe board members of the shul would explain, in Russian, the meaning of the day; thiswas followed by the cantor and several of his choir members’ singing “Hanatan Tshuah”with a special melody. They would close with the Russian hymn to the Czar. At thisceremony, representatives of the authorities came, who saluted during the singing of thehymn. Later on, the authorities sent only a policeman to represent them. This traditioncontinued into the time when Poland was independent. Only the contents of the prayersand the hymn were changed, so that the ode was to Poland.When a city Rav, a judge or a great scholar or saintly person died, the body wasbrought into the shul, circling the “bima” several times, and a eulogy was made. Theshul was very crowded then because all business stopped so everyone could attend thefuneral and pay their final respects.One must certainly describe the “Hakafot” during “Simchat Torah, which was agreat celebration. Hundreds of children, sitting on the shoulders and arms of their parents,carried their finely drawn flags, topped by a colored candle which was set into a beautiful94 / A TALE OF ONE CITYA Lag B’omer festival in front of the Great Synagogue in 1930.apple. Essentially, however, the eye was drawn to the beautifully “dressed” Torah scrollswearing silver crowns, silver shields on which were engraved various symbols and theTen Commandments, artistic trees of life adorned with beautifully designed silver “Teytlfinger” (pointers).The people danced while carrying the “Sifrey Torot,” with the rabbi in the lead, thecantor singing, and a chorus of all present in the shul expressing their joy.On “Shavu’ot,” the shul was decorated with green branches and blossoming trees,which were brought from neighboring gardens and forests.As joyful as holidays were in the shul, so the days of mourning were sad anddepressing. On “Tisha B’av,” from early morning till late afternoon the Great Temple’sdestruction was lamented, together with the destruction of our people and their martyr-dom in all areas of the world. The melodies of the cantor and choir provoked sadnessand tears. They filled the “Bet Hakneset” and summoned a need and longing for the oldfreedom that once was ours in our own Holy Land.For generations, the “Bet Hakneset” played the most important role in the life of theJewish “Kehila,” and its fate was tragically connected to the fate of the shul.As mentioned earlier, the first shul was destroyed in 1657, when the Jews weredriven from the city. The “Bet Hakneset” was rebuilt in 1689. In 1790, a pogrom totallyThe Great Synagogue / 95destroyed the shut. Then the fire was set by Jesuit students. The construction of the lastshul began in 1791.In 1854 the Czarist “Katsapn,” dressed in civilian clothing, attacked the Jewishinhabitants, beat them and robbed them of whatever they could. They didn’t ignore the“Bet Hakneset” either, and they destroyed valuable possessions.In 1861, the Czarist powers decided to close the shul because a memorial was heldthere to honor the memory of the five murdered freedom fighters. Only because ofattempts made by the Jewish “Kehila” and influential Jewish personalities in the citywas the decree recalled.In August, 1914, following the start of World War I, the Czarist police attacked theshul; destroying, breaking and demolishing everything—^while looking for a secrettelephone apparatus allegedly connected with the German military powers.Only twice since the establishment of the shul until the beginning of World War IIwere there no Friday night services. Once was in 1861, after the memorial for the fivePolish revolutionaries; the second time was on August 28, 1914, when there was thethreat of a pogrom on the Jewish inhabitants by the Czarist military forces and theirhelpers.In 1929, steps were taken to renovate the “Bet Hakneset”; this took several years.It was completely repainted inside and out. The eastern wall and the ceiling were onlyfreshened, but the side and western walls were repainted. Now, a new type of artistrywas used, whereby Yiddish letters in various styles and shapes were painted on the wallswith modern adornments, introducing brighter colors onto this mosaic of hues. ProfessorPeretz Wilenberg of Czestochowa, who survived the German occupation in Lodz duringWorld War II, was responsible for this work.Those who experienced the great tragedy of the Holocaust and miraculouslysurvived tell about the “Bet Hakneset,” which during the end was completely destroyedby the Germans, together with the entire Jewish “Kehila.”The ^^Bet Hamidrash”The “Bet Hamidrash” was built adjacent to the “Groyse” city shul in 1765. It wasbuilt in the same style as the shul. When the shul was extended several meters towardsthe street, it appeared that the Bet Hamidrash was recessed deeper from the streetbetween the shul, on the north side, and Yoshke Yekl’s houses on the south. The easternwall was adjacent to the old cemetery, which was visible through its windows. Right inthe center of the eastern wall was the “aron kodesh.” A little to the right stood the“amud,”which was used by the cantor or “Bal Tfila.” Around it and lighting it were the“yortzayt” candles. The “amud” was always full of “kvitlech” containing the names ofthe sick, asking for prayers for their recovery.There were no special chairs for the honored “Baaley Batim,” but usually theyoccupied the place of honor.In the center of the “Bet Hamidrash” was a “bima” where the Torah was read.For many years the “Bet Hamidrash” was open day and night. It was filled withyoung men, boys and sons-in-law who “ate kest,” as well as Jews who devoted96 / A TALE OF ONE CITYthemselves to the study of the Torah and left the concern of earning a living to theirwives.The groups of “learners” varied, as did the subjects they studied. The greatestnumber studied “Shas.” At 3 o’clock in the morning, others, too, arrived to study theBible and other books with Hebrew explanations. From time to time there were studentsof a yeshiva and their director, who recited a page of “Gemarah” and “Pilpul” for themore advanced young men and the young married men. Young men came from nearbyand distant cities and towns to Piotrkow to study, because it was known for its greatRabbis and scholars. Occasionally a preacher came to warm the hearts of the simpleaudience and lighten the great burden of earning a living or the troubles of the diaspora.The Enlightened Ones sometimes stepped into the Bet Hamidrash, but mostly theyturned to education of a secular variety. Such people were labelled non-believers andwere avoided. They would say of them that they had died of a “bad education.”With the advent of Zionism and the Socialist revolutionary movement in the latterpart of 1800, many young men were taken with worldly ideals. The number of thosewho would come to “learn” in the Bet Hamidrash diminished, as a result, the parents ofthe “learners” also would send their children to the Chassidic shtiblech, where thesupervision was less stringent.When the revolutionary wave receded, and with the rise of Zionism and religion,the subject of Torah was rejuvenated in the Bet Hamidrash. The “learners,” too, camecloser to the people and every Sabbath they “learned” with the “Baaley Batim” subjectswhich were suitable to their knowledge and understanding. One must make mention ofthe devotion of Reb Yakov Leventhal (Yenkl Skernievitser), who was a gardener and a“Talmid Chacham” and a very intelligent man. Every Sabbath he would “learn” withthe common folk. (He was for Eretz Israel body and soul and his children andgrandchildren lived there.)Itzchak Schwieger, the preacher, drew masses of people every Sabbath with his fierysermons.In 1933, the Yeshiva Bet Yosef was newly established and on Sunday, October 6,1934, the first graduation of students was celebrated in the Bet Hamidrash. It was a greatoccasion and members of the Rabbinate and leaders of the “Kehila” participated. Amongthe Yeshiva boys were some who had great talents. One gave an hour-long “Pilpul” andanother recited some pages of the “Gemarah.” Once more, there was happiness in theBet Hamidrash. All the Yeshiva boys sang hearty melodies. Some came from as far awayas Bialystok.Two beautiful figures appear before the eyes of this author. He would like toconclude with them. One is Reb Azal, who sat in the Bet Hamidrash all day long. Hisgoal was to examine the “tfillin” of the men who were praying to see if, God forbid, oneletter of the “Parshiot” had been erased. He also searched out every piece of papercontaining Hebrew letters, which had to have a proper burial.The other is Avigdor Treger. He worked all week as a porter, carrying packagesuntil he was exhausted, and on Sabbath he walked around the Bet Hamidrash with aclean can of water to treat the “learners” to a cold drink during the summer heat. Hisface shone every time he answered “Amen” after each “shehakol.” There is a story aboutThe Great Synagogue / 97this porter: Once, in his youth, the Rabbi of Radom came to Piotrkow to visit the “BalTsuva” Dr. Chaim David Bernhard. Avigdor Treger took the bundle from the Rabbi ofRadom and escorted him to the saintly doctor. At that precise time, the rain gutter nearthe house of the “tsadik” broke. The Rabbi could not get across the opening in the ground,so the porter lifted him onto his shoulders and carried him across. The Rabbi askedAvigdor what kind of compensation he would like, and Avigdor simply answered, ‘‘A‘zekser.’” Later, once Avigdor realized who the guest was, he regretted, all his life, thathe didn’t ask for forgiveness for all his sins instead and have the “Yeytser Hara” farremoved from him so he wouldn’t be tempted to sin.The Bet Hamidrash was a fortress of Judaism and Piotrkower Jews were very proudof it.During the Holocaust, for all our city suffered during the destruction, the first furywas aimed at the Bet Hamidrash.Izkor BookThe Various Chassidic Synagogues (Shtiblech)Yakov Maltz—Tel-AvivThe Shtibel of the Gerrer ChassidimThe shtibel of the Gerrer Chassidim on Zamurova Street was one of the largest inour town. It was housed in a four-room apartment on the second floor of Naftali Franker shouse. One of the rooms was large enough for prayer and meditation. There were coarsewooden benches along the western walls which had no back support. In the middle ofthe room stood a square table covered with a colorfully embroidered cloth, on top ofwhich the Torah scroll was placed for reading. In the middle of the east wall stood a holyark filled with Torahs. Next to it was the amud (prayer post) with the “Shiviti” inscriptionabove it, where sometimes a note was left with the name of someone seriously ill andhis mother’s name. The south and north walls had porcelain heating stoves with hooksfor hanging upper garments, towels, and water cans for washing one’s hands. There werelong tables and benches along the western wall. The two rooms to the right of the largeroom had tables, benches and bookcases filled with volumes of the Talmud, the Bible,the Geonite writings, commentaries, Talmudic discussions (pilpul), Chassidic writings.Kabbalah, and Musar. These two rooms were used by young men and adults who weresupported by their fathers-in-law. They would study either alone or together, usually inthe company of students who had finished their heder (elementary Jewish education)studies. The room to the left of the large room had two tables, benches, two large barrels,and a tin can. One barrel contained pure water for washing the hands, and the secondhad used water. There were kerosene lamps hanging from the ceiling, as well as on thetables. Invariably there were candles burning in the candlesticks over the amud to markthe anniversary of the death of someone close to the Chassidim, or on behalf of someoneseriously ill. The main entrance to the shtibel was in the hallway next to the entrance tothe home and print shop of Motl (Mordechai) Cederbaum.The shtibel v/as full of Torah students from early dawn until late at night, with shortinterruptions for breakfast and lunch; it was also full on Monday and Thursday nights,and at times one had to wait for a place at the table.The gabai was Reb David Zelver, known as David Lx)dzer, and his assistant wasAbba’le Sofer (Kruza). Some six hundred men frequented the shtibel, including theprivileged ones who used to travel to Kotzk. There were many scholarly Jews in townwho were steeped in Torah, some of whom were drawn to other rebbes, such as theLubliner, Ostrowtza, or just learned Jews who did not agree with the Chassidic practices.98The Shtibel of the Gerrer Chassidim / 99Most of the Gerrer Chassidim were shopkeepers, merchants and persons of means.Nearly all the religious functionaries—the local rabbi, the rabbinical judges, the kosherbutchers, etc.—frequented this Chassidic house. The rabbi was bound by his agreementwith the community to pray in the main synagogue, but whenever he could find anappropriate excuse he would go to pray at the Chassidic place. One example would bethe night of Shmini Atzerett, when there were no hakkafot at the synagogue and the rabbiwent to participate in the Chassidic hakkafot, or on the first night of Passover, when theydid not say Hallel at the synagogue, or when the synagogue was closed for remodeling.The leading personalities in the Gerrer shtibel at various times included: Shalom(Weitzman) Sofer, who used to travel to Izbitze and later to Lublin, a great scholar anda pious man who lived modestly; Rabbi Leibush (Blaut), the dayan (j^dge), a scion ofthe Kotzk Chassidim; Meir Halevi Ish Horowitz; Yyukl Horowitz, one of the leadingTorah students in town, a noble person, the grandson of the Gaon (Talmudic scholar)Reb Motl Halevi Ish Horowitz, from whom he inherited many of his gifts; MosheEibshitz, a descendant of Reb Yehonatan Eibshitz; and Baruch Shidlowski, the father-in-law of the Tzaddik of Ostrovtze, who studied Torah day and night.The Horowitzes, the Eibshitzes and the Shidlowskis were members of leadingfamilies, and invariably were attracted to the Gerrer Rebbe. The Pinchavski, Shapira andKozlowski families of Malintz were close to Gur court. They were not blessed scholars,but were prominent among the Chassidim because of their militancy. In disputes overchoosing a rabbi, a judge, a butcher, etc., the “Malintzers” always took the lead and usedall means to do the bidding of the Chassidic court. Rosh Hodesh meals did not take placeat the Chassidic house, but in private homes. Sometimes a “L’hayim” toast was offeredon a Yahrzeit; and on the eve of Yom Kippur the worshippers were given a cup of wineand a piece of honey cake, and everyone, young and old, shook hands and greeted oneanother with love and friendship.When the study of a Talmudic tractate was completed, or when a celebration relatedto the Kotzk or Gur tzadikim took place, a “royal feast” was offered, with white bread,gefilte fish, beef soup with rice and meatballs, and a drink. Words of Torah were spoken,and there was singing and dancing until late at night.The Gerrer Chassidim studied Torah according to a schedule they had arranged forthe large room at the shtibel, and in 1906, when their leader. Rabbi Avraham Mordechai,introduced early rising for prayer, some did not follow suit, and many of those who roseearly to pray would only go through the morning prayer in the first minyan, and untilthe Musaf prayer of the second minyan they sat or stood and studied Torah.The ^‘Hofetz Hayim” Among the Gerrer ChassidimThat year the Gaon Rabbi Israel Meir, named the “Hofetz Hayim” after one of hisimportant books, used to pray at the shtibel. He gave many of his books to MotlZederboim to be printed at his shop. Since the Hofetz Hayim stayed with the printer, hewould go and pray at the nearby Chassidic house. He did not wear the Chassidic silkcoat or sash, but ony a common upper garment. He did not sway during the service likethe Chassidim. He would stand still during the prayer and read from a prayer book. The100 / A TALE OF ONE CITYChassidim found his behavior odd, but they showed him great respect all the samebecause of his great knowledge.The Gabai, David Zelever, was a stem man who conducted the affairs of the shtibelwith a firm hand and often clashed with the worshipers. His behavior resulted in a revoltby young Chassidim, who left the shtibel and started the Young Shtibel on 21 BikovskaStreet, at the home of Hayim Avrunin. The leader of the “rebels” was Asher Fishel, aMelnitzer. This place served not only for prayer but for frequent celebrations. Someinformed people reported that the Gabai had complained to the Rebbe about the revoltof the young, and consequently the shtibel was closed down and they had to return fora while to their alma mater on Zamorova.Between the afternoon and evening prayers there was a break, and the Chassidimwould chat about the Torah and the stories concerning the tzadikim of Kotzk and Gur,or would gossip about other tzadikim. There was greater conflict and even hate amongthe followers of the various Chassidic leaders than between the Chassidim and theiropponents or between the former and ordinary Jews or even Jews who pursued freetrades, many of whom were assimilationists. The main adversaries of the GerrerChassidim were the Alexander Chassidim, who were second to the Gerrer Chassidim intheir numbers and their status as students of Torah, as well as their social status. Theirquarrels resulted mainly from conflicts while choosing judges, butchers, and otherreligious functionaries.The Gerrer Chassidim would often have to reach a compromise with the AlexanderChassidim. Such a compromise resulted in the choice of Reb Yaakov Glaser as judge;he became known as Yankele Dayan (judge). He was a learned man and an AlexanderChassid. Yaakov was chosen in 1901 as the chief judge and served until the SecondWorld War, when he was killed by a bomb on the way to Suleyuv.Reb Yaakov Yosef Shochet, an Alexander Chassid, was chosen over the objectionof the Gerrer Chassidim. But generally, communal matters were decided in Piotrkowby the Gerrer Chassidim with the help of the assimilationists and the professionalintelligentsia. Whereas the Gerrer Chassidim were fanatics who fought anyone whodared to introduce changes in educational matters (such as starting a “reformed heder”of a model introduced at that time by the educator M. Krinski) and came out against alltypes of Zionists, they lived peacefully with those who publicly preached assimilationand even helped them run the community.But the events of the great world reached even this stronghold. During the Russo-Japanese War, the Chassidim engaged in heated discussions between those who believedthat the Russians would win the war and those who considered the Japanese stronger.The debates took place mainly between the afternoon and evening prayers and on theSabbath between the morning prayers and Musaf. The debaters made a great deal ofnoise and even fought, and it was necessary to introduce the recitation of Psalms betweenthe afternoon and evening services and do away with the break between the morningprayers and Musaf on the Sabbath and holy days.The Gerrer Chassidim lent their quarters for the illegal meetings of the socialistparties, since there were two entrances and, in a moment of danger, one could escapethrough the back door. Thus, there were meetings held during the day, attended byThe Shtibel of the Gerrer Chassidim I 101hundreds of workers and party leaders who came from Warsaw and Ijodz to deliverspeeches, especially during economic or political strikes. Ahron Singlovski, known as‘‘Yellow Ahron,” one of the great socialist orators and leader of the socialist party, wouldoften come to those meetings, and the young men who studied at that time with theChassidim would listen to his speeches; some even joined his party.The initiative to start the Agudath Israel branch in town came out of that shtibel.During World War One it was known as the “Orthodox Agudah.” The founder of theBeis Yaakov girls’ school also came out of this place. This school was started to counterthe Jewish high school started by the Zionists, which attracted some Gerrer girls. Theold Chassidim at first opposed the establishment of a Beis Yaakov school, basingthemselves on the verse, “And you shall not follow their laws,” in arguing that it wasforbidden to change the customs of the past.From time to time there were cracks in the walls of this Gerrer stronghold. Manyyoung Chassidim joined the various parties that fought for social and national liberation.They mainly joined the various factions of the Zionist movement, and many of themheaded the Mizrahi, the General Zionists, the Tzeire Zion-Poale Zion, and the Hehalutz,and many have taken part in the rebuilding and defense of Israel. They remember theirorigins and pay homage to those who kindled within them the holy flame of faith in thevalues of Judaism and the eternal Rock of Israel.The Alexander ChassidimThe home of the Alexander Chassidim in Piotrkow was on Stara-Warshavska Street.It had a large hall and a courtyard, both of which were used for prayer. The Chassidichouse had about one hundred worshipers, who consisted of Alexander Chassidim andothers who prayed there out of habit or because of the tolerant attitude of that place. Nextto the shtibel was a yeshiva called Beis Israel, named after the “middle rebbe,” RabbiIsrael Yitzhak Danziger, the author of Yismach Israel, The yeshiva was headed by RebMoshe Gomolinski, known as Reb Moshe Silver, a great scholar and baal tefilah.The Alexander Chassidim were the second largest Chassidic group in CongressPoland. The only larger group were the Gerrer Chassidim. But without going into thedifferences between the two groups, suffice it to say that the Alexander Chassidim weredistinguished by their unassuming ways and simplicity, and their tolerance of thenon-religious or those who were less religious than they. This attitude attracted wor-shipers who had not travelled to see the Rebbe, but who were nonetheless treated asequals. The Alexander Chassidim were more positive and accommodating in theirattitude towards Zionism than the Chassidic groups that belonged to Agudath Israel. TheAlexander house welcomed members of the Mizrahi and lovers of Zion in general. RebMendel Landau, an important member of Hamizrahi in Piotrkow, is worthy of mention.Freethinkers would travel to see the Alexander Rebbe and seek his advice, since his courtwas open to everyone.The Alexander Chassidim were a close-knit group who travelled to the Rebbe forthe Sabbath, holidays and Days of Awe, and stayed in the same inn. If a Chassid tooksick they would rush to visit him. If someone was in financial straits they did their best102 / A TALE OF ONE CITYto help him, and there were many such cases. Next to the Chassidic house there was acharitable fund headed by Reb Moshe Eliyahu Silber, a learned Jew who knew hisgrammar and his accounting. The fund helped members with loans, at low interest, tocover its operation cost.The Alexander Chassidim in Piotrkow took part in the elections to the Jewishcommunity council. They had their own list and got their delegate elected to the council.He was Reb Mendel Weinacht, may his blood be avenged, who was a lumber merchant,a communal worker, a man of means, who married off his daughters to learned groomsand who was an active member of the Chassidic house. His son, Reb Israel YitzhakWeinacht, was the secretary of the Yeshiva Hachmey Lublin.During the festivities of the Alexander Rebbes there was a high-spirited atmosphere.The Chassidim would gather for the meal at the shtibel, divide among themselves thestudy of the Gemarah, and each would undertake a tractate which he was committed tofinish by the next yahrzeit. The young generation in the Chassidic house was mainlynamed after the later Rebbes, and many were named Yehiel, while younger ones wereIsrael Yitzhak, and even younger ones were named Shmuel Tzvi.Central Personalities in the shtibelThe judge Reb Yaakov Dayan, who served in Piotrkow for some forty years andspent his life studying Torah and deciding matters of religious law, submitted hiscandidacy for rabbi of the town, with the support of the Alexander Chassidim, but RebMeir Shapira won out and became the local rabbi.Reb Yaakov Dayan, who prayed on the Sabbath at the Chassidic house, would havepeople gather in his house for the Third Meal and sing the melodies that he himselfcomposed.On the Days of Awe prayers were held at his home. The fervor of the prayers wasenormous. The prayers always ended later than in other places in town, even Chassidicplaces of prayer. The Gabai, Reb Moshe Epstein, known as Reb Moshe Yehezkel’s, wasa beloved Jew who, despite his physical weakness, was always ready to go out and helpothers. He served as gabai for many years, and kept the Chassidic house clean andorderly. On the eve of Yom Kippur it was customary for the gabai to bring cakes andliquor for the worshipers. Reb Moshe would observe this tradition and would not getangry when a child would come back for a second or third serving. His son-in-law, RebLipa Sanik, a pious student, was also a prominent member of the shtibel. A leadingAlexander activist was Reb Yitzhak Aharon Suchevski, who for many years was acommunal leader.A regular Torah reader for the first minyan was Reb Avraham Dunski, who had aspecial voice for reading the Torah. He was a well-to-do, tall and good-looking man whodressed impeccably, and his reading of the Torah was much enjoyed by his listeners.Reb Hayim Perl was baal tefillah, a prayer leader. He was tall and thin, and prayedwith great fervor. On holidays and Days of Awe the prayer leader was Reb ElazarLifschitz, whose soft yet penetrating voice conveyed the solemnity and awe of the dayof judgement.The Shtibel of the Gerrer Chassidim j 103Chassidim of our home town.Yeshivat Beth Yosef in Piotrkow104 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe regulars of the house of prayer included the brothers Dov Berish Meshulam andMordechai Lifschitz, pious Jews who were close to the Alexander Rebbe and related tohim by family ties. Others were Sanik Lipa and Yehiel, Yehoshua Bitsk, the bankdirector, Ezer Flatau, a real estate agent, Yaakov Shmuel Gint, a melamed, YudleNeiberg, a Bratzlav Chassid, Yaakov Lieberman, Levi Goldmintz, Moshe Goldmintz,Yaakov Shmuelevitz, Bonim Birnboim, David Katchka Blumenstein, and YaakovAryeh Kaminski, may their blood be avenged.The Radomsk Chassidic HouseShimshon Maimon—Tel AvivThe great disaster that befell the Jews of Piotrkow did not spare the RadomskChassidim who gravitated to the Admor Rabbi Shlomo Hanoch Hakohen Rabinowitz,may his blood be avenged, who was killed with his entire family in Warsaw on 18Menachem-Av, 1942. The founders of the Radomsk Chassidic house in Piotrkow wereReb Leibish Shachna Shidlowski, Reb Leibish Reisher, Reb Moshe Yaakov Mornten-feld, Reb Efraim Maimon (Reb Efraim Malach, my grandfather) and others.The Chassidic house was located in an apartment on 13 Stara-Warshavska Street,at the home of Reb Hayim Omer, who was also a Radomsk Chassid. The renownedGaon Rabbi Mordechai Halevi Ish Horowitz prayed there. Later the Chassidic housemoved to 5 Staro-Warshawska Street, the house of Reb Meir Mitelberg.The leaders of the Radomsk Chassidim in town were as follows:Reb Avraham Dov Ber Englard, a communal leader and Torah scholar, a man ofgreat intelligence and a great Chassid, devoted communal worker who was dedicated tothe Chassid community in particular and the Jewish community of Piotrkow in general.My father and teacher, Reb Shlomo Hayim Maimon, Reb Israel Yaakov Dula, RebNatan Piltzer, Reb Hayim Piltzer, Reb Yisachar Eidelstein, Reb Hayim Walkowitz, RebMotl Goldshneider, and others.The prayer leaders were Reb Natan Piltzer, followed by his son Reb Hayim Piltzer,and Reb Shlomo Radomsker (Yudkevitch).After World War One a stream of refugees arrived in Piotrkow from Lodz andenvirons, and the benches of the shtibel were filled with students. From early dawn tilllate at night the voice of Torah did not cease. Among the excelling students were RebYaakov Yakobovitch (The Yellow Yankl), a great Torah scholar who knew his Shasand commentators, Reb Yosef Shapira, Rev Avraham Elimelech Shidlowski, and others.In 1920 to 1925 the leading students were Reb Hayim Falik, myself, the young MeirGoldshneider and Reb Asher Goldshneider (now in the United States), and the youngYaakov Michal Yakobovitch, and others whose names I have forgotten.In the thirties the Keter Torah yeshiva was founded by the Gaon Rabbi MosheRabinowitz Hakohen. It was headed by the Gaon Rabbi Mendel of Radomishla, a greatTorah scholar and an outstanding teacher. The yeshiva had some forty students. TheThe Amshinov Chassidic House I 105head of the yeshiva board was Rabbi Avraham Dov Ber Englard; my father, Reb ShlomoHayim Maimon, was the treasurer.The voice of Torah did not cease for a moment in that holy place, and the Chassidicway of the Tiferet Shlemah method, the teaching of Torah and love of Israel filled theplace, not with noise and publicity, but with a still, small voice. A special nobility typifiedthe Radomsk Chassidim, who imparted the love of Torah to the masses until the axe waslifted over the head of the great community of Piotrkow, which had been knownthroughout the world for its scholars and writers, great rabbis and student, including theRadomsk Chassidim, may the Almighty avenge their blood.The Amshinov Chassidic HouseYaakov Maltz—Tel AvivAfter the death of Rabbi Bonim of Pshischa (on 12 Ellul 1828), many of the PshischaChassidim crowned his leading student, Reb Yitzhak Kalish of Werki, as their leader.After the death of Rabbi Yitzhak of Werki (on the last day of Passover, 1848), some ofhis Chassidim crowned his first-born son. Rabbi Yaakov David, the Rabbi of Amshinov,as their new leader.The Werki-Amshinov house excelled in their love of Israel, in looking for the goodside in every Jew, and in defending Jews. In our town the prayer house of the AmshinovChassidim was on Stara-Warshavska Street, corner of Parna, on the second floor. It hadsome three minyanim. Many of those Chassidim became well known because of theiractivities on behalf of the community, following in the ancestors’ footsteps. One of thebest known was the sage Reb Yosef Hayim Ber, the son of the Chassidic Rabbi IsraelBer of Warsaw, author of the hook Agudath Israel. Reb Yosef Hayim always combinedstudy of Torah with physical work.Mordechai Feiner, an Amshinov Chassid, was a member of the community council. YosefHandels was known for his ethical character. Mordechai Zederboim was the famous printer.Yaakov Milioner and his son David, as well as Shmuel Milioner and his son David, wereknown for their good deeds. The Brothers Feitl and Wolf Fisch were known for their pleasantvoices in leading the prayer. Leib Tushiner was a man of good qualities. Pinchas-Pinie Nisansonand Moshe Pershovski represented the Mizrahi in the community council. Reb Shlomo Fuchsand his gentle son-in-law Reb Michal Fulman also ought to be mentioned. Other memberswho were not so well known were also kind and modest people. During the celebration inhonor of the Amshinov rebbes they showed great joy at their meal, to which they would invitemembers of Agudath Israel and the Mizrahi, since the love of Israel among them transcendedall disagreements. When we mention the names of the houses of prayer and the Chassidichouses in our town, let the name of Amshinov also be remembered, with all its worshipers, thekind, gentle Chassidim whose memory will always live in our hearts.Izkor BookOrganizations and MovementsAgudat IsraelThe World Organization, was founded in 1912 in Katowice by theleading orthodox rabbis, tsadiks, and Chassidic leaders. A branch was established inPiotrkow by Gur Chassids and a few Mitnagdim. In 1918, they founded a school forboys named Yesoday Tora, which combined secular and religious studies under thedirection of R. Henoch Folman, and later under R. Dov Ber Koplowicz. Numerous futurerabbis, scholars, authors, teachers, and civic leaders graduated from this school. A fewyears later, a counterpart for girls, the Bais Yakov^ was founded as well as its daughterorganization, Batia. A Yeshiva, the “Bney Tova,” was established in 1922 under theleadership of Rabbi Zvi Rynkewicz.In 1925, Agudat Israel founded a weekly publication. Die Yiddishe Stimme, underR. Isaac Ber Akerman. It fervently supported XheAliah to Eretz Israel. In 1939, anotherpublication, sponsored by R. Moshe Chaim Lau, appeared. It was a four-page popularweekly. Das YiddisheLicht, written in Yiddish, Hebrew and Polish.Agudat Israel also founded the commercial Bank Spoldzielczy and supported theprofessional school of art, as well as the clidinXdhXe LinasHatzedek. Their representativeswere members of the community, the municipality, and the Councils.In 1913, a youth organization, the Tsirey Agudat Israel, was founded. It generatedcultural activities for the young.Josef Konstantynowski founded the Poaley Agudat Israel for the working membersof the organization. A library was also established and, in 1923, a Hachshara point forHalutzim was prepared. Several dozen of these Halutzim m^deAliah to Eretz Israel.MizrahiAt first, the activity of the Zionists in Piotrkow was minimal, since Zionism wasforbidden under Russian rule and looked upon unfavorably during the occupation by theGermans during World War I.AZionist religious group led by R. Jacob Krakowski founded a branch oiHamizrahLThey set up a school with sixteen pupils in 1917, teaching in conjunction with religioussubjects, Hebrew Agada, Jewish history, geography, and general subjects, which com-prised the equivalent of four years of tuition in high school. This school was stronglyopposed by Agudat Israel, The conflict created a rift between parents and children.In 1917, a youth group, the Irgun Tseirey Hamizrahi, was formed; another group ofyoung people opened a farm for Hachshara. They founded the Hehalutz Hamizrahi.Their first olim reached Eretz Israel in 1931.106Organizations and Movements I 107Activists of Poalei Zion C.S. in 1929.Hanoar Hazioni in 1931.108 / A TALE OF ONE CITYGdud Mishmar Haemek—^Hashomer Hatzair in 1933.The Gordonia Movement.Organizations and Movements ! 109The Socialist Zionist Movement in PiotrkowUnder the Austro-Hungarian occupation (1914-1918), the military authorities per-mitted public activities of a cultural nature, which had been forbidden prior to that time.It was then that the Hebrew organization Tarbut was founded. It served as a vanguardfor all Zionist, public and educational Jewish activities in Piotrkow. The first leaderswere general Zionists, without specifically defined doctrines.This led to the creation of various parties, such as the Mizrahi in 1918; this was thesocialists’ party of the Tseirey Zion^ which was represented in the Municipality by twomembers (Berish Rosenblum and Jacob Malo). In 1925, they joined forces with thesocialist block consisting of ‘TPS,” Bund, and Poaley Zion. This coalition gave them amajority on the Council. Later on, Tseirey Zion and Right Poaley Zion fused into a unitedparty and founded a local branch of the League for the Working Eretz Israel. Piotrkowbecame an active center for neighboring towns such as Tomaszow, Sulejow, Rozprza,Belchatow, etc.Hitachdut—GordoniaIn 1925, a local branch of Hitachdut was established. Its committee consisted ofrepresentatives from all the Zionist institutions: Keren Kayemet, the Keren Hayesod, theLeague for Working Eretz Israel and the Hehalutz. Its cultural activities were conductedin Yiddish and Hebrew. Hitachdut established a library, a Hebrew evening center, anda drama circle; the members met frequently. AHachshara point was founded in Sulejow,which sent several dozen olim to Eretz Israel in 1929.The youth movement, Gordonia, established in 1927, followed the ideas andteaching of the great thinker, A.D. Gordon. Its goals were the achievement of Aliah,work on the land, self-realization, simplicity, and a life of justice and equality.Herzlia—Hanoar HazioniIn 1930, high school students joined the//erzWfl movement, which stressed the studyof Zionist history and Palestinography. They combined with Hanoar Hazioni, whoseideals were and scouting. Numerous members made Hachshara and Xhon Aliah,settling in Eretz Israel.The Scouting OrganizationIn 1916, high school students founded the ZydowskiZwiazekKolezenski, which laterbecame a scouting organization. They studied the Morse Code, Palestinography, physi-cal culture and first aid and organized trips and plays. The group was disbanded in 1922,after it had arranged outings, learned various skills, performed plays, held symposia, etc.no / A TALE OF ONE CITYMizrachi—the religious Zionist organization.Young Mizrachi members bid farewell to I. Gotesman, who leaves for Eretz Israel.Organizations and Movements I 111Poalei Agudat Israel.The activists of Betar.112 / A TALE OF ONE CITYHashomer HatzairIn 1919, a political scouting organization in Poland formed the Hashomer HatzaiVya youth Zionist-Socialist movement based on scouting principles with the ultimate goalof settling in Eretz Israel. The Ken (Nest) brought together a wide spectrum of youngpeople, high school students and the sons and daughters of artisans. Pupils fromvocational schools and young apprentices from shops and stores had high aspirationsand espoused strict rules of clean living. They organized summer and winter camps.Their meetings, events, and symposia were highly imaginative. Their ultimate goal wasto nurture high ideals. The sports club Shomria^ consisted of very active members andorganized interesting events. When the movement decided on obligatory Aliah, theyjoined the HecheleitzHechsheva.Quite a number of Hashomer Hatzair members from Piotrkow are now living inKibbutzim and Moshavim, as well as in cities all over Eretz Israel.The Revisionist Movement in PiotrkowIn 1930, the Zahar and Betar movements were organized in Piotrkow. Theirorganization, inaugurated in 1931, was active until 1942. They set up a choir, a dramaticcircle and met every Friday evening.High schools and Ort pupils formed the group Massada, which maintained educa-tional, athletic, political and Zionist activities.In 1933, the so-called pro-Grosman group emerged. Its goal was the establishmentof a Jewish state on both sides of the river Jordan. Another youth group was BrithKanaim,All these groups were politically active. They opposed Hitler’s Third Reich and, in1935, formed the New Zionist Alliance under the leadership of the Municipal Commit-tee. They acted on behalf of the illegal Aliah and promoted military preparation for theeventual armed struggle to establish a Jewish state in Eretz Israel.BritHahayal, founded in 1933, was the youngest group. Its goal was to become thenucleus of the future Hebrew Army. Another group was the revisionist-religious BritYeshurun,Every candidate ioxAliah was required to study and pass two years oiHachsharaylearning aviation, navigation, fish husbandry and agriculture. Several group membersclandestinely fought against the Germans.Condensed from the Izkor BookThe Jewish Labor ^^Bund” MovementIt was 1897, in an attic in Vilna, that the The Jewish Labor ‘"Bund” Movement ofRussia, Lithuania and Poland was founded. The first Socialist circles of Piotrkow cameinto existence around the year 1900. The young Socialists, imbued with an idealisticOrganizations and Movements I 113The activists of Zukunft, the youth branch of the Labor Bund movement.The Scouting movement.114 / A TALE OF ONE CITYwish to wage battle against Czarist rule and social injustice, regularly met illegally.Those years, just prior to World War I, were marked by turbulence. 1904 and 1905 wereespecially eventful, filled with strikes, arrests, struggles and cultural as well as politicalactivities. Cruel repression (from 1905 to 1912) resulted in many of the revolutionaryleaders’ being incarcerated or sent to Siberia, thereby seriously depleting the ranks ofthe movement. During the years of World War I, however, the movement began to takeflight and expanded its cultural, educational and political activities.After World War I ended and Poland became independent, the “Bund” organizationcontinued to flourish and strove for a freer world of equity and justice. During thefollowing twenty years, the Movement made an impact on the Jewish Community ofPiotrkow. Many “Bund” leaders became representatives on the municipal council andin the Kehilah, and the members of the Movement benefited from various social,economic and cultural institutions within the Party structure, enriching their quality oflife.The Party’s youth movements, the Zukunft, Skifi Soms and the sports club, Mor-genstern, became beacons of hope for the many children of the Jewish workers ofPiotrkow. A Jewish Weekly, the Piotrkower Veker^ was published by the Party.At the outbreak of World War II, under Nazi oppression, the Party leaders whorepresented the Jewish Council endeavored to continue their activities and maintaincontact with the Central Socialist underground movement in Warsaw.In July of 1941, a Polish underground courier, Maria Szczesna, was captured andarrested by the Gestapo. She was carrying illegal publications, as well as a list of namesof the entire Council. It was thus that the Germans learned who the members of theresistance movement were and the nature of their rescue efforts. The leaders of thePiotrkow “Bund” were arrested shortly after and sent to Auschwitz. After a few weeks,their families were notified by telegrams that their loved ones had died.Izkor BookEducationThe Hebrew High School (Hagimnasia Haivrit)Yaakov Maltz-Tel AvivThe establishment of the Jewish high school in Piotrkow was an important event inthe annals of Jewish education in the town. It was the culmination of several attemptsto open a school that would impart to its students the knowledge of Hebrew and Jewishculture in addition to general studies.In 1888, the periodical Hatzfirah published an announcement by Shmuel AbbaMindel regarding the opening of a private school “which will teach its students Hebrewlanguage and grammar as well as Torah, while living languages will be taught as requiredby the authorities by specialized teachers. The school will also provide meals to thestudents according to their ability to pay, and the character of students can be attestedby the learned Rabbi Leib Eisenrowitz.”The Russian-language Jewish weekly Voschov of 1890 relates that “on October 16of last year, the school inspector of the Warsaw district, accompanied by the directorfrom Lodz, along with two senior teachers, visited the private Jewish school of ShmuelAbba Mindel of Riga, in the town of Piotrkow, and tested the students in Russianlanguage and writing and in arithmetics, and were satisfied. The visiting dignitaryexpressed his gratitude to the above teacher, signed his name and left with an affectionatefarewell. On December 17 the above Mindel was presented at the Piotrkow city councilcenter a twenty ruble check by the director from Lodz at the order of the inspector, tobe paid by the government treasury.”In 1906 a school called “reformed cheder” {cheder metukan in Hebrew) was openedin our town by M. Krinski, the author of the Hebrew grammar books. It was given thisname so that the evil eye of fanatics would not harm it (the latter, speaking ashkenazicHebrew, called it heder mesukan, Hebrew for “dangerous school”). This school wasclosed when the First World War broke out.In 1914 the Zionist association, Tarbut, started giving Hebrew lessons in theevenings; then it opened the Herzliya school. In 1919 the Piotrkow Zionists opened theHebrew high school, which became an exemplary school.According to Dr. Y. Katzenlbogen, the first principal of the school, it belonged tothe association of high schools of Polish Jewry, founded by Dr. M. Braude of Lodz. Thehonorary president was Wilhelm Silberstein, the leading lay leader of the community.The members of school board were Dr. Avraham Leifuner, Avraham Stern, YaakovLitmanowitz, Berish Dzibaltowski, Avraham Tarlowski, Yosef Goldfried, the dentist,H. Richer, and Katzenlbogen himself. The chairman of the board was H. Richer.115116 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe board ran into many difficulties in finding a facility and securing funds. Its workwas conducted under strained conditions. The economy of the newly liberated Polandwas shaky, and the aftermath of the war was typified by social demoralization, increasedcrime, impoverishment, and, above all, the spread of anti-Semitism throughout the state.One must marvel at the courage of Piotrkow’s Jewish community, which, under suchconditions, was able to promote an important educational institution. Katzenlbogenwrites: ‘‘I remember how Henich Levin [nephew of Knesset member Rabbi Itche MeirLevin, a leader of Agudath Israel, husband of Rashka, the daughter of the learnedChassid, Rabbi Yukel Halevi Ish Horowitz; and father of the distinguished poet LeopoldLolek Levin. Yaakov Milstein, Israel Ziskind and many others who were not membersof the board, nonetheless took part in organizing the school. I also recall Moshe Feinkind,Berish Rosenblum and Yaakov Maltz, who showed great interest in the school, but forseveral reasons did not take part in its organizing.”The faculty consisted of Henich Horowitz (inspector and mathematics teacher),Manya Lefkowitz (natural history), Mrs. Gefner (Polish), Mrs. Stowitzka (Polish),Yakobson (Polish), Maria Kronman (Polish, spelling and arithmetics for the lowergrades), Pinchas Bar-On (Hebrew), Yosef Berish Rosenblum (Hebrew), ImanuelGoldberg (Latin and mathematics), and Rivka Levin (daughter of the scholar RabbiYeshayahu Wolf Fulman).Instruction was at a high level, which was also the assessment of the religion andpublic education inspector of the government. Two years after its founding, the schoolwas recognized as a public school. The principal of the school from its inception wasDr. Katzenlbogen, who served until 1921. He was followed by Dr. Tzvi Zemel.Dr. Katzenlbogen remarked that the board spent a great deal of time determiningthe tuition fees of needy students. Some 30 percent of the students received tuitionreductions.Moshe Omer relates: “Among the founders were I, Avraham Stern, Henich Levin,Motl Goldblum, Yaakov Milstein, Berish Bitsh, Avner Margalit, Moshe Grinspan,Moshe Kenigstein, Yaakov Litmanovitz, and Avraham Poznanski. Some of them servedon the first board after the opening of the school. Besides the teachers mentioned by thefirst principal of the school. Dr. Katzenlbogen, who survived the terrible catastrophe andnow lives in Warsaw, were also Dr. David Zlotnick, Yaakov Fisch (Adi), and ShlomoMakovski. The last two, as well as Pinchas Bar-On and Yosef Berish Rosenblum, alsotaught Bible, Jewish history, modern literature and more. The physical educationteachers were Krakowiak, followed by Grimeisen, who had served before as Maccabeecoaches.The paper Unzer Tzeitung, dated April 16, 1926, mentions the names of thegraduates. The female graduates were Richer, Barasch, Goldberg, and Hava (Hella)Rosenboim. The male ones were Shmuel (Mulek) Bronowski and Weintroib Kappel ofSulejow.In the June 10,1927 issue of the paper we are told that the “Hebrew high school inour town was given full recognition by the authorities, according to the announcementof the ministry of education.” The paper adds that ’’excellent results of the final examsof the school were submitted by the school. Eleven students took the tests and all passed.The Hebrew High School (Hagimnasia Haivrit) / 117Alumni of the Hebrew Gimnazjum in Piotrkow (late twenties).The famous kindergarten of Maria and Roma Ginzburg, class of 1930.118 I A TALE OF ONE CITYThe female graduates are Basiar, Blumenstein, Grossberg, Hempel, Weinacht, Landa,and Stem. The male graduates are Wolfstein, Levin, Rosenzweig and Stem.”The school administration proceeded to build a suitable facility for the school. Aftermany efforts, a spacious three-story house was obtained on 8 Sulejowska Street.In the new building the school increased its activities, increased the number of itsstudents, improved the laboratory and expanded the library. The economic condition ofthe school, however, did not improve, and throughout its existence, until it came to anend when the war broke out in 1939, it stmggled to balance its budget. Only through theefforts of the administration and the dedication of the students and the principal was acrisis avoided.The principals of the school were Dr. Y. Katzenlbogen, Dr. Tzvi 2^mel, H.Burenstein, Imanuel Mannes Goldberg, and Dr. Manheim.The Principals and the FacultyDr. Katzenlbogen was the organizer and the first principal of the school, from 1919to 1921. When he came to Piotrkow he dedicated himself to public activities and wasthe founder of the Ort vocational school. He survived the war and now lives in Warsaw.He established the school curriculum together with the teachers, the students andthe administration. He set the way for those who followed him.Dr. Tzvi Zemel came in 1921 to head the institution. He had been known in Galicia,from where he hailed, as an experienced Zionist activist, who was distinguished by hisdedication to the tasks he undertook. He came to Piotrkow in the year that some of thelocal Zionists, including Pinchas Bar-On, immigrated to Palestine, and there was a fearthat the Zionist effort in the community would be weakened. He undertook to lead thePiotrkow Zionists. In 1924 the idea of issuing a Zionist paper, Unzer Zeitung, wasrealized, and he performed successfully as its editor. He served as a member of the Jewishcommunity council and a patron of Hashomer Hatzair, and was also active on the boardof the Friends of the Hebrew University in Jerusalem. He headed the school for eightyears, then moved to Bialystok to head the 700-student Hebrew high school, the largestin Poland. In 1934 he immigrated to Palestine and headed the H.N. Bialik high schoolin Haifa. He died on 19 Kislev, 1947.The teacher Henich Horowitz became the principal of the high school in Radom.His father was a founder of the Tarbut Zionist association in our town and his sonfollowed in his footsteps. He was an affable person, one of the first Tzofim (scouts) inour town. He later joined the Tzeire Zion. In the Radom book, page 106, we find thefollowing: ‘'The students regarded the school principal Horowitz as a friend and guide.He would explain his rules and policies in open discussions, and was willing to listen,to which his students responded with affection and friendship.”The teacher Shlomo Makowski was a scholar, well versed in the Talmud andPoskim, early and late. He could quote entire chapters by heart from the old and the newsources. He was the son-in-law of the religious Zionist Yantche (Yaakov) Kenigstein,and the husband of Rachel, a teacher in the public elementary school for Jewish children.During the ghetto period he continued his activities in secret.The Hebrew High School (Hagimnasia Haivrit) ! 119The teacher Dr. Grossfeld was a socialist Zionist thinker who devoted his free timeto lecturing for the Poale Zion Z.S. party on Marxism and Borochovism. His lectureswere well received and attracted a large crowd to the party center every Wednesday. Hewas invited to serve as assistant principal of the high school in Radom.The teacher Michael Weinsinger was active in the Gordonia Zionist youth. He isnow in Israel, serving as the head of the high school section of the ministry of cultureand education. His name is Dr. Michael Ziv.Among the graduates of the school who later became teachers there, we shouldmention Leon Rosenzweig and his wife Genia, nee Stem. He was murdered by the Nazisand his widow, Mrs. Rozycka, lives with her daughter in Israel, where she holds animportant position with Yad Vashem in Jemsalem.Special articles have been written about the teachers Pinchas Bar-On, Yosef DovRosenblum, and Yaakov Fisch (Adi).I am sorry I cannot provide more detailed information about the rest of the teachers,who dedicated their lives to the sacred task of educating hundreds of students in ourtown and its surrounding area.Izkor BookThe Vocational School, OrtThe idea of vocational training in our home town had existed long before theestablishment of the worldwide ORT organization.At the end of the nineteenth century, the philanthropist and advocate, Gustave Levy(the head of the Doboroczynnosc), had promoted the notion—later widely accepted—^that underprivileged youngsters should learn a trade, mainly carpentry and mechanics.Some courses had been organized but they lasted only a short time because of theoutbreak of World War I.The ORT school in Piotrkow became a reality only after the war, when the prominentORT activist from Lodz, Dr. Jacob Kacenelbogen, became the principal of the JewishGimnazjum. Under his initiative, a conference of politicians, cultural activists andprofessional people unanimously resolved to establish an ORT school in Piotrkow. Acommittee of four was elected: Dr. Katzenelbogen, Moshe Feinkind, Dr. Leipuner andS.E. Zygelman. Thus, in 1921, a dream came true.The Hertz Hall at Garncarska 7 served as the first location of the school. MosheShereshewski, the well-known benefactor from Wola Krzysztoporska, was named ascurator. Thanks to his leadership and the financial assistance of the Shereshewski-Szpil-fogel families, a large building at Leonarda Street was purchased a few years later. TheORT in our home town, under the leadership of a group of skilled and dedicated men,emerged as one of the best Ort institutions, not only in Poland but also in Europe. WhenThe vocational school, Ort—late thirties.120The Vocational School Ort j 121Dr. Leipuner, the first chairman of the school, died, Dr. Shimon Tenenbaum, hissuccessor, dedicated a great deal of time and energy to the school. Later, the chairman-ship was transferred to Dr. Israel Feiman, who guided the institution until the outbreakof World War II. Shortly after curator Moshe Shereshewski passed away, his son. Dr.Leon Shereshewski, took over the important position. He was quite a personality; heheld a Ph.D. degree and was a member of the Warsaw Chamber of Commerce. He wasalso a gifted writer and playwright. Despite his very heavy schedule, he always foundthe time and energy (and also money) for the school, which, under the dedicatedchairmanship of Dr. Feiman and with the unconditional help of loyal, able and devotedassociates, prospered enormously. These associated were Jacob Berliner, A.R.Pinkusewicz, S.A. Zygelman, A. Weishoff, J. Glogowski, S. Zeiten and others.These factors proved crucial for the ORT in Piotrkow to become a model vocationalschool in Poland. A significant number of out-of-town students lived in the dormitory(Bursa) managed by Leon Shitenberg, a respected teacher and educator. Thanks to theable and dedicated staff, the education and training in the school were of high quality.School director Broide, secretary Leon Kimmelman, instructors Zalman Tenenberg andJoseph Epstein, and teachers Leon Shitenberg and Ms. Rubin worked arduously andefficiently to give the boys the best start in life.Those bright and eager, mostly underprivileged, students were the true contributorsto the great success of the school. The few who survived became successfulentrepreneurs in their respective professions all over the world.A group of teachers and counselors of the “Toz” camp in the Wolborski Forest 1935.122 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe fame of the Piotrkow ORT was widespread. Personalities like Arthur Zygiel-boim sent their sons there for schooling. Thanks to the efforts of the Board, an additionalbuilding wing had practically been completed when the war broke out.During the Nazi oppression, the school premises served as a German shop, produc-ing garments for the Wehrmacht The Jews of Piotrkow were subjected to harsh laborthere. Many contemplated with grief, during the long, cruel working shifts, the gloriouspast of the ORT school days, compared to the heartbreaking reality of the wartimepresent.Izkor BookLiterary-Artistic ActivityMotl Mordecai Lenchintzky—Buenos AiresShmuel Eliyahu Zygelman—MilwaukeeAfter the Revolution of 1905, when the ‘"Reaction” was rampant in Poland andpolitically related work was forbidden, there arose throughout the country a network ofliterary-musical societies. Also in Piotrkow, in 1908, the “Hazamir” Society wasfounded. Serving on its executive board were the Poznansky brothers, Marcus Lit-manovitch, M. Lenchintzky, M. Berliner, Shmuel Eliyahu Zygelman and Mrs. Ginsburg.The Zionist, Meyrand, was the president. Among the organizers were also Engineer YoelIzak, Dr. Zygmunt Feiner, Adolph Pansky, Lawyer Zilbershtein and the well-knowncommunity and Zionist leader, Michl Hertz. For a period of time, the great philanthropist,“Maskil,” and founder of the Zionist “Aguda,” Moysh’l Sheresehvsky of Wola-Krish-toporska, was president.The society organized a chorus under the direction of the bandleader of the RussianMilitary Regiment, David Karagadski, and later under the direction of the conductor andcomposer M. Bensman; following him was the composer Leo Kopf, conducting the largesymphonic chorus of the “Ikuf.”The organization was located in Shmaragd’s house on Rynek-Trybunalski near therotating pump. Choral concerts, in the form of family entertainment, took place. Theysang Yiddish, Hebrew and Polish songs. Every concert started with “Hatikva.” Therewas also a violin quartet, with G. Shvartsnsteyn as soloist. The chorus was composed ofworkers. At every concert, soloists performed; among them were Motl Lenchitzky, Ms.Ginsburg, Ms. Same, Mendl Rosenzweig, with piano solos by Mr. L. Cohen, G. Panskyand G. Zusman. The dramatic circle was directed by Ch. Granat. The concerts wereperformed in Meyer Hertz’s Hall on Garntsarska Street.In May, 1910, a grand concert took place in Sphane’s Theater (at that time, the largesttheater hall in the city, located on Bykovska Street in the same building as his beerbrewery; the latter passed into the hands of his son-in-law, Braulinski). Among theparticipants was the reciter from Warsaw, Mrs. Z. Hantshak. It was a very rich program.An upheaval in the management committee was related to this concert: the manage-ment elected to have, as part of the program, the song “Mishmar Hayarden,” therebyavoiding the singing of the national-Zionist “Hatikva” at the opening. But the chorusbegan, as usual, with the “Hatikva,” and this shook up all the assimilationists who wereon the management committee, causing them to resign from the committee.In June of the same year, the “Hazamir” conducted a festive celebration in honor ofthe Shpilfogel-Shereshevski family in Wola-Krishtoporska. The chorus and members,as well as the invited guests, spent an entire day enjoying various entertainments, suchas singing and dancing, with the participation of an orchestra. A buffet was providedentirely complimentarily.123124 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe dramatic section featured such talented members as Chaim Eleazar Dubeck,Motl Lenchitzki, Mendl Rosenzweig and others. The question of language caused greatconflicts: some wanted to “Polonize” the “Hazamir.” The Yiddishists wanted to be farfrom the Hebrew culture because it smacked of Zionism. The friction became strongerand stronger. The supporters of “Polonizing” the “Hazamir,” the assimilationists, werethe affluent members of the committee; they were the first to leave and also refused togive further financial help to the institution.A new committee was created, one whose disposition was national. Two membersof the chorus were also included in the committee: Sh. A. Zigelman and the singerZigmuntovitch. Mr. Levin, from Vilna, was invited to direct the dramatic section.Unable to continue financially without its rich members, the ‘"Hazamir” began to godownhill until it ultimately dissolved. The entire inventory was transferred to the domainof the Jewish Kehila. As a result of this, the “Hazamir’s” first chapter ended in 1912.The cultural activity, however, was not severed. It was conducted sporadically byarranging performances, concerts, and entertainment evenings from time to time, witha rich program of recitations and songs for the benefit of charitable organizations suchas “Linat Hatsedek,” “Bikur Cholim” and others, which sought sources of income fortheir activities.During World War I, when the city was occupied by Austria, the general situationwas better than in Lodz under the German occupation. At that time, a group of culturalactivists devised a plan to restore the extinct cultural organization, the “Hazamir.” Ameeting took place in the home of Nachman Rosenshtein (an important and very activeBundist leader, who was also called “Frayland” and Nachman Yidl Avram Beiles),where a way to establish a community library was discussed. A committee of three waschosen: Tovya Rosenblum, Sh. A Zigelman and Yidl Belzitski. They appealed to theartist Julius Adler, who was then on tour in Piotrkow, to give a benefit performance forthis purpose; it actually brought in a nice profit. It was thought that with this money theycould begin to organize the library, but it did not work. Thdn the idea of renewing theformer “Hazamir” arose again.One of the authors of this article had the charter of the old “Hazamir”; on the basisof the charter and according to the laws of the occupation, it could exist. Immediately,they went to work. They rented a room in Levkovitch’s house (Henryk Festenshtat’sgrandfather) in the Narrow Street across from Fishl Tushener’s “Bet Hamidrash.” Theyfixed up a fine meeting room and opened a buffet, where for a “graytzer” one could havea bite of food. The idea spread like wildfire.The new committee consisted of representatives of the following parties: the “Bund”(Berish Rosenberg or Berish Blacharz, Avraham Reuven Pinkusevitch or Pinkus,Avraham Weisshoff; Zionists and “Tsirey Tsion” (Joseph Zayontshkowski, YakovMaltz, Yakov Kurtz); the S.S.-ovtses (Yakov Baron, Motle Lenchitski, Shmuel ElyeZigelman). Those not officially affiliated with any party were the journalist HenrykFestenshtadt and Yidl Belzitski.A dramatic-musical society was organized. Its quarters were open from 6 PM everyevening. There one could play chess, checkers, and dominoes. Discussions werearranged on cultural and scientific topics, there were readings, literary evenings. Judge-Literary-Artistic Activity j 125A group of girls of the Jewish Literary Society in 1925 with their mentorsS. Folman and 1. Kenigstein.126 / A TALE OF ONE CITYments on various heroes of Yiddish literature. The critique of “Bontshe Shveig” by I.L.Peretz created a tremendous stir amongst our younger people. The society avoidedtouching on subjects of a political character in order not to disturb the harmony of theirjoint efforts.This idyllic situation did not last long and the “Bund” was responsible by introduc-ing, at a general meeting, an anti-Hebrew recommendation that was also simultaneouslyanti-Zionistic. A sharp conflict ensued between the representatives of the Zionists and“Tsirey Tsion,” who opposed the Bundist motion; after the motion was passed, they leftthe meeting along with all the followers of Zionism.A rich chapter in the history of cultural activity in our city was written by the“Dramatic Circle” and Chorus, conducted by Motl Lenchitski. They performed a numberof dramas and presentations. On December 13,1916, the “Hazamir” had its first dramaticevening. The program consisted of “Mitn Shtrom” (With the Stream) by Sholem Ash,and “Nor a Doktor” (Only a Doctor) by Sholom Aleichem. Participating in these twoplays were the women Beyle Pinkusevitch, Stella Bielska and Wolberg, and the menChaim Eleazar (Leon) Dubeck, Avraham Reuven Pinkusevitch, Motl Lenchitski, a childby the name of Yakubovitch and others.At the 25th half-jubilee celebration for Avrom Reisen, on January 13,1917, a richartistic evening was arranged in which the chorus and dramatic circle appeared on theprogram. It contained songs, recitations and the one-act play “Gute Brider” (GoodBrothers). Participating were N. Bemholtz, M. Lenchitzki, Sh. S. Zigelman, GitlBimbaum, N. Grushofski, V. Tomberg, M. Meyerovitch and the chorus of 25 singersdirected by M. Lenchitzki. The evening was a great success. It took place in Hertz’s Hall“Kupiecki” on Gamtsarska #7.On Shabbat Nachmu, August 4,1917, a grand performance of Jacob Gordin’s “Got,Mentsh un Tayvl” (God, Man and the Devil) was presented by the artist J. Rakov andhome performers.During the years of the Austrian occupation there was a blossoming of the literary-artistic cultural life in Piotrkow. The occupation forces permitted theatrical performan-ces to be presented for the military, in spite of the fact that it was actually forbidden toarrange public social events. Thus it became a way for the dramatic circle and the“Hazamir” to present a broadly challenging event which Austrian military persons ofalmost every rank streamed to see.At the second general meeting to elect a management committee, an inter-party listof candidates was submitted so that the list was decided en bloc, thus the committee asa whole would have the same political construction. Secretly, however, the “Bund”instructed their members to strike all non-Bundist candidates. The result was that onlyBundists were elected onto the management committee, and the institution was turnedinto a Bundist one which conducted its political activities.The deceived representatives of other parties organized to form their own, whichshortly thereafter was legitimized under the name of “Education Union for JewishWorkers.” The Zionists and “Tsirey Tsion” increased their activity in the Hebrew ZionistCulture Institute “Tarbut.” Following the establishment of a liberated Poland in 1919,and with the legalization of political activity, the primary weight of community affairsLiterary-Artistic Activity / 127“The Dybbuk.”was placed on political party efforts and legal political parties were formed. These alsoconducted cultural affairs.The cultural work also brought in income for the activities of the institutions, whichthe party greatly needed. Performances and other cultural presentations aided the schoolmovement, libraries and other institutions.On October 25, 1921, an artistic evening took place with the participation of theyoung F. Hamburger, Pesse Kurtz, Rochl Shtinberg, Gitl Bimbaum, Feyge Baumshteynand Beyle Pinkusevitch, directed by M. Lenchitsky, and in 1922 the presentation was“Got Fun Nekome”(God of Vengeance) by Sh. Ash. In 1923, it was “Der Foter” (TheFather) by Strindberg. Participating in the performances were Ms. Rosa Weisshoff andher husband Abraham, File Shtern (the wife of Itzchok Shtibl), Shmuel Zeitn, Veltman,Yakov Berliner and many of those previously mentioned. On December 22, 1923, thedramatic circle of the co-op “Eynikeyt” (earlier known as “Hazamir”) performed a playfor the benefit of the children’s home, with the participation of the before-mentionedand Ms. Bemshteyn, Blume Oynig, and Libe Kotkowski. In 1924, Peretz Hirshbein’sdrama “Navla” was performed by Ms. M. Moshkovitch, M. Trisker, and I. Trisker. Forthe benefit of the schools, L. Kobrin’s dramatic play “Yankl Boyle” was presented bythe Lodzer artists.As previously stated, after the split in “Hazamir,” there arose dramatic circles amongthe Zionist parties, which also had significant successes. One of the great successes wasthe production of “The Dybbuk,” performed by the dramatic circle of the “Tsirey-Tsion.”Because of its great success, it had to be presented several times. In this play, theparticipants were Ms. Goldblum, Ms. Yitke Levkovitch, Ms. Ida Venglinska, ItzchakShtibl, Fishl Mintz, Mendl Leiberman, J. Maltz, Natan Stashevski, Yechiel Kurnendz,128 / A TALE OF ONE CITYM. Leizerowicz in “Day and Night” by Shalom Ansky.Ms. Reitberger, Ms. Rosenstein, Rosenbaum and Rubin. The director was MordecaiMeyer Leizorowicz.The youth of “Freiheit” presented, among others, Sholem Aleichem’s “Mentshn”(People), directed by M. Lenchitzki, which was also a great success. It was performedin the “Kilinski” Hall and again in the “Maccabbi,” as well as in the provincial towns.The chorus and orchestra used to arrange literary and musical presentations under thedirection of the brothers Yakov and Moshe Fish, Ms. Frohman, Yidl Zeitn, Stashevsky,the brothers Mendl and Shmuel Lieberman, and others. The Artisan’s Union and the“Hashomer Hatsair” also had active drama groups. In 1926, these two successfullypresented Peretz Hirshbein’s “Grine Felder” (Green Fields).The “Linke Poalei Zion” also excelled in its cultural work in the field of theater andsong, etc. The major directors were Israel and David Trisker and their sister and FishlYakubovitch and his wife.The “Poalei Agudat Israel” reactivated the old plays such as “Mechirat Yosef’ and“Achashveyrush,” which were always expertly and successfully performed on manyfestive occasions.Without exception, these outstanding cultural labors in all segments of the Jewishpopulation of our city were undoubtedly a great influence on the shaping of ourcommunity and political life.The theater group did not limit itself to playing for the local population, but touredneighboring cities as well, where Jewish youth yearned for a new Yiddish word.Izkor BookJewish Publishing EstablishmentsYeshayahu Pudlows/d—Rishon LeZionThe history of Jewish printing shops in Piotrkow began in approximately the latterhalf of the 19th century. At that time there was already a thriving Jewish communitylife, whose reputation had reached far beyond the borders of the city. Piotrkow wasknown throughout the world for its active publishing houses.On various holy books, which were published at that time, there was the evidenceof beautiful covers imprinted “Published in Piotrkow,” a name known throughout theJewish world for promoting printed works at a high level of graphic art. As a result, thePiotrkower printing houses published thousands of books, both rabbinic and secular, aswell as prayer books which were distributed beyond the borders of Poland.Among the founders of the Yiddish printing industry in Piotrkow were Reb TovyeFayvl and Tsipe Belchatovsky (1864) and their son Shlomo, who later became theproprietor of the print shop. They published books and had a Polish—Russian section, aswell as lithographs, new in the printing field at that time. In their home, too, they had astore of writing utensils which, on a Friday in 1893, burned up in a fire precisely priorto candle-lighting time. The fire consumed the entire house as well as the print shop,which was located therein. It continued to burn for several days and the firemen of theProvince and of Lodz (Piotrkow was then a government city) had to come to the aid ofthe Piotrkower firemen.^ The print shop had existed for many years.In approximately 1897, the print shop of the brothers Eliyahu and Shmuel Panskywas established. This was the largest and most varied printing shop in Piotrkow andvicinity. It had a Jewish and Polish section. In the Jewish section, whose manager wasMotl Tsederbaum, were printed holy books, and it is worth mentioning that one of therarest editions of “Talmud Yerushalmi” was published there. According to an ex-workerat Pansky’s,^ it was even a tradition to “daven” with a “minyan” every day, becauseprinters and students from other cities were employed there, many even sleeping in theprint shop.In Pansky’s Polish section, the manager was the oldest printer, LeibushBranyetz; his son Joseph also worked there. Motl Lenchitzky worked at Pansky’sfrom his earliest youth. The oldest print-mechanic was Itche Rosenbloom (ItcheZamostcher).One must add that the Pansky’s were a broadly varied printing family. ShmuelPansky left the partnership after ten years and relocated to Lodz, where he operated alarge paper business. His son Marcus stepped into his place and later opened a large printshop in Radomsk. Shmuel Pansky’s other son, Vladislav, relocated to Warsaw and there1 This information was related by Motl Lenchitzky of Argentina.2 Reb Shlomo Weinberg of Bilgoray, currently residing in Rishon-Letsion, Israel.129130 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe title pages of some books published in Piotrkow.he, too, established a printing shop. Finally, ShmueTs son Adolph, who owned abookstore at that time on Kaliska Street, took over the print shop.Adolph Pansky coopted his son Alexander and they published a Polish-languagedaily newspaper called “Glos Trybunalski.” Among the numerous employees of the lastof the Pansky’s, only a few Jewish workers remained: Bronyetz, as linotypist; WolfErlichman, as printer; and I. Rosenbloom, as printer. The manager of the print shop formany years was Mr. Bloom. In the end, he, too, opened his own print shop directly acrossthe street from Pansky’s.Tsederbaum’s print shop was established around 1900 and was operated by RebMordecai, who died before the start of the last World War, and his son YakovTsederbaum.Tsederbaum’s publishing house was known throughout the world because of itseditions of the highest quality. It should be mentioned that only the Bet-YehudahChumash (with Rashi’s commentary in Yiddish) was but one of the editions thatTsederbaum was credited with. The Tsederbaum’s were talented printers and wereamong the pioneers in the art of Yiddish printing. Thanks to their vast trade contacts,their “sfarim” made their way throughout the entire world.Tsederbaum employed the printer-machinist Chaim Schwartz, a person for whomeveryone had the greatest respect because of his honesty. As an orthodox Jew, he didnot avoid attending the meetings of the Jewish Printers’ Union, organized in the ’30’s,and was one of its most active members. Tsederbaum also employed Yudl Yudkevitchas an assistant-machinist.In time (early in the 20th century) the compositors of “sfarim” grew in number,because the composition itself, without the printing, did not involve gigantic invest-Jewish Publishing Establislvnents / 131miI ff i" sI ml1 ' :#|S II• A ..;^v- ■.■:'mw ^ ■ .% :•.¥•• « » > %•... .\ y.^. #.. ^ ^•iiM rf-tw W. .*' •• •••# v'-Ss'-Vv ^ ■■■J#' .••'• •.'*■? •.•;« ). ..•.••;'pH-l-S(^' .•■' #'.V V / J. r’V-'i^^-V^.'. ’^'i' V .•••" •: .V 'i^- Jiii- .’#nw*1^1^15 mrrp"■ ^j .W <HirJUgii^ ]|Hb, ik; X ^» Wt, *III■'S!I# S -.O.,?^- i. ; ■«■■ ■*.» - A .**1, :%*,*^ ■*;■ ■■ **i J^•- "••••'•-'‘'r. i “•- .t i-.'.’iiv.tt'^.Vfl'f '^•'i^'-’f'V’I't-. •.•.H» -.%.O^..Viy. n-.K.•' «“ •■'■■• ;:•>« ■«..-.iw- •liv- y ••% •:v^«ii|.-..'-vJiif ‘ m -x'^Aj«| ....J,v ...,.,3:., p «f.g?i|S??ISfS p'tsse': *''S5 ""ti ;»#? :£Sf’'■^S ■'■■?”' £«5'a '^^'W £5,J»':m^; •. -m ** n fcmi i is"'' i w' y ' JS?I I ''^''S'"' ”'a mv” T»” “' a'‘S'5 ■“rs,« I Ir»j as'vn s* I |! iS i1^ iI Ssft?, 1•    OrMeir by Rav Yehuda Meir Shapira.merits, as did a complete print shop. A compositor with a little initiative could, if hehad money, organize such a “sfarim'’-composing shop by purchasing some lettersnecessary for setting up only a few pages of a “sefer.” Instances are known of wheresuch “print shop necessities” were laid out on a bed during the day and under the bedat night.1903 saw the arrival of the “sfarim” composing shop of Reb Nathan Note Kronen-berg and his son-in-law Abraham Rosengarten, who also had a shop of his own.Kronenberg took on as a partner Reb Chanuch Henech Folman (the son of the famousTalmudist scholar Reb Isaiah Wolf Folman zts"l) and the partnership lasted until thestart of the First World War.From that time until the Hitler War, Reb Henech Folman was independent andmanaged the composing shop at 1 Garntsarska—later at 21 Garntsarska—together withhis two sons, Aaron (who died in 1945 in Lxidz) and Motl (who perished in a Germancamp). Osher Zitman and Moshe Rosenwald (who perished in Treblinka) also workedthere, as well as Leybl Komfeld (who is currently in Israel).There were other “sefer” composing shops owned by Yakov Kurnenz and RebAbraham Rosenwald (who is today in Israel), as well as that of Kopelman (the son-in-lawof Reb Yakov Tsederbaum). In addition to the proprietors. Wolf Fish and MosheNutkewicz (who died in Israel in 1960) were employed.Additional consideration should be given Reb Benyomen Liebeskind, whose printshop, established about 1902, printed, next to rabbinical and holy books, popular Yiddishstory books (before World War I), which began to infiltrate strongly orthodox Jewishhomes. It is known that the famous writer, I.J. Trunk, had his works published byLiebeskind. The most unusual characteristic of Liebeskind’s print shop was that, in132 / A TALE OF ONE CITYaddition to his sons, he also employed his daughters. In the end, Liebeskind’s childrenrelocated the print shop to Warsaw.The last three Jewish print shops that we shall mention significantly reflected theJewish community life of Piotrkow and vicinity.In Yakov Moshe Rosenstein’s print shop (on Trybunalski Platz), the largest in scope,was published a “Bet-Yakov” journal, as well as many religious books and other editionsby the Lx)dzer publisher, Abraham Moshe Grubstein (a son-in-law of the PiotrkowerReb Itche Meyer Sofer z”l); also, for many years, the ‘‘Literarishe Tribune” waspublished there. This was a journal of the Communist Party for which Mr. Rosensteinhad to, more than once, pay fines, endure court actions and even go to jail. The Bundistweekly newspaper, “Piotrkower Vecker,” was printed there, along with many otherpublications and printed works for various parties and community institutions inPiotrkow. There, too, was published “Shtaplen,” a local literary newspaper in which,among others, Harav Shimon Huberband, Sh. Ziegelman, H. Wohlreich, YidlDavidowitch, V.H. Ivan, M. Weiss (the grandson of Mendl Dein), the well-known artistHenech Barchinsky (Lodz), Yosl Yablonski, Sh. Yablonski, Sh. Leyzerovitch, Sh.Pudlowski and others appeared.Rosenstein employed his sons Shimshon (who died recently in America); Israel(who perished in a German camp); David (who lives in the USA); his son-in-law, HertzlGrinbaum (who died in the German camp “Flossberg”); his daughter Frania (passedaway in the US); Moshe Rotbein (who died in 1941); Shamai Glogovsky (the ex-chair-man of the Jewish Printer’s Union); Yantshe Milyoner (who died in 1936 in Israel inTirat-Tsvi); Israel Liebeskind (who died in Treblinka), Moshe Rosenstein (living inIsrael).Abraham Mordecai Horowitz’s print shop, located at Czarniecki Platz, was managedby his son Menachem, who, despite his active community affiliations (Poalei Zion, forinstance), dedicated the major part of his efforts to the development and growth of theprint shop, where for many years, the Piotrkower Zionist weekly, “Undzer Tsaytung,”was published and edited by Yakov Baron. For a time, the “Freiheit Youths’ ” “UndzerFreiheit” was published there; for many years a Tomashov weekly newspaper waspublished there, issued by Note Goldkrantz.Menachem Horowitz and his wife, mother and sister perished at the hands of theGermans. Fay vl Bloomstein, who worked there, shared the same fate. Only Benchovksysurvived the German camps.Reb Yakov Sternfeld’s print shop (on Gamtsarska #13) was established by his sonYochanan, who had previously worked for Pansky and then for Horowitz. This waswhen the publication of the “Poalei Agudat Israel” was printed; it was called “DerYidisher Arbeter.” Also printed for a time were the “Piotrkower Vecker,” the Agudahweekly “Di Shtime,” a Tomashov weekly newspaper, “Tomashover Vort,” issued bythe Kurtz Brothers, the “Radomer Shtime,” whose editor was Leyzer Fishman, theKrakower literary weekly, “Di Post,” whose editor was Moshe Blecher; the literaryperiodical of Zishe Bagish, “Indzlen,” a literary journal, “Tsvit,” by David Puchalnickof Volin, as well as Yiddish books and other printed matter in the Polish language.Just as in other print shops, the children helped out with the work.Jewish Publishing Establishments / 133Employed there were Eliyahu Horowitz, who made Aliya to Eretz Israel in the1930’s; Yakov Milyoner, who relocated to Eretz Israel in 1936; Yosl Milyoner, whoperished at the hands of the Germans; Eliezer Praszker, who died in a German camp;Yochanan Stemfeld, who died in Treblinka; Moshe Rosenzweig, who arrived in Israelvia Vilna in 1941—one of the miraculous survivors of Kfar Etzion and YeshayahuPudlowski, who is living in Israel.When Hitler’s murderers marched on Poland, everything that had been createdthroughout generations with so much effort was erased in an instant, together with theircreators and founders. The history of the printers of Piotrkow was cut off at its prime.Izkor Book''Fun Der Alter Heim""A Stroll Through Our PiotrkowElazar Prashker—JerusalemDo you remember the town?Do you remember the town of our sweet, pristine young years? The town of ouradolescent dreams and struggles? The town where our hearts awoke to the ideals of theJewish Renaissance and Social Justice? The town where we experienced the ecstasy offirst love and also the bitter disappointments of our more mature years? The town of ourfathers and mothers, brothers and sisters, family and friends, fellows and acquaintances?The town of “everyday” people, of “Shabbath” and “Yom Tov?” The town with themerchants and craftsmen, the scholars and the intellectuals, “Chassidim” and “BaaleiBatim,” the privileged and the poor? The town of thousands of pulsating and throbbing“Yiddish” hearts?Do you remember our Jewish home town, Piotrkow?So, please come. Let’s stroll once again, in a dream-like reverie, through the streetswith every house so homely and every face so close to you, where you know everyoneand everyone knows you. Every other person you know by his nickname. Every thirdperson has a little tale, or just a joke, attached to him.Just look around; it’s so strange that during all these years nothing here haschanged—nothing at all. The same houses, the same courtyards, the same streets andThe “Maccabi” brass band—early thirties.134A Stroll Through Our Piotrkow / 135The “Hapoel” scxx:er team—mid-thirties.squares. The same stores and merchants. That’s the way they were when you were youngand that’s the way they remain until the great destruction.The Czarniecki Square (Plac Czarnieckiego)We come to the square where, in the middle, a few dusty bushes barely cling to life,along with some scattered, anemic bunches of grass. Please, refresh my memory—^werethere benches on the square? If so, we, the young, didn’t use them. We passed our freetime in the Poniatowski Park, in the Bernardynski Garden, in the shady cemetery avenuefull of trees, or yet the other green spot, the “Budki.” The older folks didn’t use thebenches either. Firstly, they were too busy; secondly, how would it look to just sitaround? Ridiculous!Now, look at this house, just here, near the ominous jail gate. Once it was paintedgreen. Today, you hardly recognize the color, which is rather gray and dirty. As you see,everything here has remained sta.ic; nothing has changed. Like all these unrestoredhouse facades.If this particular house could speak, many nights would be needed to listen to itstales. Once, the wealthy Reb Nusen Horowicz lived here. He was the son of RebMeshulam Piotrkower. You’ll probably ask who Reb Meshulam was. Don’t you know?It’s fair to say that his virtues were ‘‘Torah Gdolah, Yiches, Chassiduth” and all “MaalothTovoth Bemakom Echad.” Hardly a trifle—the bells of the entire community tolled forReb Meshulam.At the start of World War I, his son, Reb Nusen, took all his family (he had “BliAyin Harah” ten daughters) and escaped to Russia. There, he passed away. His twosons-in-law—Reb Henzl Frenkel, the banker, and esteemed Reb Moshe AharonZussman—returned after the war to Piotrkow. Reb Frenkel, honoring Reb Nusen’slegacy, erected the “Talmud Torah” house. He later moved in here, into Reb Nusen’sold house, and now lives with his son Mordechai, next door to the “Yiddishe Kasse.”136 / A TALE OF ONE CITYI will tell you some other time about Mordechai Frenkel, one of the most interestingPiotrkower personalities. There are poignant stories about the “Yiddishe Kasse.” Fornow, however, let’s sneak into the printing shop of Horowicz, located on the groundfloor of the building.The Print ShopBefore you enter, you may smell the printing ink and hear the humming of the heavyprinting press, which takes up considerable space in the large room. On the right, yousee a few “zecers” (typesetters) standing over the spacious boxes that contain the leadtypesetters. They arrange the letters into lines to be put into print. The tall, spaciouswindows give an excellent view of what’s going on inside.Ay, ay. . . the Yiddish print shops of Piotrkow! They are known throughout theworld. In the Diaspora or in Israel, when a book, a “Siddur” or a “Machzor” is opened,the logo on the title page is clear and distinct: “Printed in Piotrkow.” Then, the namesof the printers appear in order—Shraga Faivel Belchatowski, the brothers Eli and ShmuelPanski, Nathan Kronenberg, Rosengarten and Horowicz, Yakov Ber Mordechai, Ceder-baum, Henoch Bar Yishai, Zeev Folman, Abraham Rozenwald, Benjamin Libeskind—these names are known to every “yodea sefer.” A large volume could be written on thesubject of the Piotrkow printers.The Horowicz print shop did not set books. Its trade consisted of printing variousforms, cards, announcements, posters, etc. Here, at the beginning, the Zionist weekly“Unzer 2^itung” was put together. In later years, the weekly was printed at theRozenstein print shop on Rynek Trybunalski.The Horowicz print shop was founded by Abraham Horowicz and is now being runby his son Menachem, who, in an ink-stained smock, runs hectically around the placeall day. He is as mobile as mercury. He attends to the customers, puts the texts together,tends the printing press, and collects fees; in short, he does practically everything.Menachem was a short, round-faced man, smoothly shaven. His mouth was slightlybent. He spoke so rapidly, it was hard to understand him. This, however, didn’t preventhim from being the second keynote speaker (after Yakov Maltz) at the first of the Mayrallies organized by the Right Poalei Zion Party. Are you surprised? Just rememberDemosthenes.In the evenings, on Saturdays or holidays, Menachem underwent a completemetamorphosis. Clean, wearing a black suit and tie, he attended meetings, conferences,rallies, gatherings. He was a member of the Tzeirei Zion, Poalei Zion C.S., Hechalutz,Hapoel, Maccabi, various organizations, committees, literary and musical circles, sportclubs, leagues and alliances. He attended drama workshops, women’s and youth move-ments and all the unfolding and growing cultural activities that were flourishing. “BliAyin Harah,” like mushrooms after a rain.Doesn’t your head spin when you hear all those names of the various circles andcoteries? Just wait! Firstly, I am not sure that I didn’t forget anybody. Secondly, these areonly the circles associated with the Party, which, after many transformations, acquired theofficial name, “The Jewish Socialist Labor Party, Poalei Zion United with C.S.”“Kwutzat Shomrim of Kibbutz Aliya Aleph” in 1927. Lower row, from the left: Hela Rosen-baum, a “teacher’s teacher and a fine educator,” Mordechai Fajner, Shayek Fajner, Tila War-zager, Zeev Lipski (Liwne). Upper row, from the left: Hertzel Fajnkind (Jafet), RiwkaJakubowicz, Lea Wajntreter and young Elazar Prashker, the author of the essay.The committee of Poalei Zion C. S. in May 1930. Sitting, from left: I. Kogan, M. Fisz,B. Lewkowicz, M. Szydlowski, Szapiro and I. Fisz. Standing, from left: M. Wajnberg,Rozental, J. Wolrajch, C. Kogan, J. Male, M. Horowicz and S. Horn.138 / A TALE OF ONE CITYYiddish Newspapers Published in Piotrkow Before World War IIIf*,<(•? trtf.ly is r'ls,n*3: mus*'« pa»#’4i»l'irK4» I r) H., niiftii9 puM'MernIkii*W r.,Sp“®SV'‘;H 'S-4 "I ^S'.r’VffUA'fSKjsf<,S 1 AaJw „n\ ,l\«ii\*sw SsJsirm#’'Ifes-* lita.S‘"lf sftsws.ay'jI, ?i!Si «}"(%?";“ilf'i ""W® '''''3®" *‘".1" ;'S!m “''y a"S”^R. ’-.nri wvw- sft-tp sl^sW»S:J'V n',"®!}*ri p?«s ?"1 3« ‘W 1”TI IS TO«? •’1 ‘^11 8f * a"'» '■'“R '•'S'^ E, tr':";'. .*'.j’"s sr' ?;« s ’'^5';'• .w^fs■fsi' s,'t"sf«;‘> "v'?') "jf s'^s £;.:a^;s .{5n\i'rf■vflr. "•'-'tfs fi'NB E^’^E^ne'\W w-i 'SE'w.'s.S'-S'/Vt p»S! "fEiiiS ■4««* '{“fS SiEu-'S sstf*I'ars sprR'W ■'iS'S S“5f“'} 'iS C'^WT’, r'VR'sW"®* W'“'V jnsf'? 'nr px""nii‘53Nn»n mnaujw,'^V “'Ss'l-'f Eii'V" Ji".''!^.n^:tr3;''', ■EAif;;? •'ss“Di Yiddishe Shtime”—^Agudat Israel\"A j? •«■’?' 4"'fi'»i.nsn« '"i SS!«♦■> 1938 “insiaiis 35 .1 Amw'f'^'s^\A 5 ,'F.r:r*srva .ci-i'.'s \'},:v' ;■:Ir, n:iriEi'ri rs-A ■ "s"r>'s■v'-t^rr *'f>» rr * "* 'j?.';-',’*'’’'??"** ’f't-», . * „ f . ■ V ,:S'- “' r. ft n ? 'i'-Fyezahs'fM.ra 2 TO«_ PiOTRKOWeH W£KER:, • ' \'n•Jr'ff f?6 r r rt'lE* .Vf^-'53f't yS PiOtEk4¥»'fn «'■«'?;« s "vS; !;'‘n»9 « f'.# -EJSS'? Pl^teH.; 1‘s ffs? f® r$.T.-E;,') A*® {'t-sni-RffilSf-'iS ,l'''Wai? M i® BfSf.2.1 «i .fnn-^%XAr^-^.Tru' A;fxn5'»»s£i^» 'i,,;.« ^ ., ®*rn 1* .ffiS'tisEEe: ".-jR |^» .’; '•;•?« ■» s'tt.-S's '' .* t'sa |$Bi*R,f‘':'E s".r'» 11*“fv-'a E'lE\ .rr''?!■;?■'■.■(•*n¥'s «t ’ SPE®“ i\% ''iE'.'jrt An® rs).f's I"® |¥Br»*,ei:v,#e-ee‘'S -;. !* ;-S-EE'E* 5'M, ' “aj-'.;»'s -c .”')*.-'n -y? \iS'SR"®':;-*■,■.'snns'- *' -“E'S \'s e-'s»'» s'i"';vis -fl!..tsir'Jf.’ssft*,nns t^s "‘•’-'■‘i' VS'® I,®lEi!', run ”;k'^:ve:'rS7”"J!|5 ESR’ rr-i E“«E'm *iv, .*1510 Im0mMmmm^mmimmimm nnaiyMiiiwMi mu' iiiiiimiii^iii iiii|jiii:r’-u^A-' VH \^’ V A tii.\"iViliHaiMii|^ II ^ » B  ■» I mm I^MI P Bb IHH I ■t3M';a3 3ini 7 np«- 7 r i '.i - 5 ■ ?t; u ‘ 7 rr*^Ki.. HomarTBarn?^? lonj ifftais,r,.i n’ tti tH'® ri-s’ '>* I'E'E.-t E..';■*p*35“E3 r'ft* ®eEES2 EAEVT' 'i''® V«";'V S "t. VESt .r". I"S'-‘:S7’"•'r*. 3,'.;'- vr'*'" .'li's ]'"'■%, S'"!sl^Q tri,tfy'43 a: ;j''i>-:?r'n ,'®"' ■ mn '0 »‘;3 m f? tiv" tj’yi 'tliWTTYa 'fiiT rs'f^Jl iic'"'*': ' h T® nS'i'.s'l E’E’-y•U.E'VS ®-‘S' J .;: 'siic'lf**iiDfflf anmns iSTv,»„- , -1«« l'n£",'£ aR’ESr1*. Im,» y* 4y«*S ->»»«.Sinn i? ^"\pnM n^5: m" 'K\s' 7:"‘ '"7 .“Piotrkower Weker”—Jewish Labor BundA Stroll Through Our Piotrkow / 139Our people, however, dislike lengthy names. So, the Party was called “The RightPetzekes,” or “Peitzadikes.” Understandably, when there is a right, there must alsobe a left. And though united, there were also some left ununited. These parties alsohad their youth organizations, women’s groups, libraries, choirs, temples, sportsections, etc.Now, where is the “Bund,” with its domain of “Kol minei” circles, rings, associa-tions, societies, and institutions? Yes, and all other parties and their offspring? Mizrachi,Tzerei Mizrachi, Poalei Mizrachi, Hechalutz Mizrachi; the Agudah, Poalei Agudah; theRadical Zionists of Grynbaum and the “Algemeine” Zionists; Revisionists of Jabotinskyand Revisionists of Grossman. There were also Communists—those of Stalin andTrotzky and who knows whose else?I even knew some Independent Socialists and followers of Dr. Joseph Kruk, whowas famous here for his lectures on Ghandi and Roman Roland. Noah Prilutzki and hisFolks Party, however, wasn’t so popular in our town. Assimilators? They almostcompletely disappeared. Maybe some remain among the so-called “High Intellegentsia,”but they are not to be heard. It’s interesting how our lifestyle has changed lately. About15 to 20 years ago, the assimilators played the dominant role in Jewish Piotrkow, buttoday, no more. And that’s the way the world turns. You probably think that the Piotrkow“Yidn” were quite interested in all their parties’ programs, principles, ideologicalplatforms and would found a new party every Monday and Thursday, then divide orreunite as the politicians in the Warsaw headquarters did. You are in for a surprise. Ourpeople had all these things in the “Linke Piente.” Only a small group of enthusiasts wereinvolved body and soul in these party antics. Except for this group, you wouldn’t find ahandful of people that knew the difference between Hitachdut and Poalei Zion orbetween Gordonia and Freiheit.Ninety percent of the population had other worries. How to obtain a “GemilathHessed” to redeem an outstanding obligatory note? Where to get a few “Zlotys” to make“Shabbos?”Oh Lx)rd! How could one obtain a sack of potatoes and a cart of wood to store in thecellars for the winter? The poverty was enormous. There were years when over athousand families didn’t have the means to prepare for the Pesach Holiday and wereforced to apply for “Kimcha L’Pascha”^—^and all in all, there were only a few thousandJewish families living in Piotrkow.Our Newspaper, ‘^Unzer Tsaytung”How did I get sidetracked? We were just talking about the print shop. In fact, duringthe three years prior to the beginning of the “Hurban,” I remained in the print shop onThursday evenings to help prepare a new issue of “Unzer Tsaytung,” which would beready on Saturday for the Jews of Piotrkow. This was during the weeks when imp)ortantevents” (like elections) were taking place. During other weeks, Yankl Baron and theprinter compiled the issues. As time passed, a routine was established. “Unzer Tsaytung1 Kimcha L’Pascha—^the traditional relief activity dispersing Kosher-for-Passover victuals to the poor.140 / A TALE OF ONE CITY\ge*«»£ ft'trmn I'gntT'j'SfB f“»i f'SIfltltnI rt II sgs' s«f*Z'T^ S'S’ l^ns ftn•♦■ispnt |%t fi?4 ,^i.■T35?5S?as’K m -n^piDJj’S nss Bs^jsiyars j?es8c?7Pti'j-i?’nK-(i'B’9'0’t:’i>es j .. . jj'; , .^-rr, ;:m.» Ju-.uir- -r-Affres retl»lic|i I PI«ts'k?'^w»Tf^b. Pt^c Tryh. 4, tiLf»* |%S P«1 I’*n fit fs%j,6nfe "t n.nii ftn« i iwt" er^ ***vr''g»«|r’**i*w*rwtifP e« HP•■snm ^’''^’51 *^is fc®*'!.^nK |»»'^£jras!| ''I'' e'Bfe«n?s3nsi ^mp If.|fR»nj fRAkajn** n s»ii ■**«l« fiiifm t*’% fa aw*^ffSfRa nft *^'t« p*srvi 'fsa ®®g fs^fR,^f1ws |«' I'''"'**'* p*'itOgtft&« Pfsetsyg s« 4o»w«^ do Spufis *p@w»«i€feBrmn w PfOtfl^owm snytistd# w* ?ek«M& 13 (673) 13W1»-14 .1115J'"'lS3 Rok XlV. Unzer Cajtung; ?”■";» •;n.i m»\, n*'"® « ,## % «""i #t(».*|^ , Mf . . J „ 4 Pii,'*® j *1|||.£3|?5« jv® l-WE6S''S f'■‘•irft.tfR *'5 P*fK7B’f1R   9'’J CIS  ^in, *•»»•» •.«!«.««. ewwwsuii* »4t'“V n® 4\4 "If".*.|« rgwi. !|n;4;:g I*'? im lat3|g Rrn p«l« :|if*vt IP r«8 .BsnraJ |«^V* |:s*a#;*» ssti -ros |‘»r-'?4 ft ipi t**? 8w £p| mn* as"iis, c§ .*t® pi |w'7f'i f® j'tm ft ?''« as^ ' .Spent r« p«nv'' ppfPaiW aofas^i»4|® '*1 p is^yotsiis | oroogupt*r»5afa!*R 4.111 cfi egn so;n*, ' » ^ *:*"«'« l?« ^>1s e^-se^fvi.sino 0^1. . .f'*-ai i?i I'Ia cfi raa^i.,.  4 f\87| nraff f ‘ %nf•af ” *14 pi Bfn .^RS l«rn» e«l |f 1*1 * c¥aatf» .» epIW PtAr-niw O^n r« r* n pP-Rf” |v tratanf®4 .»a*£f3 a»"nf0 sfR sn |« M-osaR stf ,arnw*-' tW > S»1mt» nta B-'esipo® i»» wfaissi'Mi''*a »4?.pp npo Y'^m ..pT'*;**,d •* _ . aivi* ’*"» n sff,4"‘'sai"''4e fol'''4.,.I'ls '’ir'? ,ns''* ■>’«< *‘i4-vr'*OS-UW tW Bill'A Of® p» IPs*1 efR Pt*®"* f”'K 4A441 ei«s'^iJASsniss If8"i'‘''*“.f'i fi rroP’fJ|W ronoi f4 **» a't f«''•'s*’f.'i pr fsigfe li”®.GSMWPf |Wmm fo e«n p pp'si Pi **'''*» *\m ns'fis;'* . .jens®fa footii fife ^ ifsta »“t p C'lmso|i pw il*r.’a fv* ®’S’'R ojss©i"4''ee's.|a''i'“'' ai"® pe lOirBnrt |fb.f% Oft 4S>#A BgopfA-Sp |Sa«a| 4S'«:iS»'»reA«s.s r# ft PAtl r». eiSw ISffi“Unzer Tsaytung”—Zionist Movement.The Zionist Movement “Freiheit” at an outing in 1931.A Stroll Through Our Piotrkow I 141became like the old “shtraymel” in the anecdote: if you put it on the table, it would, byitself, crawl further.The founder of the Piotrkow weekly newspaper “Unzer Tsaytung” was “davka” a“Galitsyaner”—^Dr. Tsvi Zemel, director of the Jewish “gimnazium.”Following the signing of the Balfour Declaration, the Jews believed that the “geula”had arrived. The Zionist dream captivated Jewish hearts. During that period, severalenthusiastic Zionists decided to establish the Jewish “gimnazjum” in Piotrkow. Tm notgoing to tell you about the “gimnazjum”; that’s a story all by itself and should be toldby its ex-students, the few that are still left. I still remember the first director. Dr.Katzenbogen, who started it on its way. He remained in Piotrkow only two years longer.Following him. Dr. Tsvi Zemel was engaged as director. He was, as they say, a man ofsubstance—^“mechikmo u-mala.” During his tenure, the “gimnazjum” blossomed andZionist activity in Piotrkow had a new purpose. Dr. Zemel immediately became the headof the Zionists in the city, and through his initiative it was decided to publish a Zionistweekly newspaper.Decisions are easily made but expediting them is more difficult. However, sinceAbraham Eli Rozenthal stood behind the decision, it soon became a reality. This is how,one Spring day in 1924, the first Yiddish weekly in Piotrkow, “Unzer Tsaytung,” wasborn.Every Friday for 15 years, “Unzer Tsaytung” stirred up the generally sleepy Jewishcommunity of Piotrkow. A poke was made at a communal leader who had “made amistake”; it was discovered that the “gmina” was up to no good; the paper took a standagainst Grabski’s schemes, but also announced cultural and artistic events in the city; itagitated during the “Sejm” elections, the “Rav” elections, the “Magistrat” elections, andthe “Gmina” elections and, of course, “guarded and protected the interests of Zionismin Piotrkow.”Well, what did you think? That the Zionists would have their own newspaper inPiotrkow and the Bund would sleep? Immediately, they came out with their “ Wecker”;following them the “ Agudah” issued their Shtimme. True, from time to time the Weckerseemed to “sleep” a little and Di Shtimme was quiet, but you may be sure that when thescent of elections was in the air, the newspapers rose to the occasion and let themselvesbe heard.The Gray EminenceOf course, “Unzer Tsaytung” was a simple provincial weekly which barely existed,and only miracles kept it alive. That such a miracle occurred every Friday for a periodof fifteen years can only be credited to several “mishugoyim,” several of whom areworthy of mention.I have already mentioned Abraham Eli Rosenthal. As far back as I can remember,A. E. Rosenthal had been the secretary of the Zionist organization in our city. Usuallyhe did the daily “groye arbet.” I never saw him get angry nor raise his voice. He was afanatic about order and punctuality. I was always amazed by how organized his officewas—his desk neat, the minutes recorded, the papers catalogued, everything in its place.142 / A TALE OF ONE CITYBehind all the Zionist events and actions lay Abraham Eli’s organizational hand. He wasthe “groye eminents” of Piotrkow Zionism.He also ‘‘made” **Unzer Tsaytung'* from its inception until 1938. Then, for personalreasons, he withdrew from communal activities. He had been the editor, administratorand provider of most of the newsworthy material. Throughout those years, Abraham EliRosenthal was Unzer Tsaytung and Unzer Tsaytung was Abraham Eli Rosenthal.Yankl Der Rebbetsin’sCorrections on Unzer Tsaytung were always made by Yankl Baron. He was called“Yankl Der Rebbetsin’s.” The “Saba Hakodesh” of Radoshitz was his great-grandfather.He was raised by his grandmother, the widow of the Piotrkow “rov,” Rabbi EleazarShalom Morgenstem. In our city she was called “Di Rebbetsin,” so of course, he wascalled “Yankl Der Rebbetsin’s.” The name stuck even after he left the “Bey t Hamidrash”and started to befriend the Zionistic Socialists of the S.S. Party, which was beginning tobe organized in Piotrkow.For several years, Yankl Baron was the secretary of the Lodzer Togblat, Even thenhe was known to be knowledgeable in Yiddish literature. Sometimes he even “sinned”with a poem and a “peyrek” of prose. With the outbreak of World War II, he returnedto Piotrkow. At that time drastic changes were occurring amongst Polish Jewry. Theshtibel and the “Beyt Hamidrash” were no longer of primary importance in Jewish life.People started to be more involved in worldly matters. There was a growing interest inYiddish literature and in secular culture in general. In Piotrkow , the people began tofeel this. The young people who came from the “cheyder” and the shtibel and, evenmore, the Jewish girls who had no place at all where they could learn, were starving forknowledge, culture and any fresh breeze from the broader world. That was when the“Hazamir” was founded in Piotrkow—it was to be the first swallow of the approachingSpring.Yankl Baron promptly got involved with this cultural activity and, together withShmelke Folman, organized and directed the “Literarishe Gezelshaftn,” as it was thencalled.**Unzer Tsaytung*' was actually published by the “Algemeyne Tsionim,” but it wasfar from being simply a party publication. In fact, all the Zionist factions, from the“Mizrachi” to the “Poalei-Zion” were represented in it. And, in general, it took a liberalstand on social issues. Yankl Baron, who at that time identified with the Poalei-Zionists,saw no difficulty in joining the editorial staff and started to work for **Unzer Tsaytung"immediately. From time to time he published his articles under the name of “Doresman”(his wife’s name was Dvorah), but essentially he did the proofreading and saw to it thatcorrect grammatical Yiddish and a superior style were used. More than once he had tocorrect the writings of various community leaders who wanted their work to appear inthe newspaper but were, unfortunately, rather weak with the pen.Every Thursday afternoon, he left his kiosk at the “hoicher kole,” from which hebarely eked out a living, and took his place in the printing room. All night, until Fridayat dawn, he remained at his job until a brand new issue of *'Unzer Tsaytung" wasA Stroll Through OurPiotrkow j 143completed. The few “Zlotys” he received added somewhat to his income. TheBundists could not forget their earlier arguments with him, ever since he had beenthe leader of the Zionists, and constantly accused him in their Vecker of “selling outto the Bourgeosie.I can only remember Yankl Baron during the last three years before the “Hurban.”Engraved in my memory is a scene which took place late one winter’s night in theprinting office, which was simultaneously the editorial room. Yankl Baron was standingin a comer near a “shtentser” wearing a worn coat and an old, misshapen hat on his head.On his hands were knitted half-gloves, from which his naked fingers, swollen from thecold, and looking like red sausages, protmded. He held the pen awkwardly between hisfingers, dipping it constantly into a small bottle containing only a drop of ink on thebottom. Thus he stood patiently correcting the material printed on narrow strips of paperfor the compositor.By that time, it seemed that the revolutionary fire of his youth had been extinguished.He never participated in the heated arguments of the small groups of idlers who alwayshung around the print shop. Seldom did he make a comment. But when he did, one saw,through the lenses of his misshapen metal frames, a spark of the old fire in his eyes.^^YerubeP^On almost every Friday for many years, there appeared in Unzer Tsaytung, underthe pen name “Yerubel,” satiric poems and rhyming parodies. In funny, pointed rhymes,full of humor and wit, they accompanied the events of Piotrkow’s Jewish world. Weekafter week they reflected in a “krumer shpigl” the humorous side of our life. One did notenvy the “parves” whom “Yerubel” whipped for his “sheyne maysim.” It was pitiful tobehold the “kokhlefel” when Yerubel honored him with his stabbing mockery becauseof a clumsy misstep. The readers delighted in the light, playful lines which excelledbecause of their folksy but very rich Yiddish.Not only were sharp arrows aimed at wrongdoing and injustice; not only were therebiting satires of the distorted and oftentimes ridiculous shape of our Jewish reality:Yerubel also knew how to illustrate, with warm sentiments, the beautiful aspects ofJewish life, to draw sincere pictures of simple folk manners.However, although the readers were greatly pleased by his humorous parodies, hiscomic rhymes and witty lectures, which always made their point, the author himself wasalways clouded and embittered.Yosef Berish Rosenblum, known as “Yerubel,” earned his living as a Hebrewteacher at the Jewish Gimnazjum. I had the honor of knowing him closely. He was really“aley v’gadash” with “khakhmay Yisroel, Tanakh, Talmud, rabbinic S’farim” to thelatest research on behalf of Judaism, not to mention all of Yiddish and Hebrew literature.Everything was known to him, and he was the “bal-habayit” of it all. Judging from hisknowledge and abilities, he could have been a professor in any Judaic institution.With his {)en he could have shone as a writer of human interest stories in the mostimp)ortant Yiddish newsp)apers. His satiric talents could have succeeded in social andpolitical newspap)ers in the broadest sense. But fate had cruelly trapped him in Piotrkow.144 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThere he taught in a small provincial “shul.” His witty satires dealt with small provincialmuck and were published in a poor provincial brochure.This was his tragedy. And another thing: Yosef Berish Rosenblum was a fanaticZionist. He had a premonition about the Holocaust. As a representative of the Zionistsin the “Kehila,” he fought bitterly against the local teachings of the “Bund,” which eitherdid not hear, nor did not want to hear, the approaching heavy footsteps of history. Inspeech and writing he tried to influence the indifference of the Jewish masses, who,while involved in their daily problems, did not sense the oncoming storm.This almost brought him to despair. The last drop in his bitter cup was that his tragicdestiny prevented him from realizing his greatest dream, to make “Aliya” to Eretz Israel.Hundreds of young people heard his talks in the “gimnazjum” and during eveningcourses. He implanted in their hearts the love of the Hebrew language and Jewish culture.Thousands of his readers memorized passages of his satires and parodies and entertainedthemselves with them for many years. Those who remain still remember him withgratitude and love.The satire which he published in “Unzer Tsaytung” on Erev Pesach 1924, which, ifI am not mistaken, was his first, opened with the following lines:Do you know the cityThat’s at God’s mercy,Where the Jordan doesn’t flow.And not, too, the Rhine,But the genuineStrawa itself?Let’s alter the first line a little and make it the motto of our “shpatsir”:Do you remember the City? ....The Loyal SoldierAnd last, but not least, Fayvl Shteinberg. Who didn’t know Fayvl, the son of MenilShteinberg, who owned the tavern on the “Fama,” across from the “Tushiner Feltsher?”Everyone knew that at Menil Shteinberg’s one could get the best glass of beer in town.Whenever we passed by, we would always stop in for a cold glass of beer with “zokherarbes” and thin “zalts-matselekh.” Fayvl himself would fill our glasses with a particular-ly large head. He could always be found in the tavern, except when he was involved inhis Zionist activities.Do you remember Fayvl? Short, thin, a “halb droybele” with a long neck andprotruding Adam’s apple right in the center? It was always thought that he would losehis trousers and jacket, which were always several sizes too large for him.He was neither a writer nor a speaker. He was only a simple soldier, always on thealert. He made sure that the Zionist interests were taken care of. Without wisecracks andwithout arguments, he alone did the major share of the daily “shvartze arbet”: he tookcare of the necessary chores, retained contact with the “responsible leaders.” He neverA Stroll Through Our Piotrkow ! 145seemed to be in a hurry, yet he always managed to be everywhere. He knew everyoneand was aware of what was going on in the entire city.Fay vl was an unusual kind of soldier. No one gave him any orders. His orders seemedto come from a higher authority. Nevertheless, he made sure that the “generals” did theirjobs. He supervised each and every one and did not relax until everyone in theorganization accomplished whatever they undertook to do or what Fay vl thought theyshould be doing.At the time that I was coopted by the staff of Unzer Tsaytung, an embittered Yerubelhad already ceased contributing his rhyming “felyatonen.” Abraham Eli Rosenthal hadalso withdrawn during the past year. It seemed that Unzer Tsaytung was going to closeup shop. But Fayvl was on the alert. When the generals fall, the soldier takes command.Unzer Tsaytung continued to appear.On Sundays, Fayvl would begin to remind me that the paper must be ready forFriday, and on Wednesday afternoons he moved into my house and did not leave untilall the material, including my editorial for the new issue, was in his hands.The same thing happened on the last day before the beginning of the great disaster.On that Friday, September 1,1939,1 left my apartment in the morning for work, as I didevery day. I never saw it again. I also never saw the last issue of Unzer Tsaytung, whichappeared that Friday, and I never got to see my editorial. I would give a great deal toknow what nonsense I wrote in the final hour before the catastrophe hit us.I also never saw Fayvl Shteinberg again. Nor did I ever hear from him again. Now,after so many years, I read witnesses’ accounts that Fayvl Shteinberg provided secretunderground literature to the small ghetto and the “block.” He never stopped carryingout the orders of his “higher authority.”He was the loyal soldier to the very end.HeidimConjunctions in the Past TenseBen Giladi—New YorkOne of these days, I shall have to take pen in hand and write a thousand stories aboutmy boyhood and my home town....What I remember vividly about those years, just before the Holocaust war, are thesights and sounds of the “ Yidn Gass.” I remember the yards of the tenements, the smallorthodox congregations and, most of all, the tiny neighborhood stores. I remember allthose places where life moved on in colorful simplicity.At the grocery of Pinkchas Tillis on “Yidn Gass,” the piquant fragrances of spicesand dried prunes would send my senses reeling. Garlic garlands hung from the nails andhuge, open sacks were filled with beans, barley, sugar, salt, and rice. I would walkaround, not only smelling the foods but visualizing the places from which they hadcome—^a multiple lesson in geography.I loved to go to “Toltsa’s” bakery. All the years that have passed have not dissipatedthe memory of the heart-warming aroma of the fresh-baked bread and rolls that mademy mouth water. There was a small, hut-like store near the “Strava” bridge that waspacked with vegetables, greens, fruits and pickles. The owner, a short, heavyset woman,had the flattest nose I had ever seen; as you might guess, people called her “DiePlatzinose.”Questioning the price was standard procedure: “How much is this one?” “Threegroshen.” “Okay, I will take the other one for two groshen.”“Fair trade” meant that you never paid the asking price. When one woman wascaught shoplifting, the merchant did not press charges. “Just pay for the item and wewill forget what happened.” With tears of gratitude running down her face, she squeezedhis hand, sobbing, “I don’t know why I did it! I will be glad to pay for it! But not at yourprices, you crook, you!”A real treat was a visit to the stationery stores of Mr. Okrent or Mr. Wald. If therewas money in one’s pocket one could buy the most desirable school supplies.There were all kinds of men cruising the streets. A ragman carried a burlap sack onhis back and sang out, “Szmaty—^alte zakchen.” Another one chanted, “Handel, handel,handel.” There were music men, too. Sometimes a man played or sang in the street or atenement backyard. Soft-hearted Mamas would wrap a coin in a piece of paper and throwit out to them. The artist would stop the performance, pick up the coin, bow to expressthanks and continue. I still remember some hit songs from this era, such as “OiMadagascar” or “ Abbisynia.” The most popular song, however, was “Remember Capri.”In our house in Piotrkow—No. 13 Gamcarska Street—there was a little synagoguecalled “Hessed shel Emmeth” (Benevolence and Truth). On Sabbath, just before theevening, the congregation would sit around a long table for the closing Sabbath meal(Shalosh Seudoth). The men sang table chants and ate “chale,” a piece of herring, carp146Conjunctions in the Past Tense / 147The Staro-Warszawska Street (Yidn Gass) in perspective.or even meat. The food was provided by a noble woman named Rivkeleh, who lived ina second-floor apartment overlooking the front. People called her “meshugeh” (crazy).She spent all the money she received from her rich children on charity. She also provided“chale” and bread for the “Beth Lechem” society. They distributed the goodies to thepoor from the only brick-built, all-year-round static “Sukka,” which was the pride of ourlandlord, Hertzkeh Gutkind.On holidays, it was always a thrill to watch the four wings of the roof open and thento eat a delicious meal inside.Some very strange individuals came for the Sabbath meal, which was probably theonly substantial meal they had all week. The most memorable character was called“Eisl.” He was a slender man with a little black beard, long earlocks and shiny eyes. Hismission in life was to visit every garbage dump in the Jewish quarter and to look forpieces of paper written in the holy language in order to give them a decent burial. Hesalvaged prayer books and every scrap of paper with a Hebrew letter on it. He spokesoftly and had a large aura of holiness around him. No one ever tried to poke fun at thisremarkable man.Then there was “Sender a Needle,” who got infuriated whenever the word “needle”was mentioned. Apparently, this was his weakest point.Shaye Pukatz was a stoutish man dressed in an old orthodox coat with the ritualfringes outside. On late Friday afternoons, he roamed the “Yidn Gass,” wooden hammerin hand, knocking on walls and reminding merchants to close their stores before theSabbath.148 / A TALE OF ONE CITYOne man was called “Mendele Shmeck Taback.” He constantly approached peopleasking for a little dab of this nose-tickling substance.“Awremele der Wasser Treger” (the water carrier) supplied this necessary liquid tothe houses without a running water system. All week long, the wooden carrier on hisback and two heavy buckets attached, he strolled from a pump to houses carrying water.On the Sabbath, the bent figure would appear at the door of the congregation. He worehis best clothes and a bright smile on his usually impassive face, which indicated thatthis must have been a happy moment in his life.The man conducting the ceremonies inside was called “Reb Leibele.” He wassurrounded by pious, poor people who chanted “Zmiroth” and unraveled the mysteriesof the Torah. And while they sang, the first stars came out and the Sabbath was over. Anew week had begun. The lamps were lit, the evening prayers said and, as “Reb Leibele”said grace over the wine, the men held their fingers near the candle flame and smelleda box of “B’sumim” to ensure a prosperous new week. The shtibel was filled with theodor of burning wax, blessed spices and an atmosphere of wonder and miracles.Youth passed quickly for us. Our minds are charged with vivid memories of the onlyplace on earth where we experienced the greatest thrill of all—our childhood and ouryouth.Therefore, one of these days, I shall have to take pen in hand and write a thousandstories about my boyhood and home town....New BulletinPeretz StreetMaria Migus-ParisA street, it seems to me, like so many streets of Polish cities. Poor, neglected, it waslocated in the center of the heart of the Jewish quarter. She cradled the poor houses inher arms, as a loving mother, and felt the joy and pain of its inhabitants.She would have had so much to tell of her long life—of Jewish poverty and want,of Jewish heroism, bustle and struggle—and how her arms once nestled the illegalBundist “Birzhe” before Czarist times.This street was not very long. It contained only a few dozen houses. At its borderwas a girls’ school, named for the Jewish commandant of the Polish liberation struggleagainst the Czar, Berek Yoselevitch; it later became the building which housed theHebrew “gimnazjum” and, in the Ghetto, the Jewish hospital. Across, the slaughterhousefor fowl. At the junction of the “YiddisheGas” porters would stand, their loins girdedwith rope, waiting for their services to be purchased. A little further on were the “richer”porters who could already afford hand-trucks. Across were traders of old things. Fromhere there rang out to all the city’s courts the elongated sounds of “Shmattes.” Old shoesand clothes waited for customers.Across the small bridge, over the Strawa Stream, troubled women and youngchildren, who had forsaken their schools in order to help provide support were sellingtheir wares, which consisted of damaged apples, pears, plums and green vegetables.In summertime there was a distant fragrance coming from the forest, together withblack and red berries. Groups of pranksters ran about in ragged clothes, barefoot andwith discolored lips and blackened teeth because berries were very cheap. In the web ofthe total ambiance, there came a rhythmic beat from the cobblers, as though from anaccordion, locksmiths’ and metalsmiths’ hammers and the sewing machines, interwovenwith interrupted strains of songs. The cobbler’s awl and thread, plane, shears and irontook the upper hand. Thus the Jewish workers, bent over their worktables, sent, throughthe windows and into the world, their longing for freedom, their readiness to fight, whichrekindled a flame in their extinguished eyes.It only became quiet here late at night. Exhausted from a day’s labor, some withearnings, some without, they dragged themselves home, where a shriveled wife, a hungrychild waited. Together, in the light of a dim kerosene lamp, they ate their meager mealand laid their weary bones on a straw-filled sack until dawn once again forced them out.The houses on the street were low; a few had collapsed. The tallest house was onestory high with a skylight where a chunk of gray sky peeked in, but seldom a ray of sun.There were narrow, unpaved courtyards, where Jewish children wove their hopes anddreams.How different the street appeared with the arrival of “Shabbat.” Together with the“in shul-klapn,” a majestic stillness took over. Trade disappeared, the sewing machines149150 / A TALE OF ONE CITYand the workshops were silenced. Candles were lit, like stars in the sky. Groups ofchildren, sparkled with their shampooed hair, like birch trees after a rain. Jews withneatly combed beards and “taleisim” under their arms, headed with measured steps,either to the shul or to their shtibely the youth headed to their party halls, some of themto learn how to respond to the revolution, others to dream of a land where palm treesgrew and the Dead Sea rolled.On Saturday afternoon, a soft “nigun” from “zmirot” and “tsena u-Rena” strolledabout saying “Today we rest, today we don’t worry!”Until Sunday awakened, and the new week raised its head and chased the residentsto seek sustenance. Thus, life continued in the very heart of the Jewish quarter inPiotrkow, on the most Jewish of all the Jewish streets, which later bore the proud nameof our great writer, I.L. Peretz.Izkor BookPeretz Street with the Strawa Stream in the center.City StereotypesYakov Leber—TivonOnce, every city and town in Poland had its characters, at whom the people pokedfun, thereby gladdening the sad moods of the inhabitants. Under the conditions in whichthey lived, their daily life was really difficult; in addition, they were surrounded by“good” neighbors, who, on more than one occasion, sought an opportunity to findhappiness at the cost of a beard or a back. This, of course, was the time of the Russiansduring World War I until the outbreak of the Hitler catastrophe.Toybele Mitn Lokshn Bret they called her. A soul that “was not all there,” she wouldcavort each day in front of the Polish barracks across from the Jewish hospital and shoutdirty words through the windows to the Russian soldiers. This would delight the soldiersand, as a reward, they would hand out or throw through the window some bread andsometimes even cigarettes. At night, she would steal into the women’s section of theshul and spend the night there.Sender a Nodi lived on Yidn Gas, where 2Layontshkovski had his herring store. Hecame from a very honorable family in our city, the Horowitz’s, but, unfortunately, hewas not totally in possession of his mind. I could never find out the reason, but whensomeone showed him a pin or a needle, he would yell and chase the children and wasready to “tear them to pieces.”Der Shtumer Vove was mute and deaf, but if anyone wanted to have some fun, theywould give him three kopeks (Russian money). Then he would let them speak to him,and when a pretty girl passed and they said, “Vove, give her a kiss,” nothing could stophim. He would kiss her so violently that she, alas, ran home in great embarrassment.Yitschok Bas was the father of Wolf Platow, who was later the owner of a largecarpentry shop as well as the movie house. Yitschok Bas earned his living as anorgan-grinder; a parrot would stand on his organ and, for three kopeks, would choose alucky ticket for the servant girls. They were actually the best customers and alwayswanted to know who would save them from their difficult destiny and their “balebostes”’iron pots, or who would be their prince, whose white horse would take them away todistant places. They could see him every Tuesday and Friday on market days, with hisorgan, among the peasants of the neighboring villages.Kichele they called him. He had a pitifully little shop near the “Strawa.” Since therewere several “cheyders” in that area, the children would come to him to purchase a rollor a piece of candy and pay him for it with three or five Kopeks. He would always takethe money, but never wanted to give them their change. Instead, he would give them acookie.On Yidn Gas, where my uncle Henoch Korman lived, there was a cheyder. The“melamed” was named Leybush Koze. He only taught “Chumash” to the boys. As washis wont, he would fall asleep at the table. One day, we wanted to “teach” the rabbi a151152 / A TALE OF ONE CITYlesson. We brought pieces of rope from our home and, when he fell asleep, we tied hisfeet to the bench. Then we took his whip, with which he often let us have it, and smearedit with garlic; then we placed it into the “Kalch” oven, where the heat dried it out well,and we returned it to the table. When the Rabbi awoke and couldn’t rise from the bench,he became angry, grabbed the whip, and began to strike the first boy sitting next to him.The leather tongs began to fly in all directions.New BulletinThe cemetery “Watchman” before the warA Letter From Ben-GurionElazar Prashker—JerusalemA Gift to the Research of the History of Piotrkow JewryOur friend Michael Shidlowski has given us several documents for the Piotrkowarchives. Among them is a letter written by David Ben-Gurion on July 6, 1933 andaddressed to the committee of the Eretz Israel League in Piotrkow. Michael Shidlowskiwas, at the time, chairman of the League and Joshua Ziegelman its secretary.The letter takes us back to the time of the bitter interlude in the Zionist movementwhich preceded the 18th conference in Prague (Aug.-Sept. 1933). This was truly a periodthat would shape the future. In January of that year, Hitler had come to power inGermany. The Jewish communities in Israel suffered greatly after the anti-Zionist turnin British policy, which had begun in 1929 and had reached its culmination with thepublication of the ‘‘white book” of the labor government, headed by Lord Pasfield, in1930.Britain’s new anti-Zionist policy caused great divisions of opinion about which roadthe Zionist movement should take. Such divergences were heatedly debated during the17th congress in Basel.The Revisionists were extremists had remained outside Zionist administration. Asa result, their influence with the workers’ factions from “Mapai” and “HashomerHatzair” declined.In 1933 the poison of internal rivalry between the Socialist-Zionists and theRevisionists filtered through the entire Zionist enterprise of the diaspora. Jabotinskycalled for the dissolution of the Zionist organization. He asked that the rug be pulledfrom under its feet. There were heated arguments about which direction and policy oughtto be pursued. Some of these led to assassinations.Only six days after the arrival of Ben-Gurion’s letter in Piotrkow, Haim Arlozorofwas murdered; this climactic event, occurring, as it did, in a tense, hate-filled atmosphere,caused all havoc to break loose within the movement.This background clearly explains Ben-Gurion’s words about a “a campaign of lifeand determination, the battle for the destiny of Zionism.”Printed below, the letter is a document typical of Ben-Gurion. He wrote it in pencilon pages from one of the hundreds of his now-famous notebooks, and a copy of itremained with him. His spelling of the city name Warsaw (“Varsho”) is reminiscent ofhis particular pronunciation of words such as “ Americo” and “ Africo.” As no correctionshave been made, and as there is no attempt at grammatical precision, we can assume thatBen-Gurion wrote the letter in a rush. It is a clear, brisk letter and the Hebrew word “et”(“so favored”) by Ben-Gurion appears only once.At the time he wrote the Piotrkow letter, Ben-Gurion was the head of the united front153154 / A TALE OF ONE CITYof the labor movement in the Eretz Israel elections of the 18th Zionist conference. Thiswas the conference which was to determine the face of the Zionist movement, but thishardly prevented him from being concerned with the details of every small unit of themovement. In this case, the unit was our small town, Piotrkow. Such attention makesBen-Gurion’s letter a valuable historical document for us Piotrkow Jews.The LetterWarsaw, June 7,1933To the League Committee in Piotrkow:Dear Friends:I received an answer to the shekel questionnaire from Piotrkow, signed by ourcolleague M. Shidlowski, and I was ashamed to read it. In your town there are 68 PoaleZion C.S. members, 30 Hitachdut members, 86 Freiheit members (of whom 64 arebogrim [those who have finished their youth organization training for life in the newlyrebuilt land of Israel]), 280 in Hashomer Hatzair (45 seniors), 20 in Gordonia (14seniors), 159 in Hehalutz, with 28 in the Hachshara [preparation for settling in the landof Israel], 170 in Hapoel (60 of whom are apolitical), 367 in the League of whom 85 areapolitical, which totals about seven hundred persons (not counting Hehalutz, who mightbe party members, and the youth organizations), and you are proposing to sell only 500shekels? Our colleague Shidlowski further writes that a financial assistance in the sumof 300 zloty was given to you! The members, not counting their parents, should give atleast 1,500 shekels, and, after all, in your town you have also 400 craftsmen who can bewon over to labor Zionist in the land of Israel. What is the meaning of this delinquentnegligence? In most towns the members increase their quotas five-six fold, and you cando the same if you fulfill your duty out of a sense of realizing that this time it is not anelection campaign but a struggle for life and decision, crucial for the survival of Zionism,of the workers’ union (the Histadrut), and the pioneer immigration!Sell the shekels among all the parents of members in the youth organizations; imposea minimum of 60 groshen on every member of Freiheit, Gordonia and Hashomer Hatzairwho cannot vote, for the shekel fund; sell the shekels to the craftsmen. You have toguarantee a minimum of 1,500 shekels for the bloc of labor Zionism.I am awaiting your answer and I expect more encouraging news.Fulfill your duty!With fraternal greetings,(signed)David Ben-GurionHeidim/ 155e-Tia n-^t, ^i, ii/'.'jlkl>^ sJi 5'i!i nwTi s3)/ #./ fo» ?L?| ii(( K-a^Kf yA^<^•^(0 5^1 \Jlh J-lthfn ufhVi\Hh >\lV\'!lTll ,>;^)l3! -^«^'''l',-«, I\Jl^^J^ nVri £} iv' ►/'3's£s ^ lf'(i!^ /'^Iji' >)')•>P-H V"’ *^1'"'^b/^ ^ V''»■)''<—« ’^J'tls,-) rio tb-b >5'0>’'irvt Cl yffg)n,_ ^>b v; w'n-. J^ VHT' b • l| ^ Mq/>' jJinfll 'rj*-? ^i'!t-»r *Vi)/’I. 1 I 'If{>-if~ pjh^tQ'i <)yfy. j. ACpt) j*/l<^ A iJj/!)tf»9j<^4 H%|^ 4' >«* u e .M b m I ^lyn’ii4'i i. /rf ^1^1 j^j ^ W|4i ^4,'^^ * ‘I' li, I# t /i !51., ^4 ^JN ITtf'l ftfn;'^ 4^1 /-//fi 14^■ Vli!lt V[jb ft )/;^ rb 04;^* 'at. %!tl ^ ^ . T^ %ibi'1 ^ihC, /.i;5 ti pfV lifi u"\b'bpj /r»-0 ti AJ\|'f^ti'd hutj yyu, Jrt 7^ p^-/rt K,*s# - 'Hi /./M fw ^yv^ hJ'iz \ J\liAbi/^n niiOv',The original letter of Ben-Gurion.Ben-Gurion during his visit to the “Migdal Or” (Tower of Light) house in Haifa in 1961. Onhis left is Pola Gelade-Glatter of Piotrkow. She was then the manager of this house for theblind. They are surrounded by the blind inhabitants of this noble institution.Leopold LewinThe famous Polish poet and writer, Leopold Lewin, was bom in Piotrkow. Hegraduated the Warsaw University in 1931, majoring in Law and Journalism. He survivedWorld War II in the USSR, where he served as a Polish diplomat and later fought theNazis when he joined the Polish Army.After the war, he held various, important editorial positions serving a number ofmajor Polish newspapers. He was also the Secretary General of the Polish LiterarySociety.Leopold Lewin, who for the last 45 years lives in Warsaw, wrote poetry all his lifeand is widely acclaimed in Poland. He also translates from Russian and Germanliterature.In 1988, Lewin visited Israel for the first time. He immortalized this profoundexperience in yet another volume of precious poems about the Promised and Holy Land.Bom and raised in Piotrkow, the prolific writer fondly recalls his home town andhis young years. Some of the poems express his precious feelings shared, undoubtedly,by many of us. Here is one of them:PIOTRKOWIANALEOPQtSD LErrjvc^Nie chcialbym przyjsc na ^wiat we Frankfurcie nad MenemI mieszkac w miniaturze stolicy — Weimarze;Nie chcialbym przyjsc na ^wiat we wsi MichajlowskojeI mieszkac nad kanalem w zlotym Petersburgu;Lecz chcialbym przyjsc na ^wiat w Piotrkowie Trybunalskim,Gdzie w zaulkach Starego Miasta, na Rycerskiej,Na Trybunalskim rynku, na Grodzkiej, ZamkowejRozgrywaly si§ sceny wzi^te zywcem z Troi —Ich sil§ nap^dow% pasja i nami^tno^d.Bitwy klanow, gonitwy, zasadzki, porwania,Napady nienawisci§, zemst^ dyktowaneI najazdy, ktorymi kierowala milo^c.Tu kazda sieh, piwnica sekrety odslania,Godne homeryckiego patosu i mocy.Tak, chcialbym przyjsc na ^wiat w Piotrkowie TrybunalskimI stad wyruszyc na podboj Kolchidy.LEOPOLD LEWIN156LeopoldLewin ! 157* * *I would not like to be born in Frankfurt am MainOr to live in the miniature Weimar Republic;I would not like to be born in Michajlowskoje domainOr live on the gold, Petersburg channel—^so unique;I would like to greet the world in Piotrkow Trybunalski,Where, among Rycerska, through the city alleys.On Trybunalski Rynek, Grodzka and ZamkowaAncient Trojan images—^sounding like reveilles—Their driving power—desires, lust and passion.Fights of klans, ambushes, chases and abductions.Assaults and vendettas, hatred and compassionAnd raids motivated by love and seductions.Here, every cellar, hallway, beneath and above.Unveils the Homeric-like epics full of pathos.I would like to be born in Piotrkow TrybunalskiAnd from here set out for the conquest of Colchis.^LeopoldLewinTranslated from Polish by Ben GiladiHeidimNo. 25, 1984The founders of the Jewish Library in Piotrkow in the early twenties. From the left:Leopold (Lolek) Lewin, Yakov Pais, Hela Horowicz-Staszewska, Shimon Blausztajnand Eva Blausztajn.1 Colchis is the mythological land of Medea, the wife of Jason, the leader of the Argonauts, whom sheassisted in obtaining the Golden Fleece.THE TRACKOF THE STORMThe outside walls of the Great Synagogue after the war.The Seven Fires of HellThe Destruction of PiotrkowNaphtali Lau-Lavie—JerusalemHell is above the firmament. Some say it is behind the mountainsof darkness.—^The Talmud, Tamid 84Hell will cease, but they will not cease.—^The Talmud, Rosh Hashana 17The earthly hell of our times was not hidden behind mountains or darkness. It foundus in our very homes, in the midst of civilized, twentieth-century Europe, and made uspass through its seven gates of fire. When this hell ceased, those who had crossed itsportals were no more, except for a few embers that had been spared and brought forthto tell what their eyes had seen and their ears had heard. Fragments of their words, retoldor in writing, are now appended to the scroll in which the destruction of the city ofPiotrkow is recounted.The facts attesting to this truth, revealed by these few rescued embers, have not beenobscured by the rivers of tears of the witnesses in their personal accounts. Theseterrifying facts, deeply engraved in the consciousness of all who saw and heard, shouldserve as eternal testimony for future generations, so that they may know, informed bythe original and authentic source, of the era of the horrors that visited humankind at thepinnacle of its civilization.It was at the time of the historic trial of Adolf Eichmann in Jerusalem that wegathered testimony of the destruction of our city. By day we sat opposite the judges’bench and heard the horrors described from the witness stand. By night we edited thetranscripts of these agonies of the survivors of Piotrkow. They took on a palpable formwhen retold: Before my eyes these accounts animated the dry bones that had beenpresented during the trial. They made this reality tangible to us and gave identity to thenation’s anonymous victims. Thus they are presented in this book—through the personaof the city of slaughter, Piotrkow, and in the image of its Jewish inhabitants.Our memory was refreshed by those details of events that had sunk deep into ourconsciousness. They flashed before our eyes like a motion picture, as we had witnessedthem from a hidden comer of my father’s house, which had served for a time as thesetting of events, and as we had experienced them in the flesh when tom, with the othersurvivors, from the ruins of Jewish Piotrkow. We now retell them briefly in the order inwhich they occurred.161162 / A TALE OF ONE CITY1939_The BlowIt was late August, 1939. The warm, late-summer sun spread its rays. We—thousands of schoolboys—hurried back from summer vacation in order to resume oureducation. While riding the express train from Carpathia to Piotrkow, I witnessed scenesthe likes of which I had never seen before. Wailing women and girls crowded theplatforms of the stations between Krakow and my destination; they were parting withtheir husbands, fathers, and sons. As the train slowed, clusters of disheveled young menleaped into the doorways of the cars and clung to the railings. “There’s gunpowder inthe air,” whispered an old Jew who sat with me in my compartment.We reached the Piotrkow station after a ten-hour journey that normally took onlyfive. There, too, I witnessed similar outpourings of raw emotion. I headed for home,oblivious to the raucous crowd of men clutching suitcases and wooden crates on theother side of the station. When I arrived, however, the greeting I received wasnot the cheerful one I had expected. Beneath my father’s smile and my mother’scaress, their concern about the future showed through—a concern that proved tobe justified.The school year began two days later, on Friday, September 1. The principals of theJewish schools decided to postpone the resumption of studies until Sunday, but even inthe public schools few students reported. Thus, granted an extra day of summer vacation,I went out to amuse myself in town. The mischievous nature of youth had not beendissipated by the depression and tension that were felt everywhere. Who imagined thatthis would be our last breath of freedom in this city?As I stood on the steps of the Beit Midrash on Jerozolimska (Jerusalem) Street,marveling at the antics of one of the town eccentrics, an army vehicle streaked by, fullof soldiers shouting, “War!”We began to appreciate the significance of this cry fifteen minutes later, when Ireached the center of Stara-Warszawska Street, known as the “Jewish street” ofPiotrkow. I found the Jews there seized with fear, for a radio news broadcast hadinformed them that the border town of Wielun had been attacked. The sirens began towail at midday, and people hurried to doorways and cellars for shelter. A chance bombthat fell on the outskirts of the city caused slight damage. That day, the first day of WorldWar II, passed without bloodshed in Piotrkow.Only a few people ventured out of their houses for Sabbath evening services thatnight. The synagogue was dark and desolate, as were most of the shtieblach. Hardly aglimmer of light could be seen in the city streets. People strained their ears to hear thedrone of the steel birds that spread terror throughout Piotrkow. On our street, PilsudskiStreet, troops of infantry filed by singing marching songs. Slightly encouraged, I ranoutside to verify that Poland’s armed forces were indeed ready to repel the Nazi invasion.Their dismal appearance only compounded my depression: only some of the soldierswere armed, and many were barefoot.A night of fear and anticipation passed. Some predicted that the allies wouldintervene quickly to staunch the conflagration. Others feared a second “Munich” atThe Seven Fires of Hell ! 163Poland’s expense. Still others appreciated the situation for what it was, but not the fullimpact of its cruelty.Piotrkow was dealt a convincing blow the next day, Shabbat morning, when severalsquadrons of Stukas bombers emptied their bays on the downtown area and claimed thefirst casualties. Scores of people on the main street, Slowackiego Street, were buriedunder the rubble. First-aid teams loaded the casualties onto stretchers and, for lack ofany means of transportation, carried them to the general hospital, far from the site of theattack. For the first time I saw crushed human bodies, with their intestines exposed andfragments of their limbs dragging behind. It was then, too, that the Jews of Piotrkowcontributed their first victims: Romek Zaks, injured in his home by shrapnel, and LolekEpstein, standing near the new railroad station.The streets were strewn with broken glass. Few p)eople dared to peek out of theirdoorways. The deadly enemy aircraft continued to circle over the city before heading totheir other destinations. Occasionally, the sputter of a single machine gun could be heard,sending intermittent gunfire in the direction of moving targets overhead.That afternoon, a Jewish soldier frantically burst into our house. He was stationedat an anti-aircraft artillery near our house, equipped with a few medium-range machineguns and nothing else. The sporadic coughs that came from there reminded us of theexistence of the anti-aircraft defense.“The war’s over for me,” the soldier shouted hysterically. Before we could size himup, he told us that a Polish reconnaissance plane had been downed over the city a fewmoments ago; his unit’s commanders held his p)osition resp)onsible for the mishap. Thesoldier felt that he had been victimized, turned into a scapegoat. Nor was he exaggerat-ingiabout an hour after we had fed him and sent him to a safe shelter, military gendarmesbegan combing the area in search of the “traitorous Jewish deserter.”On Saturday night, the situation in other parts of the country still unclear, a madscramble to flee Piotrkow began. Hundreds of Jews converged on our house, demandingto know what my father, the rabbi of the city. Rabbi Lau, would do. The only advice hecould offer was, “Hide for a moment until the furor is passed” (Isaiah 26:20), addingthat “Flight is the beginning of defeat” (Sotah 44).The4 affluent, who had procured suitable means of transportation, geared up for along journey and planned to migrate eastward, hoping that the Nazis advance would bearrested near the Russian border. Others doubted the possibility of any temporary refugefrom the deadly bombardments. The city exits were blocked; thousands of refugeesclogged the roads and dirt paths with hundreds of wagons, pulled by either horses orpeople. Most of them moved eastward, toward the nearby towns of Przyglow andSulejow. A few had given thought to their destination, but most wished only to flee thefocal point of fire in the city.In any case, the steel birds caught up with the refugees. On Monday afternoon,German planes swooped down on the masses who had taken shelter in the forest ofSulejow, strafing them with machine guns and other automatic weapons. Most of thevictims were Piotrkow Jews who had fled the city. Entire families were wiped out,including the elderly day an, Rabbi Jakob Glazer, and his daughter and grandson.Those who remained in Piotrkow and heard about the slaughter at Sulejow and saw164 / A TALE OF ONE CITYthe tongues of flame that had broken forth from the houses of that town preferred to seekshelter in the city. However, Piotrkow’s turn for aerial bombardment came two days afterthe devastation in Sulejow, before the Nazi ground forces had occupied the area. Betweenbombardments, residents hurried to the stores to restock their food supplies. Shortages werefelt in the very first days, after the frantic exodus on the eve of the war. Looting was rife.Civilian discipline was slack; hardly any policemen were seen. On rare occasions, Polisharmy units passed through the main street, some armed and in formation, heading for thefront, and others in disarray, the remnants of units now retreating to the interior of the country.The latter troops brought news of the entrenchment and rapid advance of the Germans, whohad broken through the front lines before the Poles could gird for resistance.Every day I stood at the door of my house and peered into the empty street, waitingfor future developments. Indeed, on Tuesday afternoon, September 5, a Civil Defenselookout spotted two motorcycles racing up Pilsudski Street from the direction of therailroad tracks. With their gray-green uniforms and unfamiliar steel helmets, the riderslooked like foreigners. When the house commander, an educated Gentile, saw them, hecried out, “It’s the Allies! The French and the British!”The news spread quickly. Many people rushed out of their cellars to witness thesaviors’ arrival. However, as soon as the motorcycles turned around the comer ofPilsudski and Jerozolimska Streets and passed by again, the identity of the “allies”became clear.The two motorcycles, the vanguard of the invading forces, were followed bycommand cars, trucks packed with Wehrmacht troops, and light armored vehicles.Soldiers fired indiscriminately. I saw my first victim of German gunfire: a Jew who hadsat with me in the cellar of the Radoshitzer Rebbe, Rabbi Yitzhak’l Finkler. The manpeered through the doorway and took a bullet through the heart.By the end of the next day, Piotrkow had been cleansed of its last pockets ofresistance; German garrison forces controlled the city. However, any lone shots fired ata German car at the comer of Jerozolimska and Zamkowa Streets were met with cmelretribution: the Germans decided to burn down the block of houses bounded byJerozolimska, Staro-Warszawska, Wspolna, and 2^mkowa Streets. All these homeswere occupied by Jews, and the Germans threatened to torch them with their occupantsinside.The warning was issued on Wednesday at noon, and all the inhabitants, who hadbeen afraid to put their heads out earlier, fled in panic with nothing but the clothes theywere wearing. Six of them were shot as they ran; several died of their wounds. Withinminutes, the Germans made good on their threat, igniting flames that took more thantwo nights to bum themselves out.Thus began a new era for the Jews of Piotrkow—the five-year period of Nazioccupation, which brought upon the world a terrible holocaust the likes of whichmankind had never known.1939-40—Plunder, Murder, and OrganizationChaos reigned in the city. Crowds thronged the stores, bakeries, and coal depots.The Seven Fires of Hell j 165forming lengthy queues. Even before the Germans unveiled their Jewish policy, Polishmobs vented their undisguised hatred for the Jews; they were among the first to drivehome the lesson of the new era. Anyone who “looked Jewish” was shoved out of thequeues. Whenever a German soldier passed by, Poles pointed at the unfortunate one andshouted “/wde,” showing the German, with unmistakable gestures, the kinds of treatmentthey had in mind. Jewish stores and businesses were routinely vandalized, and Polishlooters directed the Germans to these locations in hopes of sharing the spoils.Corpses that had been killed as the Germans entered Piotrkow accumulated in thegutters. The many Jews among them were gathered up by their relatives and hauled onhand trucks to the cemetery. The burial society people had not yet returned to the city,and the only person available to prepare the corpses for burial was the gravedigger, RebDavid (Tetlok) Nutkievicz. He cried out for assistance, and Rabbi Lau and several otherJews came out to the cemetery and began to bury the scores of dead.The Kehila offices were still closed. Most of the community council and its staffhad fled during the bombardment. Those who remained, or had succeeded in returning,kept themselves far from public view. The Germans, however, joked for an officialJewish address. The city was under the command of a Wehrmacht Oberst (Colonel)named Brandt, who, having been appointed town major, made initial contact with theJews by visiting Rabbi Lau at home.Two days before Rosh Hashana 5700 (September, 1939), a green Volkswagen,already a Gestapo trademark, pulled up at our house. Three high-ranking SS officersstepped through the gate, climbed the stairs, and pounded on the door. When I hurriedlypushed the door open, I was surprised by their politeness and courtesy as they asked tospeak with the “Chief Rabbi,” They waited in the vestibule for a few moments and thenentered the study, saluting crisply in a manner quite unlike the sloppy style typical ofthe Nazis. Then they removed their hats and turned to the rabbi.Rabbi Lau remained seated in his armchair, forcing himself to look calm. He askedthem to sit down, displaying a businesslike coolness. After an initial exchange ofsentences, the Nazis pulled out three chairs near the desk and seated themselves.“We have come to you as the ‘elder of the Jews’ in this city. We wish to establish abasis for cooperation between the authorities and the Jewish population,” one of themtold the rabbi. Then, without pausing, he presented his demands. The rabbi was to presentthem with a city map marked with the “Jewish neighborhoods,” a list of the membersof the community council, its staff, and their functions, and a record of community assets.Silence reigned. Then, carefully measuring his words in fluent German, the rabbiexplained that he, as rabbi, was given his position by a Jewish public that sought hisspiritual and instructional leadership, not by the authorities as a “communal elder.The Germans smiled at themselves and, except for complimenting the rabbi for hisbeautiful Viennese German, did not interrupt him. They stood up, bowed, and left, havingmade their first official contact with the Jews of Piotrkow.For Rosh Hashana, the Jews readied themselves for prayers in the great synagogue,the midrash;' and the shtiblech, but the rabbi advised them to pray in privategatherings. In the auditorium of the Dobroczynnosc orphanage, holiday services wereheld with the participation of the rabbi and a congregation of some 300, led by Cantor166 / A TALE OF ONE CITYReb Baruch Kamieniecki (later martyred) and several members of his large choir. Thefirst day of the festival passed quietly. About thirty Jews chose to pray in the greatsynagogue. On the second day, however, the Germans conducted a manhunt in the city,abducting men for forced labor. In the midst of this operation, they burst into theAmshinover shtibel, interrupting one of the improvised minyanim and seizing thirty ofthe hasidim as they stood in silent devotion, wrapped in their prayer shawls. The victimswere herded into a truck and hauled away. The Jews were panic-stricken.Several of the kidnaped men returned that evening. Their captors had humiliatedthem, subjected them to severe beatings, and ordered them to scrub latrines with theirprayer shawls. Another group, including Rav Baruch Asher Nodelman—^head of theBeit Yosef Yeshiva—^had been sent to a concentration camp in Germany. These menreturned about a month later; one of them, R. Peretz Prashker, had died along the way.As the morning service at the orphanage drew to a close, a whisper spread amongthe worshippers: two German officers had been seen slipping into the courtyard. I hadjust come up from the cellar of the building, where several trunks containing Torahscrolls and synagogue ornaments belonging to the community of Lipno on the Germanborder were hidden. I was clutching two silver finials, used to embellish the atzei hayim(wooden supports of a Torah scroll), and an ornamental silver breastplate. We were tomount these on the Torah scroll from which we would read. The Germans entered theauditorium and looked at the objects. One of them, who seemed to recognize me fromhis visit earlier, asked when the prayers would be finished. After hearing the answer,they left. Late that afternoon the two reappeared at our house and offered the rabbi a“deal”: the Nazis would stop kidnapping Jews for forced labor, and the rabbi, or hisagent, would promise to provide 1,000 able-bodies Jews a day for physical work.This was an enticing offer, for the kidnappings were causing great suffering at thistime. Several men had paid with their lives in the course of the work and its hardships.Again, however, the rabbi asserted that he was not the authorities’ representativevis-^-vis the Jewish community.“But you will serve as the Jews’ representative vis-a-vis the authorities,” the Nazisordered.The conversation lasted about twenty minutes, long enough for the Nazis to beginto display their “erudition” in Jewish matters. Nothing, however, came of it.The day after Rosh Hashana, people came running to the rabbi and told him that theNazis had brought huge piles of wood to the plaza in front of the synagogue; surely theywere preparing to torch the building. As soon as this information had arrived, a Polishpoliceman appeared and presented the rabbi with a written order summoning him to theCity Hall. The last time he had visited the municipality, the rabbi had met with the mayor,Stefan Fischer. Now Fischer stood aside. Facing the rabbi was a Nazi, his chest spangledwith decorations, who introduced himself as Oberbuergermeister Hsms Drexel.This proved to be a short getting-acquainted meeting with the new ruler of Piotrkow,whose chief concern was the Jews. Drexel got to the point, wasting no time on courtesiesor protocol. He seated himself at his desk, offered his guest an aromatic cigar, and, inthe midst of a monologue about the hardships of war, ordered the rabbi to remit acollective tax (“contribution”) of 25 thousand German marks. Drexel left no room forThe Seven Fires of Hell ! 167dispute about the rules of cooperation between the authorities and the Jews, nor did hesuggest that the rabbi act as a representative. Instead, he presented the facts and allowedthe rabbi to bargain. In the course of these negotiations, he reduced his demand by half,that is, to 25 thousand zlotys, and agreed to give the Jews two weeks to raise the moneyrather than one.The rabbi took the opportunity to ask Drexel to ensure the safety of the synagogue.The Nazi smiled cynically: “You’re facing difficult times, you Jews. Why should youworry about things like that?”Drexel, however, was not the only boss in town. A staff of security police and S.D.sat at 14 Legiondw (Bankowa) Street, where the Gestapo maintained a torture detailunder one Ditmann, who was subsequently killed in a Polish attack. One of the membersof this unit was a tall, thin, dark-skinned sergeant named Putzalla, who stalked the Jewsof Piotrkow like a nightmare throughout his years of service there, during which he rosesteadily in the ranks. The senior Gestapo agent, Altmann, and another jackbooted soldiernamed Miller had their offices in the same building. Gestapo agents from elsewhere,representing the “Jewish section” 4B4, occasionally visited this headquarters, deliveringinstructions and directives concerning the Jews.The Wehrmacht town major took up location in another house, on Third of MayBoulevard. This unit was headed by Oberst Brandt, the only German who showed amodicum of human understanding. After leaving Drexel’s office, the rabbi went toBrandt, who clarified that the wood heaped next to the synagogue was meant for theconstruction of outhouses and barracks for Polish prisoners of war, who were being heldin prison camps out of town. No harm would befall the synagogue, Brandt promised,adding that the rabbi might empty the holy ark of its Torah scrolls. By the time the rabbireached the synagogue, however, he found scores of Jewish and Polish workers alreadyremoving the furnishings, the benches, the reading table, and the bookcases, hurling allof it into the street. They carried the Torah scrolls into the belt midrash next door.That evening, a group of Jews broke into the beit midrash and transferred some sixtyTorah scrolls to the bathhouse, quite a distance away. Thence the scrolls were broughtto the cemetery and temporarily interred among the ohalim of the tzaddikim. Sub-sequently the men returned, pack d the scrolls in wooden chests lined with panes ofglass, and buried them in the earth.On the night when the Jews slipped into the beit midrash and removed the Torahscrolls, the wood in the square in front of the synagogue disappeared. Logic suggeststhat local Poles had stolen it for use as fuel. The Germans, however, construed the actionas Jewish sabotage, arguing that the Jews had sought to prevent the construction oflatrines and the desecration this would cause the synagogue.The consequences were not long in coming. Two days before Yom Kippur, ten localJewish dignitaries were arrested at home and imprisoned in the Gestapo cellar. Rumorhad it that the Germans would kill them on the very day of Yom Kippur. The rabbiappealed to Drexel, to Brandt, and to a German pastor with whom he had contacts beforethe war. None of them were able, or wished, to lift a finger. Finally, the rabbi turned tosecurity police headquarters, where Ditmann explained that the ten Jews would behanged for sabotage.168 / A TALE OF ONE CITYPutzalla, however, displayed some willingness to bargain. He explained the diffi-culties encountered by his unit, which did not draw its supplies from the militarydepots.An acceptable quantity of Kolonialwareriy such as sugar cubes, cocoa, quality(South American) coffee, chocolate, and dried fruit, might be considered compensationfor the damage the Jews had caused, he asserted.To provide this “acceptable quantity,” the Jews were assessed a new “contribution”of a quarter million zlotys. Then, when they had already reached the door, Putzlalachanged his mind. He wanted cash, not goods, and he wanted it within three days. Drexel,however, was a businessman, who controlled the robbers’ mutual war chest. He agreedto give the Jews a week, even promising to free the ten guarantors before Yom Kippur.Affluent Jews were scarce in Piotrkow, the local community could not meet theterms.The morning before Yom Kippur, several young men participating in the organiza-tion of a ransom campaign, arranged by the rabbi in time for Kol Nidrei, presentedthemselves at the rabbi’s house. Every head of household had been dunned ten zlotysfor his family and another zloty per capita. Few worshippers had materialized at thatearly hour, however, and the amount collected was small. At the end of Yom Kippur, amessenger was sent to the Spielvogel-Szereszewski family in their Wola-Krzysztoporska estate. He returned with a sizable sum, but even this could not satisfythe robbers. A significant donation toward this “contribution” was provided by AvrahamNamirovsky, a Russian Jew, who had once spent four years in the prison in Piotrkowfor financial crimes. The rabbi, who habitually visited Jewish prisoners from time totime, knew Namirovsky, an educated man who had formerly owned large businesses.Namirovsky was one of many prisoners who had been freed at the outset of the war, andhe had reached the rabbi’s home in the thick of the German aerial bombardment. Usinghis own connections, Namirovsky succeeded in obtaining credit and made it possiblefor the rabbi to deliver the “contribution” to Drexel’s office the following day, the daybefore Succot. To haul the suitcases of cash, the rabbi was accompanied by his secretary,Mr. David Zachs, who now lives in the United States, and by myself.Drexel began with polite words—extraordinarily for him—expressing regret for thepointless sacrifices of the war. The rabbi turned in my direction and, his head at anoblique angle, whispered to Zachs in Hebrew, “I don’t have to listen to this mockery ofthe defenseless.” Then he lifted two cloth sacks, each marked with the sum of moneywithin. Much was still lacking. Drexel added up the sums and became furious. At thatvery moment, the rabbi pulled a small bag from his coat pocket and emptied its contentsonto the desk: gold jewelry, bracelets, earrings, necklaces, rings, gems, diamonds, andpearls.“This is all we were able to collect,” the rabbi said.The sight caused Drexel’s eyes to light up. With no further haggling, he raked thebooty into his desk drawer.Some of us thought this plunder would cause our situation to improve. The randomand deliberate murders that took place in subsequent days proved otherwise.On the Shabbat of hoi hamo*ed Succot, as we sat in our succa, hidden in ourcourtyard, three black-garbed SS men came to the door and asked for the rabbi. WhenThe Seven Fires of Hell ! 169he approached them, they seized him by his clothes and dragged him into the street,where, shouldering their bayoneted rifles, they made him walk in the middle of the roadtoward the Landsrat in the Starostwo building on Slowackiego Street. There the townand district commander, Kreishauptmann Busch, had his headquarters. Busch had hisown policy on the Jews. The city was in a state of panic. A large crowd gathered outsidethe building, anxious to know what had happened.The rabbi returned an hour later in severe pain, his back covered with bruises.The SS men had brought him to their commander, a new figure in town and anunderling of SS General Katzmann, who was in charge of the area at this time. How, heasked, had the rabbi collected some of the “contribution” money from the Wola-Krzysztoporska family, whom the Germans had dunned for a special remittance forthemselves? After being rebuked for this, the rabbi was freed, but two black-garbed SSmen waited for him outside and pounded him with clubs.The rabbi was ordered to stay in bed and allow his back to heal. On Simchat Torah,however, the Germans summoned him again, this time to Putzalla’s office. The summonshad been sent in writing from the security police and S.D. commander in Piotrkow toRabbi Moshe Chaim Lau, “the elder of the Jews of Piotrkow.” At this meeting, Ditmannand Putzalla announced that the Jews were henceforth under curfew between 6:00 p.m.and 6:00 a.m.In the meantime, the new sovereigns began to coalesce in the occupied country,which they divided into four districts: Warsaw, Krakow, Lublin, and Radom. Piotrkowbelonged to the Radom district.One of the three SS officers who had first visited the rabbi before Rosh Hashanapresented himself at his house on October 14, presenting the governor of the Radomdistrict. Dr. Karl Lasch. He was accompanied by two locals, Putzalla and an SS officerfrom Katzman’s unit, representing the Landstrat.The rabbi lay ill in his bed. The three Nazis sat down around him, as if paying aget-well visit. The officer from Radom, evidently the highest-ranking of the group,informed the rabbi of plans to establish an “area of Jewish residence” in the city, i.e., aghetto. Would the Jewish institutions of Piotrkow be so kind as to cooperate in theexchange of Jewish residences outside the ghetto for non-Jewish residences within theenclosure? The Nazis also disclosed an edict handed down by the head of the General-gouvernement, Dr. Hans Frank, under which every Jew was to adorn his right arm witha white ribbon ten centimeters wide, with a blue Star of David, one centimeter thick andeight centimeters in diameter, positioned in the center. Would the rabbi, under hispersonal signature, please order the local Jews to comply?That would be difficult, the rabbi answered. Several days earlier, theKreishauptmann had ordered every Jew to wear a yellow patch shaped like a Star ofDavid on his back.The rabbi’s response provoked a short argument, after which the three Nazis wentto the Kehila building, three doors away from the rabbi’s house, where severalfunctionaries provided the needy with shelter, clothing, and food.Several Kehila leaders who had returned to town were living on the second floor ofthe building at the time. Among them were Zalman Tennenberg (deputy-chairman of170 / A TALE OF ONE CITYthe community council), Mikhail Hertz, Avraham Samelson, Moshe Nordmann, BunimKaminsky, Simcha Blachman, and Fischel Lubliner. The Nazis took them by surprise,and when they were asked which was the head of the Kehila, Tennenberg answered,representing himself in his power position.On the spot, the Nazis appointed Tennenberg as chairman of an institution theycalled ‘‘the council of elders” of the Jewish community of Piotrkow. Within a few days,Tennenberg presented a list with twelve members of the council, as the Nazis haddemanded in keeping with their Jewish policy introduced by the Generalgouvernementon October 12,1939. Later, the council was expanded to twenty-four members.The Jews regarded the establishment of this body an important step toward aregularization of relations with the Nazi rulers. The Germans viewed it as the first goaltoward the fulfillment of their Satanic plan. Now they were assured of the existence ofWe slk isHffinf*' Will I#i4' ^I* Wi 14 W* SS H4f? ti# mf wfstutkrisn, *«f. mh *m ■w dtiiu 28 tnarca 1940 rokuilioilll »l# do iPUrnmu^m tilft m mMmt mt mm nmm tmtHmmimmmh $nni i fisf*#««•;s •• It"* - ’wm m rrm ^>illi ps tm fm nfnppnmm*wm^*ms ■ i*w*f |»ii tm'wm mwm%^wmi Visits1!^ I ,5 ^"iS ri'^'3I^M |i»ii IS nti^ ,*t fwn m fmn iii?DST 1,1? , -'-•■> I I-i?p? sponit s: ^ i H' ‘1^ f IS a gV ^ I'" : v-'-v^v"'’t, ^“ 'Vj •« '■'’ "fi, *' T r-'l’"," S> ■ s’"W 53H-'" '* fts •"«! W‘# "'“»7 t*r . ’^1’" '* 'n?':'' •"»'’«s f' •*": •, I,"' “'f'S5, s’3'|-.The first draconian announcements—registration for forced laborand declaration of yearly income (March 1940).The Seven Fires of Hell ! 171The first “edict” issued by the Nazi plunderers demanding the declaration of any Jewishproperty and possessions (Piotrkow, March 4,1940).a Jewish institution through which they might carry out their designs for the Jews.The looting and murder that had characterized the first three months of the occupa-tion—the last three months of 1939—became more organized in 1940. Instead of theimposition of collective fines by competing agencies of the occupation regime, matterswere run by only two parties: the civilian governor, Drexel, and the police-political-judi-cial echelon represented by Altmann and Putzalla. The two agencies cooperated asprescribed by a policy handed down from above, formulated by Governor-General HansFrank and the head of the Radom district. Dr. Lasch. To be sure, those carrying out thepolicy on location suffered no lack of initiative and special methods of operation, whichmanifested themselves in plunder and extortion accompanied by murder. With inspira-tion from above, Polish intelligentsia and patriot circles were decimated by arrests. Three172 / A TALE OF ONE CITYof the victims were Jews: Zalman Abramson, Bank, and Bogdansky; they were shippedto Buchenwald.Spontaneous plundering and looting diminished now, as the “council of elders” metthe Nazis’ needs for clothing, footwear, jewelry, and delicacies. In late 1940, an edictwas issued forbidding the wearing of furs by Jews, at which point the council conferredthese treasures upon the local gangleaders. Even before this decree, however, the councilsupplied the Nazis and their wives with costly furs in return for access to some of thegoods the Nazis had confiscated. These were relocated to the council storehouses,situated in its new quarters in the school at 23 Pilsudski Street, and used to meet thecouncil leaders’ various needs.The personal rapprochement between the council chairman and the Nazi rulers ledto some mitigation of hardships. Tennenberg cultivated especially good relations withthe city commander, Hans Drexel, and one of the Gestapo leaders, Dirmann. The ghettowas indeed established, but for appearance’s sake only. Its boundaries were marked withsigns bearing the word “ghetto” in German and a threatening skull and crossbones. Thefirst ghetto in the Generalgouvernement, it was the most comfortable one for most of itsyears of existence. On the other hand, the Germans enforced the armband rule stringently,occasionally shooting Jews to death for being caught outside of the ghetto without it.Bund factotums, members of Zalman Tennenberg’s party, holed up the councilleadership within the bastion. Most of the burgeoning staff, too, was composed ofBundist or Bund sympathizers. As soon as the council offices moved into the school at23 Pilsudski Street, various departments were set up: mail and telephones, housing,supply, welfare, sanitation, finances, labor, culture, and law. Only a few individuals wereallowed to communicate with the outside world; almost everyone had to rely on thecouncil departments to arrange their affairs, from mailing a letter to finding housing inthe ghetto—usually the flat of some Gentile who had taken over the Jew’s apartmentoutside the ghetto. These swaps were often coupled with transactions not always to thebenefit of the parties directly involved.As Pesach approached, the Jews began worrying about a supply of matzot. The“council of elders” disregarded this need. The rabbi telephoned the civilian authoritiesdirectly and, with the support of the German pastor and the manager of the Hoebler GlassEnterprises, a German named Christmann, he secured permission to bake enough matzotand enough flour for this purpose.The forced-labor kidnapping came to a virtual halt the day the labor department wentinto action; the department met these needs by mobilizing the ghetto population. TheGermans formalized the forced-labor system, requiring every resident aged sixteen orover to meet a given quota of work days. The labor department compiled a card file ofthose obligated to work and instituted a rotation. Eventually a labor market developedbetween the indigent, interested in working for payment, the others wishing to avoidwork and willing to pay a substitute.The Nazi labor office, headed by a German clerk by the name of Rattke, drew up aregister of all residents of the ghetto, issued work papers, and set work quotas. Thecouncil’s labor department was headed by Mr. Felix Poznanski, who now lives in Israel.By mutual agreement, workers were sent to the job sites in an orderly fashion, withoutThe Seven Fires of Hell ! 173dragnets and without hardships imposed by work overseers. This arrangement providedmany ghetto residents with an assured source of livelihood. However, mistreatment ofworkers was known to occur. In the wake of these incidents, others refused to go to workand the Germans resumed their abductions. By that time, the Ordnungdienst or O.D.(the Jewish “order-keeping police”) had come into being. It was the duty of this forceto supply workers, sometimes forcibly and arbitrarily. Thus the Germans refrained frombreaking into Jewish homes.Along with their forced-labor arrangement, the Nazi rulers tightened their controlof Jewish property. In early 1940, they appointed a German named Roenig as custodian(Treauhander) of the Jewish property in Piotrkow.In July, 1940, the Germans demanded a census of Jews between the ages of 16 and25. The purpose was to draft them for the building of fortifications in the frontier areaalong the River Bug. This census was widely opposed because of a variety of concerns.Many were afraid of being sent to the Lublin area, where German atrocities were rife.Many Jews among the Polish prisoners of war, including three from Piotrkow, had beenmurdered there.But the census was carried out, and nearly a thousand young men were gathered andsent to the Hrubieszow, Belzec, Dzikow, Cieszanow, and Plaszow labor camps. Condi-tions in these camps were brutal. The regimen introduced by Nazi commander Dolfprovoked mass flight to the other side of the river, but the Soviet sentries there returnedthe fugitives to the German side, where they met their deaths.The men from Piotrkow alerted their parents to the harsh situation. Parcels of foodand clothing were sent to them, but this help failed to solve the problem. The rabbitelephoned his friends in Lublin, who succeeded, through bribery, and personal connec-tions, in freeing several hundred of the young men and returning them to Piotrkow.These were the days between Rosh Hashana and Yom Kippur, 5701 (September,1940). Again a ransom collection was conducted before Kol Nidrei, with better resultsthan the year before. In exchange for a sizable sum of money, which the rabbi forwardedto Lublin, groups of forty men began to arrive until the last of the young men ofPiotrkow—^including some on stretchers but excluding about sixty who had died in theLublin camps—had been returned to the ghetto.The leading figure among them was Shlomo (Solomon) Gomberg, a Betar memberfrom Lodz who had happened to be in Piotrkow when the war broke out. He displayedexemplary leadership during this time. His courage and personal honesty mitigated thesufferings of the young men of Piotrkow, compared with the treatment that befell others.The summer of 1940 was a time of relative freedom in the ghetto; residents resumednearly full contacts with the outside world. Several Jews received permits to travelsignificant distances by train, albeit within the confines of the GeneralgouvernementChristians came to the ghetto to make purchases or to sell foodstuffs.The situation was worse in other cities, and a significant influx of refugees ensued.Most of them came from Warsaw, but others were from the western region that had beenannexed to the Reich—^Lodz and its vicinity, Belchatow, and Kalish. They came to rideout the storm in Piotrkow.Those who arrived of their own free will brought possessions. Among them were174 / A TALE OF ONE CITYBa««d on Gorman aourcot of 1042A map of the ghetto with the streets renamed in German.In the ghetto—1940. Theyoung girls with the Starof David band on theirforearms are from left:Esterka Szerman-Gomo(now in Melbourne), FelaMoszkowicz, BlumaDzienciarska and Cela.people of stature who contributed to community life in the ghetto. Together with these,however, the Germans exiled to Piotrkow thousands of residents of the villages ofPomerania, of Plotzk and its surroundings, and of Gniezo and its vicinity. A gravehousing shortage developed in the ghetto. Many refugees were accommodated inapartments confiscated for this purpose by the council, but most of them were housedin the Great Synagogue and in the Maccabi Hall at 25 Pilsudski Street. Jews from Tuszyn.The Seven Fires of Hell ! 175In the ghetto—1941. Picture taken onSzpitalna Street where our people gatheredfor deportation to Treblinka a year later.From the right: Itka Lipnicka, Leon Miller,Lucia Wajshoff, Berek Pytel, Cesia Geladeand Heniek Henig. (All wear the Star ofDavid armbands.)transported to the city on farm wagons one frosty winter night, were housed in butchershops in the meat market between Czarniecki Square and Zamurowa Street.The Jews of the ghetto began to adapt to the new conditions and to devise newpastimes, including entertainment. Performing artists among them even presented aproduction of S. Ansky in the Hertz Hall on Gamcarska Street. Teenagers organizedsports tournaments. Organized studies had not taken place since September 1,1939, andthrongs of schoolchildren milled about in the ghetto alleys with nothing to do.Educators pressed for the establishment of a school. The Germans acquiesced to theopening of one in which Hebrew, rather than the “emasculated German dialect,” as oneof the Nazis called Yiddish, was used. However, the council heads were reluctant tofollow through. Medical personnel and others opposed the idea, fearing that the con-centrating of children in crowded conditions might endanger their health and permit theGermans to lay their hands on all the youngsters at once, as they had elsewhere.Nevertheless, studies were conducted in secret. Veteran teachers arranged elemen-tary and high-school classes in private homes. Religious study continued in many privatehomes. In addition to the general andreligious teachers of the Talmud Torah andYesodei Hatorah School, and the deans ofthe Yeshivot Beit Yosef and Keter Torah,many of the refugee teachers and religiousapparatchiks started cheder-type schools inevery corner of the ghetto.Despite the general poverty—therefugees, in particular, were penniless—many craftsmen made a comfortable livingA Jewish man at forced labor in the ghetto.A smirking Nazi guard looks on.176 / A TALE OF ONE CITYby providing their Polish customers, under Nazi patronage, with shoemaking, tailoring,and jewelers’ services. Economic life was so lively at this time that an active ‘‘securitiesexchange” developed, where one might trade in all kinds of hard foreign exchange.1940/41—The NooseIn the winter of 1940/41, however, the severe overcrowding caused by the con-tinuous influx of refugees caused sanitary conditions in the ghetto to worsen. Initialindications of a typhus epidemic appeared at Chanukah time, and, in place of the Jewishhospital that the authorities had confiscated and annexed to the general hospital, amakeshift hospital was set up in the Jewish gymnasium building. To staunch theepidemic, the council immediately established a special “sanitary service department,”staffed by three young men wearing hats of the O.D. (distinguished from the regularpolice by blue ribbons instead of red), the new unit was headed by Shlomo Gomberg,who in due course held many important positions in the small ghetto (the “block”).The “sanitary service” people, some of whom subsequently participated in O.D.operations and failed to meet the test of the hour, contained the epidemic superbly. Itwas their duty to discover cases of the disease immediately, to transfer the sick to thehospital, to send their families and all residents of the apartment to the bathhouse fordisinfecting, and, finally, to put the apartment under quarantine for whatever period oftime the medical officer deemed necessary.All physicians in the ghetto were enlisted in the war on typhus. The head of theaction was Dr. Yakubowicz of Lodz. Yakubowicz was a relative of the deputy chairmanof the council, Szymon Warszawski, who displayed great activism at this stage despitehis position of authority over the other doctors and his tense relations with them.Many perished in the epidemic. The council confiscated a house on the comer ofPeretzand Staro-Warszawska Streets and designated it as an infirmary. Around the clockwe could see the “sanitary service” wagon plying the ghetto streets, bringing the sick tothe hospital and their relatives to the bathhouse for disinfecting. Another wagon, a blackone, was also seen frequently. It hauled the dead to the cemetery, where their burial, too,was seen by the “sanitary service” people.It was an especially harsh winter. Fuel was hard to come by, and supplies, doled outby the council, were extremely limited. The economic condition of most ghetto residentsworsened. Children, especially those of the refugees, were found to be suffering frommalnutrition. The council and groups of volunteers began efforts to provide them withfood.The active group of volunteers was founded by the initiative of Rabbanit Lau, Dr.Henia Greenberg, Mrs. Kaminska, and Mrs. Malvina Tannenbaum. This group also setup a free kitchen for the needy in the Dobroczynosc celler. Before long, these women,who toiled from morning to night, were distributing a thousand free meals a day. Goodrelations were then established with the center of the ZSS (Zydowska SamopomocSpoleczna, the Jewish Self-Help Organization), which was funded mostly by the JointDistribution Committee. With ZSS assistance, it was possible to do much to feed andclothe the unfortunate children of the indigent.The Seven Fires of Hell ! 177During this period of time, with much of the ghetto gripped by epidemic, cold, andhunger, the local Nazi leadership underwent major changes. Drexel, who had arrived atthe beginning of the occupation and come to know the Jews ’ representatives, from whomhe extorted whatever would fulfill his wishes, was transferred to a similar position inKielce and replaced by Kommissar Buss.Whereas Tennenberg had been almost the only one with access to Drexel,Warszawski now participated in contacts with the new commander and succeeded inbuying Buss for a suitable price. Buss, however, was anxious to justify his appointment;he ordered the contraction and closure of the ghetto even before it occurred to theGeneralgouvernementXo demand this. This decree placed additional houses outside theghetto bounds, reigniting the bargaining between Jews compelled to seek alternativehousing in the ghetto and Polish Christians who remained in the ghetto and demandedexaggerated sums for their run-down attics. Most of these people were caretakers of oldhouses of the ghetto and had been living under miserable conditions. Now, by a trick offate, they acquired fine apartments in a good part of town, in addition to payoffs.The council’s housing department, under attorney Szymon Stein, tried to preventthe profiteering and extortion associated with this trade. The outside authorities, how-ever, would have none of this. They had a vested interest in determining which houseswould be gerrymandered out of the ghetto because this enabled them to establish inadvance the monetary benefits they would gain from managing the barter of apartments.It was indeed a different and much smaller ghetto, but the closure threatened byKommissar Buss, meant to safeguard the health of the city’s non-Jewish residents fromthe spread of epidemic, was not carried out in full. Ghetto residents could still come andgo in a limited manner.Life continued “as usual.” With the approach of the spring of 1941, conditionsactually eased slightly. The epidemic was arrested and the sun’s rays brightened theJews’ spirits as well. The “council of elders” expanded its activities and its staff by takingon many people from Gniezno and the Pomeranian towns, who were fluent in Polishand German and proved to be efficient administration and staff workers. The council’sauthorities increased; it was given operational powers by the incorporation of the “Jewishpolice,” still officially known as the Ordnungsdienstox O.D., literally “the order-keepingservice.” This service enforced the rulings of the council’s court of law, headed by JudgeBorenstein, and the decisions of the rabbinical court, which operated in the rabbi sapartment. Verdicts of the latter body, enforced by the council, included orders affectingalimony.It was still a mere nucleus of police force, numbering twenty-four young men underthe command of Izhok Magner, a tall and handsome fellow originally from Berlin whohad reached the ghetto with the exiles from Pomerania. These young men were to escortthe labor details outside the ghetto and, in special instances, to take workers from theirhomes and bring them to the council courtyard, where they were counted and sent towork. The decision to set up this force had been made in the spring of 1940 but, becauseof the opposition of several members of the “council of elders” who still had influencewith the council leaders, only a small core group of handpicked young men had beendesignated at that time.178 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe order to found a Jewish police force had been Drexel’s. Tennenberg became afervent supporter of the idea at some point, viewing it as a way to increase the council’sesteem and to improve his own status. Others warned against a rash decision in thismatter, and so the issue rested until the establishment of such a force had obviouslybecome inevitable, at which time the council discussed it in full session. The rabbi,attending this meeting, asked the council to appoint a special committee of public figuresthat would choose candidates among local young men with the appropriate attributes.The rabbi alerted the council to the dangers the ghetto population would face if powerand authority were entrusted to a group of young people lacking the requisite social andmoral basis, and warned of the fateful consequences this service would bring in tow.Indeed, Tannenberg’s inaugural remarks to the members of the new police force werein this vein.As soon as Buss assumed his position, Szymon Warszawski began to build personalcontacts with the Nazi high command of the city. Once he even traveled to Radom, wherehe met with the regional commanders concerning matters of the ghetto. As with every otherrepresentative of the Jews during this bleak period, Tennenberg and Warszawski could notspeak frankly with the German officials, insisting on the rights of the community theyrepresented. The only language the regime understood, in those days, before the annihilationmechanism was set in motion, was the distribution of payoffs and personal favors to big fishand “small fry” alike, including officials’ drivers and servants. Thus orders for the absoluteclosure of the ghetto were commuted from time to time, and the Piotrkow authorities turneda blind eye to the infiltration of Jews from Warsaw and even from Lodz.As Pesach approached, the authorities again permitted the baking of matzot inan arrangement similar to that secured the year before. Conditions in workplacespreviously known as being especially harsh were improved, and the ghetto dwellerswere eager to work. Demand for labor, however, had decreased because the Germanlabor office had reduced the forced-labor quota and fewer people were willing to hireothers to replace them in rotation. Still, day laborers were anxious to go to work.Leaving the ghetto presented them with opportunities to bring home cheap loaves ofbread and packages of butter; by this time, restrictions on departure from the ghettotoughened with each passing day, and the Polish farmers no longer visited the ghettoto market food.The more routinized life became, and the more amazingly skillful the Jews becameat adapting to it, the more Jews returned from the places across the new German^Sovietfrontier to which they had fled in early 1940. After Pesach 5701 (April, 1940), four Jewsarrived from Brisk (Lithuania) and Wolkowisk, of whom two were natives of Piotrkowwho had fled the city in 1940. The Russians had begun transporting Jewish refugeesfrom the annexed areas into the Soviet interior, including Siberia, and many Jews wishedto return to the German occupation zone.This migration was short-lived. By midsummer of 1941, the first sparks of a greatconflagration were visible on the eastern horizon.The Seven Fires of Hell f 1791941/42—DreadEarly 1941 was a time of acquiescence to reality. Many young couples married andhad children. Notwithstanding the grinding poverty that afflicted much of the ghettopopulation, well-dressed people were seen and customers frequented the open stores.“Idlers” who had no need to worry about their daily bread spent their time in cafes andthe one remaining pastry shop.Here and there one heard echoes of underground organization campaigns by thenationalists and the populists. The founders of Armia Krajowa (the A.K.) stressed theiranti-Semitic leanings and banned Jewish fighters from their ranks, but it was preciselythis organization which depended on the sympathies of the broad Polish public, thatcarried out most of the underground Polish activities against the Nazis. The secondorganization, Armia Ludowa (the A.L.), was established by socialist elements thatmaintained connections with Jewish forces in the ghetto. Bund, Poalei Zion, andHashomer Hatzair activists aligned themselves with this organization, if only on anindividual basis.After June 22, 1941, when the Nazi armies attacked the Soviet Union, the A.L.stepped up its activities, supported by Soviet partisans behind the lines.The outbreak of war between German and the USSR caused an abrupt turn for theworse in the situation of the Jews in the occupied areas. Hair-raising accounts began toarrive of slaughter by the Nazis and the Ukrainians in the new regions in the east. Theatrocities of the Einsatzgruppen in the ostland, following in the Wehrmacht’s tracks,were also evident in the Generalgouvernement, in Lublin, and in the area annexed to theReich, where large-scale murder was practiced. Evidently having learned the lessons ofthe Einsatzgruppen in the east, the Nazi hangmen convened in Wannsee to draw up theirpainstakingly detailed “Reinhardt Plan” for the annihilation of all European Jewry,starting with the Jews of the Generalgouvernement. The A.L. stepped up its activitiesand this underground already seemed firmly in the grip of the communists. At this time,the participation of Jews was limited to the dissemination of propaganda and newspapersfrom abroad. A.L. Agents, seeking to establish relations with Jewish groups, visitedPiotrkow and contacted several left-wing activists, including Bund functionaries Tan-hum Freund, Izchak Samsonowicz, Kimmelman, and 2^uer. The chairman of the“council of elders,” Zalman Tennenberg, and the Bund leader in Piotrkow, JakobBerliner, were aware of these contacts.This underground liaison was conceptual only; it never reached the stage of operationalplanning. Even these tentative contacts, however, had unfortunate consequences for one ofthe organization’s messengers, who traveled about with propaganda material both in Polishand Yiddish. In a routine search for contraband foreign currency and gold at the town railroadstation, the Germans and the “blues” (the Polish police) came upon an abandoned suitcasecontaining underground literature. A Polish woman at the scene pointed out its owner atonce. Searching her bags, they found a notebook with lists, including the address of TanchumFreund, a leading Bundist in Piotrkow and a confidant of Tennenberg’s.The Gestapo began to track the “council of elders.” Ambushes were set up around180 / A TALE OF ONE CITYthe council building, and councillors and suspected members of Freund’s group werefollowed. It took the Gestapo four days to tighten the noose. On July 5 they rounded upnearly all the town’s leading Bundists, including Tennenberg; only Berliner, Sam-sonowicz, and Kimmelman eluded them. When the Nazis threatened to take hostages,Berliner gave himself up. The other two escaped.The detainees were held for ten weeks in the massive prison of Piotrkow. Every day theywere transferred, handcuffed in pairs, to the Gestapo cellar for the agonies of interrogatioaPutzalla, formerly a recipient of Tennenberg’s payoffs, dealt with them personally.On Friday morning of the eleventh week, a rumor spread that the detainees were tobe transported out of town. A crowd gathered along Pilsudski Street (Ostlandstrasse)and waited for the transport. However, only those in the vicinity of the prison saw thedetainees on their way out, barefoot and hands tied. They were loaded into a flatbedtruck with high walls that concealed them from the other spectators’ view. In the driver’scab sat a sentry, armed with a submachine gun; two Gestapo Volkswagens escorted thetruck from the rear. The crowd in the street emitted a cry. Only those in the upper stories ofthe houses could see the detainees, seated with their backs against the walls of the truck.Subsequently, Piotrkow was flooded with rumors about the fate of these men,condemned without a trial. Some asserted that they had all been shot to death in theRakow Forest. Others reported having received ‘‘regards” from a camp in Germany. Thewives of several of the detainees, however, had received notices from Auschwitzoffering them their husbands’ ashes for twenty-five marks.Arrests accompanied by grievous suffering were frequent by this time. Jews caughtoutside the ghetto were murdered on the spot. Still, ghetto life continued in its “normal”way. The rural Jewish communities in the vicinity—Wolborz, Serock, Rozprza,Kaminsk, Przyglow, and Sulejow—continued to supply the city with foodstuffs, par-ticularly kosher meat. The ghetto did what it could to help itself. The Polish police, underthe command of a scourge named Leonarski, nicknamed “the fat guy,” turned a blindeye to what was done in the courts of the houses. Even when caught in the act, peoplecould make anangements with the police. So it happened in one courtyard in Stara-Warszawska Street, when a group of Polish policemen caught a ritual slaughterer and threebutchers slaughtering a cow. Where the death penalty could have been expected, the matterwas settled with a heavy bribe, and the meat found its way into the kitchens of any householdthat could afford it. In late 1941, however, a new district commander, Kundt, took over inRadom. Economic strictures and the terms of closure of the ghetto were toughened.Typhus struck again in the winter of 1941/42, although on a smaller scale than theprevious year. Dysentery and scabies savaged the city in epidemic proportions. Thesanitary service was reinforced. Council member Bunim Kaminski was appointed asco-director along with Gomberg. Kaminski had been a leading official of the burialsociety but was no longer needed in this function, as the society members were no longerallowed to visit the cemetery. He continued to supervise arrangements for burial, whichwas performed by members of the sanitary service.After Tennenberg and the Bundists in the council had been deported, SzymonWarszawski, Tennenberg’s deputy, seized the reins of leadership in the ghetto, assistedby Izchak Feiner. However, whereas Tennenberg had collaborated with party advisorsThe Seven Fires of Hell ! 181who had political interests at heart, Warszawski worked with several relatives. Con-spicuously influential among them was his daughter, Mrs. Bronya Lieberman.Encouraging news reached the Jewish ghettos in the winter of 1941/42: the Nazijuggernaut had been stopped in White Russia, the Ukraine, and the desert of northwesternAfrica. Not only had the blitz been arrested for the first time, but '‘General Winter” beganto decimate the Wehrmacht, pinned down in the snow-covered fields of Russia. TheJews hoped for a speedy end to their agonies. By spring, however, the Germans recoupedand improved their positions, dampening the Jews' morale. As if to augment the Jews’dread of the future, the first reports of organized, planned slaughter of Jews in isolated placesand of actual preparations for mass extermination campaigns permeated the ghetto. No one’simagination, however, could grasp the actual dimensions of this scheme.1942—^AnnihilationThese terrifying rumors were first confirmed by two young Jews who reached thePiotrkow ghetto before Pesach of 5701 (1941) from the area annexed to the Reich. Theyhad been working in a special "kommando” (labor detail) that performed mass burialsin the Chelmno Forest, to which corpses had been transported in sealed gas cars.The two young bachelors, Chaim Yerachmiel Widawski (today an affluent in-dustrialist in Belgium) and Izchak Justmann (who lived for a short time in Israel anddied in New York) wandered through the ghetto for a few days in search of secure shelter.One day they visited the rabbi at home. A Gestapo agent, a Volksdeutscher namedEmerring, had already been assigned to them and was trailing them like a shadow. Whenthey reached the bridge over the River Strawa on Pilsudski Street, Emerring summoneda Jewish policeman named R.H. for assistance. When they reached the Rolstein cafe,the two young Jews suddenly forked in different directions. Emerring chased Justmann,who fled toward the bathhouse. R.H. pursued Widawski, who succeeded in reaching thestairwell of the rabbi’s house. The policeman wrestled with Widawski, trying to draghim away. Hearing the victim’s shouts. Rabbi Lau appeared and invited him inside.Emerring reported to the rabbi’s house five minutes later. Justmann had eluded him;where was the second youth? In the meantime, Widawski had found a hiding place in acomer of the house, and the rabbi succeeded in sending the Gestapo agent away.Still panting from the agitation of his ordeal, Widawski began to unfold his story,which sounded, to many of the listeners, like the product of a wild imagination.Four days earlier, the two had escaped from their labor camp in Chelmno. The detailhad been engaging in the extermination of the Jews of “ Wartland, who had been broughtin sealed tmcks from a hut, camouflaged as a bathhouse, to the forest where the labordetail dug their graves. During the twenty-minute ride, the Nazis had funneled theexhaust fumes from the engine, mixed with cyanide, into the airtight rear compartmentof the truck, suffocating the passengers. The truck then backed up to the edge of the openpit. The rear door was opened and the corpses, naked and entangled, were dumped out.The Jewish “kommandos” then climbed into the pit in order to separate the bodies, stripthem of false teeth and gold crowns, arrange them in layers, shovel lime upon them, andcover up the traces of the murder.182 / A TALE OF ONE CITYOne day, Widawski stood with his spade next to one of the open pits and waited forthe next load of victims. When the mass of some forty bodies arrived, he recognizedamong them thirteen relatives, including his fiancee. He fainted. His friends draggedhim back to the camp with difficulty. The next day he recovered from his shock anddecided to flee, joined by Izchak Justmann.The rabbi recorded all of this in his pocket diary, verbatim, evidently questioningnothing. That very day, the rabbi summoned the community leaders to a meeting inWarszawski’s room, bringing Widawski along to repeat the story.Not everyone was convinced. Attorney Stanislaw Zilberstein, in charge of the Jewishpolice at the time, called the story a “delusion of horror” meant to arouse compassionfor the fugitive. He accused Widawski of perpetrating a fraud for the purpose of extortingtears and money.The rabbi, however, believed it. Restlessly, helplessly, he tried to persuade keymembers of the “council of elders” that the matter was grave and that they should discussit and formulate a plan for the future. But Widawski’s testimony was to terrible to serveas a practical subject for discussion.Since the Gestapo had discovered the presence of the two men from Chelmno in theghetto, it was necessary to move them out at once. Thus they donned railroad workers'uniforms, armed themselves with forged identity papers and pocket money, and headedfor the Slovakian border.They vanished, but their terrible report from the first extermination camp stayedbehind, spreading gloom and depression throughout the ghetto.New rumors filtered into the ghetto: mass expulsions from Lublin, organizedslaughter in Tamow, a plan for mass expulsions from the Warsaw ghetto, the physicalliquidation of those deported. Concurrent rumors, however, brought “best regards”messages from labor camps and Jewish concentrations in the east, where the Germanswere allegedly setting up a Jewish autonomous region, a sort of “Jewish state.”One day around this time, the rabbi received a postcard bearing a Reich stamp andthe postmark of a town in Eastern Prussia. On the back was the following message inHebrew:To my friend. Rabbi Moshe Chaim, may his light shine: Ourcommunity has been uprooted and deported to the east, and I amat the head of the exiles. May God have mercy. Yoisef CarlebachThese were not “best regards” but last regards, sent by the rabbi of the Altona-Ham-burg community. Rabbi Carlebach, to his friend, the rabbi of Piotrkow. This signaledthe expulsion of German Jewry.The “best regards” that came in from various places lulled our senses. Reports ofthe deportation of the Jews of Warsaw to a station near Malkinia in the direction ofBialystok (Treblinka, we discovered later), and of the expulsion of the Jews of Lublinto Trawniki, Maidanek, and Belzec, did not convey the fullness of their cruel significanceto the Jews of Piotrkow.The first description of the fate of Jews from Warsaw who were sent to Treblinkawas communicated by Polish locomotive engineer who had taken freight trains to thatThe Seven Fires of Hell ! 183camp, each composed of fifty cattle cars loaded with exiled Jews. As familiar as thisaccount is today, people refused to believe it at the time.Most Jews of Piotrkow took no action at this juncture. A few had secured forgedpapers and gone over to the “Aryan” side. Several hundred young men and women armedthemselves with Aryan papers in case of future need. Some took jobs in factories thatwere deemed vital to the Nazi war effort. Nearly five thousand Jews found work ofvarious kinds in the Kara and Hortensia glass factories, in the Nazi Dietrich-Fischerlumberworks next to the Bugaj River, and in other plants. The ghetto population,however, exceeded twenty thousand, each life dangling by a thread.Many of them made peace with this cruel fate and entertained hopes that they wouldcope “there,” too. They sold everything they owned and bought good clothing, ruck-sacks, and small objects of value that could be concealed.Months of tension and nervousness ensued. When it became known that the Naziscourge had spread to the district capital of Radom, the entire ghetto was gripped withfear. People ran about in panic, seizing upon anything in their despair. Hundredsconverged on the rabbi's house demanding advice, and some dignified people burst inhysterically, shouting, “Rebbi, gevalt! Help!”“Perhaps we should put up a resistance anyway?” asked Reb Meir Abramson, whoseson Zalman had been one of the first three Jews of Piotrkow sent to Buchenwald in 1939.“By all means,” the rabbi answered. “But How? With what?”The chance of rescue was slight, and the Jews were interested in survival, not merelyfighting for their honor. The possibility that the exiled young people would be sent tolabor camps and left alive, and that several thousand Jews would remain in the ghetto,squelched all thoughts of mounting an uprising, which would surely end with theobliteration of any trace of Piotrkow's Jews.Jewish homes bustled with the construction of hiding places in attics, cellars, andsecret rooms. The ghetto streets were thronged by young women whose hair hadsuddenly turned blonde, and who were ready at any moment to flee the ghetto and hideon the other side.The “councillors” were greatly concerned, although many of them hoped to arrangetheir personal salvation in the mini-ghetto (known as the “block”) that would be set up.Community leaders and several council members took part in consultations in the rabbi’shome. The participants included Zilbershatz, Michelsohn, Nordmann, Samelson,Lubliner, Kaminski, Attorney Sztajn, Feivel Steinberg, Dr. Ziegler, Sochaczewski,Gomberg, Zeidenworm (from Lodz), Englard and his brother-in-law Librach, andothers. The leading trend of thought in these consultations was “every man for himself’;individuals were to hide in the ghetto or on the outside, avoiding the transports as bestas possible. Collective active resistance was out of the question.According to information in Warszawski’s possession, the Nazis had decided toleave only two thousand Jews within the city limits. These would be housed at thefactories that were considered vital, i.e., the glass works and Bugaj. Otherwise, Piotrkow,like so many other localities, would become Judenrein, Warszawski’s intervention,supported by the local authorities, increased the number of Jews allowed to remain intown to three thousand. Moreover, these fortunate souls, after being spared the expected184 / A TALE OF ONE CITYdeportation, would be quartered in a block of houses in the ghetto, not with theiremployers.The mini-ghetto was set up with great haste. The rectangular block—^bounded byJerozolimska Street on the west, and Staro-Warszawska Street on the north—^wasenclosed with barbed wire down the middle of the boundary streets. Two camps wereformed in the ghetto: the fortunate, who were to live in the “block,” and the unfortunate,who were to be sent “eastward.”The Reder house, at 12 Jerozolimska Street, was set aside for the officials of thecouncil, its chairman, and some members of the Jewish police. A workers’ kitchen wouldbe set up on the bottom floor. According to the plan, these institutions were to moveeven before the Germans began their transports, but not one of the council members waswilling to follow through.By Rosh Hashana, 5703 (early fall, 1942), the angel of death stood at the very gateof Piotrkow. The Jews of Radom and Kielce had already boarded the death trains. Theforces of annihilation now approached Czestochowa.On the night after Shabbat Shuva, fifty people, including a few agitated youth,convened for an open meeting in the rabbi’s house. Several of those in attendance weremembers of the Jewish police, who distinguished themselves by exemplary service andallegiance to their Jewish cause. Particularly outstanding among them were two brothers-in-law from Lodz, Asher Landau and Michael Klausner, who, when the time came,voluntarily joined their parents in the transport to Treblinka, as did another threepolicemen, Kuba Wolkowicz and the Rokmanns, two sons of Tzine Rokmann, theshoemaker. At this meeting, for the first time, it was publicly suggested that the transportsbe resisted by force. Several participants with “ ultra-Orthodox” leanings—Elazar Shein-feld, Reuven Neifeld, Avraham Moses (from Kalish), and others— shared this view.Others took exception, arguing that it was hopeless. They included Judge Borenstein,Dr. Brahms, R. Moshe Shapira (brother of the distinguished Rabbi Meir Shapira), R.Baruch Zilbershatz, and Dov Handel. The day an, Rabbi Moshe Temkin, adamantlypressed the case for resistance. R. Moshe Nordmann, an activist among the “ultra-Or-thodox,” presented the anti-resistance argument just as strenuously, insisting on respon-sibility toward those who had a chance to remain alive.Many saw only one route to salvation: a place of refuge in or outside the ghetto untilthe storm had passed.The tension reached unbearable levels. Women sewed rucksacks and packed themwith needed items. Men working in vital industries married young women in the hopeof protecting them this way. Outside the ghetto, the Poles lined up and bought Jews’possessions for a pittance.The whole ghetto prayed on Kol Nidrei night. The sound of crying emanated fromevery house. Hundreds of people gathered at the rabbi’s home for the emotive prayer.The next day, Yom Kippur, the rabbi gave the Piotrkow community a farewell addressbefore Yizkor. It was an emotional speech, evoking rivers of tears. The worshippersexpressed only one wish: that a few of their number would survive to bring their namesto remembrance.Czestochowa’s turn was the very next day. Messengers sent from Piotrkow returnedThe Seven Fires of Hell / 185with terrifying report. The Nazis’ special “Operation Reinhardt” detail then went on toRadomsk, the last stop before Piotrkow, and carried out their premeditated mass murderof the Jews of that city. Thousands in Piotrkow were transfixed, terrified and hopelessat the news.As the death trains passed the Kara and Hortensia plants, the martyrs of Radomsktossed slips of paper, bearing their names and warning of the tragedy that had befallenthem, to the waiting Jews of Piotrkow who worked there. The latter, knowing that theirtown would face this tragedy in a few days’ time, were as drained of strength andincapable of clear thinking as those aboard the train.As the agony of the Radomsk transport proceeded, the Germans gathered the Jewishresidents of the villages around Piotrkow into the ghetto. Scores of farm wagons, underheavy Nazi and Polish police guard, brought the Jews from Srock, Tuszyn, Wolborz,Przyglow, Sulejow, Rozprza, and Kaminsk, dragging along their property, housewares,and even chickens.At this time it was discovered that two foreign SS officers had moved into the ghetto;one was the “expert from Lublin and Radom,” Hauptsturmfuhrer Willy Blum, who hadcome to prepare the operation. The first of the Ukrainians who belonged to theextermination unit appeared in town on October 12,1942.Those employed in the vital industries, whose safety had been assured, were orderedto bring their p)OSsessions to the factories, where they would have to remain during thedeportation. Thus on Tuesday, Heshvan 2,5703 (October 13,1942), groups of workers,escorted by squads of firemen, marched from the factories to the ghetto and back, takingleave of their loved ones, abandoning their wives and children to the mercies of themurderers. Strong men cried like babies, unwilling to return to work. Horrifying sightsoccurred that day. Wives, mothers, and children pushed the men into the lines thatreturned to the factories, hoping that keeping them alive might somehow help thedejx)rtees in their new homes “in the east.” Some of the men, however, refused to partwith their families, forfeited the privilege of remaining in the mini-ghetto, and boardedthe death trains together with their relatives.On Tuesday night, the night of Heshvan 3 (October 14, 1942), Ukrainian andGerman SS troops surrounded and sealed the ghetto. Even before they began their work,the murderers amused themselves by firing indiscriminately into the air and at any targetin the ghetto. The annihilation began at dawn.The aktionv/as planned to the minutest detail. First, numbers of Jewish police passedthrough the ghetto streets, relying on a map prepared especially for the day’s activity,and ordered the residents to present themselves in a “deportation square” on the premisesof the Franciscan barracks next to the Jewish hospital. The deportation area continuedon both sides of the River Strawa. Whole families, men, women, old people, andchildren, trekked across the square with their rucksacks and their possessions, somesilently, others crying bitterly. After this death march, the SS men combed the houses,looted whatever they found, and shot any living creature they encountered. These corpseswere dragged to the square, as were the sick and the disabled. Rabbi Avraham DovEnglard, who was blind, and Rabbi Michael Folman were towed to the train on flatbedcarts.186 / A TALE OF ONE CITYIn the center of the square stood the commanders of the operation, headed by an SSofficer, the representative of Gestapo’s Jewish department, 4B4, known as Sturmban-fuhrer Feucht, who, with great cruelty, had displayed his expertise in these operationsin other towns. As soon as the victims had been formed into ranks, the Nazis examinedthe documents of those needed for labor, since they had not presented themselvesbeforehand, and selected those destined for transport. The day’s quota of six thousandpeople, enough to fill the fifty-two available cattle cars. Once the quota was filled, allthe others were freed until the next transport.In a ghostly procession, the six thousand deportees marched to the new railroadstation, where they were loaded onto the black train. Fatal blows with clubs and riflebutts accompanied the parade. Another SS bodysearch was conducted next to the train.The Ukrainians were especially thorough, stripping the victims of any nice boots,wristwatches, or valuables visible to them. Finally, the people were loaded into the train,more than one hundred to a car, each car marked “Maximum load: Thirty Persons or SixHead of Cattle.” This done, the death train lurched into motion.The tracks were lined with workers from the glass factory, including the Jews whowere housed there temporarily. At dusk they saw the train on its way and saw thetrembling hands groping at the window gratings, witnessed the tearful eyes peeringthrough. The survivors retained only these scenes, and the farewell cries emanating fromthe cars, as last reminiscences of their loved ones, whose terrible cries still reverberatedin their ears.They observed the passing of four such trains: on Wednesday of that week, the thirdof Heshvan; on Friday night, the fifth; on Monday, the eighth; and on Wednesday, thetenth. Each transport exterminated a quarter of the Jewish residents of Piotrkow, leavingdeep gashes in the flesh of the mute witnesses to this atrocity.The three transports were completed in an “organized” manner, except for the scoresof victims who were murdered en passant by the Germans, the Ukrainians, and theLatvians in the middle of the operation. Many inhabitants of the ghetto felt a kind ofrelief each time a transport was sent, imagining that they would be allowed to catch theirbreath until the next stage. They were incapable of feeling the terror of the nightmarethat was taking place before their eyes. The pent-up anticipation of the unexpected, i.e.,the deportation, was more excrutiating than death itself.On the day of the last transport, as the Nazis tried to fill the fourth train, they realizedthat several cars remained empty. The quota of six thousand had not been met! Theyrushed into the small ghetto and rushed its inhabitants to the square, where the com-mander of the operation, the murdered Feucht, passed among the ranks and selected thetree hundred victims he needed. In one of the groups stood several dignitaries of JewishPiotrkow, community leaders in the pre-Holocaust years: doctors, lawyers, teachers,several public figures who had belonged to the “council of elders,” Judge Borenstein,and finally, the town rabbi. Rabbi Lau, who, alone among them, still kept his traditionaldress and beard.The leader of the murderers noticed the rabbi gesturing with his cane and approachedhim. “The Jews need rabbis there, too,” he shouted. As the selection began, with themurderers abusing their victims, the rabbi called on those standing near him to attackThe Seven Fires of Hell ! 187their persecutors. ‘Tummel them. Don’t be silent witnesses to this disgrace!” This wastold by Dr. Abraham Greenberg, a survivor who later lived and died in Tel-Aviv, whostood near the rabbi at the time. But the angel of death had already made his decisionand assured his victory. The rabbi was dislodged from his position and, clutching a smallTorah scroll, joined the last transport of Piotrkow Jews. With their departure, the ancientcommunity of illustrious Piotrkow was no more.1942/43—ConvulsionsThe annihilation unit continued to its next stop, Tomaszow, leaving rubble andseveral thousand bleeding survivors where the Piotrkow ghetto had stood. SS supplyunits, in charge of collecting the spoils, ordered the survivors in the mini-ghetto to cleansuch objects as were worth sending to Germany and pack them for shipment. As themiserable remnants of Piotrkow Jewry labored, the SS thugs continued to abuse them.When the workers from Bugaj and the glass factories returned, they were housed,by workplace, in the dwellings of those who had been deported. As they moved into theghetto, people who had remained hidden in their houses outside the ghetto boundariestook the opportunity to filter back in. Thus several hundred “illegals” filled the mini-ghetto. This was of concern to Warszawski, Silberstein, and their colleagues, who fearedthat the Nazi authorities would discover the clandestine influx and stage a new selection.Indeed, the SS units in charge of the ghetto uncovered the influx, of refugees veryquickly. They began intensive searches, assisted by Jewish policemen, some of whominstigated a shameful episode in the history of the ghetto. Advancing from house tohouse, the search teams discovered several hundred Jews, including entire families towhich babies had been bom while in hiding. At first, all of them were incarcerated inthe ghetto police dungeon. When this space proved insufficient, they were transferredto the Great Synagogue, which stood at the opposite end of the small ghetto.Here, without waiting for orders from their superiors, the murderers committedbrutal atrocities with satanic pleasure. Babies gave them special opportunities to venttheir sadism. They carried the infants out of the building, shattered their heads as theirmothers looked on, and hurled their convulsing bodies into basins brought to white-heatover bonfires.Further horrors were witnessed when William of the SS, escorted by his blackGerman shepherd, went from house to house, uncovered the concealed Jews, and shotthem for fun as they walked to the synagogue. William’s forays were accompanied byhis dedicated assistant Y.L., once a furrier and now a Jewish policeman.They considered attaching the first group gathered in the synagogue to the Jews ofTomaszow, whose transport to Treblinka was being carried out at the time. This did notcome to pass for some reason, so they remained in the synagogue, imprisoned underterrible conditions. Outside, their families bargained either for their release or for theirexchange for other captives. Those who had connections with the Nazis and could affordbribes succeeded in freeing their loved ones. When the Nazis demanded other Jews inexchange, various liaisons suggested that old or sick people be dispatched to thesynagogue in exchange for wives, husbands, or children imprisoned there.188 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThis situation led to manifestations of sublime courage and moral virtue. In one case,parents, presented themselves at the synagogue in order to free their daughter, whosehusband was in the ghetto; the daughter rejected the offer. When one of the go-betweensoffered to liberate Elazar Sheinfeld’s wife and daughter, Sheinfeld handed him all themoney he had. Just as the deal was about to go through, the Nazis demanded two otherJews in exchange. When Tzilla Sheinfeld found out about the transaction, she climbedto the uppermost window of the women’s gallery and jumped. Her dress snagged on aniron rod, and she hung in mid-air until she was taken down. Several days later, all thoseleft in the synagogue were transported to the Rakow Forest, where they were murderedin cold blood.A month later, the Nazis assembled another group of several hundred Jews in thesynagogue. In the middle of Tevet, 5703, after hideous agonies, they, too, were taken totheir bitter end in the Rakow Forest.Members of the shattered families remained in the mini-ghetto and moved aboutlike ghosts. Death in the lush forest of Rakow lurked close to the ghetto and was thereforemore tangible. At just that time, however, two figures straight out of hell—^survivors ofThe 18th century polychrome mural of the Ten Commandments, spotted with bullet holes—the only remaining omen left of the Great Synagogue’s interior. The mural is hidden behind acurtain and shown only occasionally (upon request), by the Polish librarian to Jewish visitors.The Seven Fires of Hell ! 189the transport train and the Treblinka death camp, which had become the cemetery of theJews of Piotrkow—^slipped into the ghetto. The first was Moshe Wolreich, who had leaptfrom the train immediately after it passed Warsaw on its way to Malkinia (Treblinka).After him arrived Dudek Lewkowicz, who died in 1963 in the United States.Wolreich, careless with his tongue, described the last transport to Treblinka in detail.He even repeated Rabbi Lau’s inspiring words about how the Jews had progressed tomartyrdom, uttered at the railroad station as the Nazis filled the cattle cars. Wolreichalso brought best wishes from relatives whom he had seen in the railroad car in whichhe had ridden. His stories reached the ears of the authorities, and the Gestapo swept himup in one of its periodic forays.Lewkowicz, a more prudent man, had stayed in the mini-ghetto until sent with themen’s transport to one of the camps in Skarzysko. The only survivor among the Jews ofPiotrkow who returned from Treblinka, Lewkowicz described Treblinka’s deathmachine to those close to him. This was the first eyewitness account of the mass murderin Treblinka to reach the Jews of Piotrkow. He repeated part of his description in histestimony at Yad Vashem, in which he described the final moments of the Jews of thelast transport, with whom he had been deported from Piotrkow. After a Jewish foremanhad selected him for a labor detail, he stood alongside the crowd that waited its turn toenter the gas chambers. From this vantage point he had seen many of the city’s Jews;the images and sights were forever engraved into his memory. Thus, in simple language,he described how, as the community leaders stood amidst the crowd, most of thembarefoot, the rabbi’s voice suddenly shattered the deadly silence that reigned there. Therabbi recited vidui, whereupon everyone in the assemblage, a congregation now,repeated this final prayer and followed him on their last journey.By order of the district authorities, Piotrkow was declared legally Judenrein. Only2,400 Jews were permitted to remain in the mini-ghetto known as the “block” becauseof their work in vital industries; in fact, the population of the block exceeded 3,000. Mostinhabitants were employed in the large factories, thanks to which the rump communitywas allowed to remain in town. Many others, however, worked in the Nazi “shops,”clothing factories, and at odd jobs that the Nazis devised from time to time. A fewinhabitants of the block worked in internal services—the laundry, the kitchen, foodsupply, the clinic, janitorial work, and the Jewish police.Frequent reports reached the ghetto of Jewish bodies found outside the city limits.Most of these were Jews who had tried to reach the ghetto and were caught by the Nazisor their Polish helpers. In several cases, young people had fled the ghetto and were caughtoutside, thus, too, the ghetto learned that several dozen Jews had escaped at the time ofthe second Rakow Forest massacre in Tevet, 5703; the Nazis, aided by local Poles, caughtand murdered the fugitives.Six weeks after the second slaughter of synagogue prisoners, when the anguish inthe mini-ghetto had begun to ebb, a new order arrived: 250 men were to be transferredto the labor camps attached to the weapons and ordnance factories in Skarzysko.Working with lists drawn up in advance, the O.D. fanned out through the mini-ghettoand rounded up men designated for the transport, mainly those who had no permanentwork. After they completed this duty, several O.D. leaders were ordered to leap aboard190 / A TALE OF ONE CITYthe moving trucks themselves. One of them was Teitelbaum of Lodz, who had precededAttorney Silberstein as commander of the Jewish police.Then, as the German trucks were about to pass through the gates of the mini-ghetto,Szymon Warszawski ordered Tadek Glogowski, a policeman and one of the mostshadowy figures in the ghetto to the ‘‘block,” to join the transport. When Glogowskirefused, Warszawski, with the help of one of the SS men, threw him into the truck as itstarted moving. Then he did the same with Weisros, a policeman and underworld figurewhose behavior marked a shameful page in the history of the ghetto. Glogowski wascaught after the war and served time for his despicable actions; Weisros was killed bythe Nazis.A month after the first transport, the Germans demanded an increase in manpowerfor the Skarzysko camps. This time they needed women, since they had severaldepartments that employed women in particular.This transport was not pre-planned; the Germans simply broke into the mini-ghettoand abducted 250 women and men. One of them was the Radoshitzer Rebbe, AdmorItzchakl Finkler. Among the others was his entire family.There was no contact with the victims for a few days after the transport. Thencommunication was established, and it became known that quite a few Jews fromPiotrkow were working in the “Z” factories, where the regimen and work conditionswere the harshest known.One of the cruelest tyrants in the “block” was officer Luckner of the SS. One day,Luckner appeared at the office of the chairman of the mini-ghetto, Szymon Warszawski,and presented him with an order from Radom: ten members of the Jewish intelligentsiawere to be exchanged for German hostages whom the British were about to repatriate.These Jews would be transferred to Vienna and thence to Palestine. He presentedWarszawski with a list, with Rabbi Lau and his family at the top of it. When he was toldthat the rabbi was no longer around, he settled for Dr. Zilberstein and his wife.Luckner allowed no time for rumination; a Red Cross ambulance for the transportof the lucky ones had already joined his little convoy. After Jakob Kurz had left forPalestine, many people believed in this possibility. Four families, composed of tenpeople, were chosen: attorney Stanislaw Zilberstein, commander of the Jewish police;Dr. Maurycy Brahms; Dr. Leon Glater; and attorney Szymon Stein, who was unmarried.The inhabitants of the “block,” their eyes wide with envy, accompanied them to theRed Cross vehicle and asked them to pass along regards. After seating themselves in thewhite ambulance, however, the liberated ones were subdued and depressed, as if inshock. It is doubtful whether they could guess what fate had in store for them.This was in late march, 1943, a day before Purim. The next day, on Purim afternoon,reports reached the mini-ghetto of the satanic murder carried out the previous eveningin the Jewish cemetery. The entire German colony in Piotrkow had gathered in thecemetery, greeting the “Luckner convoy” as a band played marches. The ambulancestopped next to the little building where corpses were readied for burial, and the tenunfortunates were hauled out, screaming wildly. The band increased its tempo and thebloodthirsty crowd applauded as the victims were forced to run between the rows ofgraves, tossing their clothing aside as ordered. When Dr. Brahms’ young daughterThe Seven Fires of Hell ! 191Stumbled, one of the spectators shot her on the spot. In this fashion the others ran to anopen grave prepared for them, as the Germans cheered and laughed at the sight of theabomination.Several days later, it became clear that this devilish scheme had been concocted bythe criminal Ernst Klatenbrunner, commander of the S.D., who had ordered his localagents to engage in murder on Purim as retribution for the hanging of the ten sons ofHaman.The mini-ghetto was virtually paralyzed by shock and depression. Life, however,had to go on: people went to work and haggled over the quantities of food and othersupplies they were given. The Nazis, for their part, continued to enter the area and carryout their daily abuse.One morning Luckner came again, accompanied by two Ukrainian members of themini-ghetto border guard. This time they entered through the gate at the comer ofGamcarska-Jerozolimska. They stood in the snow in the middle of the street and shoutedin the direction of the Reder residence at 12 Jerozolimska. Itzchak Feiner, Warszawski’sdeputy came out. As he stepped past the sidewalk and into the street, one of the Ukrainiansentries, standing next to the gate, fired one round from his rifle. Feiner stumbled andfell; the snow under his body turned red. Later, the men explained that it had been amistake; they had meant to kill an insane Jew who lived at the Weiser bakery acrossfrom the Reder residence, which was outside the “block.”The murderer, Meister Klete of the SS, a member of Luckner’s unit, materializedthe next day. He uncovered the wanted Jew, a young man from Opoczno who was servingin the Wehrmacht transportation services unit, keeping his Jewishness a secret. Kleteordered him to step outside. The young man, who had indeed lost his mind, sat in a shedat the entrance to the house at 17 Jerozolimska, where brushes and brooms were stored,and refused to come out. When one of the Ukrainians fired into the shack, the youthpanicked and began to run through the snow with nothing but socks on his feet. A secondbullet evidently struck him; he stumbled and fell. Klete approached him, bent over,unholstered his handgun, and fired several rounds into the boy’s temple. Amazingly, thederanged young Jew stood up and broke into a mad run toward the mini-ghetto gate. TheUkrainians continued to fire at him until he fell dead, leaving a trail of blood across thesnowy street.In April, 1943, the mini-ghetto was engulfed in tension and rumors about its fate.One morning the Germans followed the workers on their way to the factories; manyviewed this as an augury of the end. During the day, however, it became known that theNazis were merely toughening their security measures, since the local authorities hadjust been informed of the eruption of the Warsaw Ghetto uprising.News of the Warsaw insurrection breathed life and pride into the tiny ghetto, eventhough no one deluded himself about its chances of success. A few individuals werepositively elated, as if a fire had been lit under them. Many others continued to fantasizeabout the possibility of escaping or joining one of the Polish underground units.The Lieberman and Goldberg brothers, members of Betar, had been planning suchan escape and had even made contact with a Pole who worked with them at Hortensia.The Gentile’s role was to lead them to a unit of the Polish partisans. He supplied them192 / A TALE OF ONE CITYwith a pistol, some ammunition, and forged papers. As soon as he brought them into anearby forest for their rendezvous with underground agents, the young Jews realizedthat they were surrounded. The Gentile fled in time. The Jews tried to use their handgun,only to find that the rounds were blanks. Taken captive and tortured by Gestapointerrogators, they confessed and informed on their accomplices: Katz, a hatter who hadfashioned firefighters’ headgear for them, and Shimon Nyss, a young member of theJewish police who had led the would-be partisans out of the ghetto. They were roundedup, and the seven victims were taken to the cemetery and murdered.The next Gestapo atrocity came two weeks later.Piotrkow Jews in the Skarzysko camps and their relatives who remained in themini-ghetto maintained regular communication. Gentile couriers brought money toSkarzysko and returned to Piotrkow with letters and regards. One of these messengerswas caught and, in the course of the interrogation, informed on those who had sent him.It took the Gestapo less that two days to seize all the Jews involved, including Ber Handeland his son Leibish, Marmor, and others with sons and daughters in Skarzysko. After abrief investigation, the “culprits” were taken to the cemetery and shot; their relatives inSkarzysko were sent to Auschwitz.In July, 1943, it became known that the original plan to make Piotrkow Judenreinhad been completed. According to the plan, only 1,500 Jews were to remain within thecity limits, employed in the two glass factories and in the Dietrich-Fischer lumberworksnext to Bugaj.After some bargaining, Warszawski extracted an agreement permitting 1,720Jews to remain—1,000 of them near Bugaj and the rest in the glass factories—oncondition that the Jews would live on the factory premises and evacuate the mini-ghetto.This conformed with the overall policy of the Generalgouvernement toward theJews, under which only a few enclaves of Jews were to remain in Poland. These wereto be the operational arms of concentration camps, subordinate to the command andregulations of these camps and supervised by local SS authorities.To reduce the Jewish population of Piotrkow to 1,720, the Germans deported some15,00 “excess” Jews to camps in Blizin, Pionki, and Starachowice. For those whoremained in Piotrkow, residence camps were set up next to the Kara factory and on thegrounds of the Bugaj plants. When the transports left town in the second half of July, asign reading “Piotrkow is Judenrein'' was posted at the railroad station.This liquidation, too, was accomplished by fiendish murder. The Nazis separatedchildren from their parents, who were being sent to Blizin, by promising good conditionsfor thechildren. The youngsters were then taken to an isolated building in the city, wherethey were murdered with great cruelty.A month later, one of the Gestapo men discovered that he had been deceived aboutthe number of Jews remaining in the city. Only 1,500 were to remain, he insisted. Thus,in early September, another selection was carried out at the glass factories and at Bugaj.One hundred workers at the glass factories were transported to the Pionki camp; anotherhundred from Bugaj—^91 men and nine women—were sent to the Dietrich-Fischer woodfactories in Tropau, Sudetenland. Whereas the women emerged from the war alive afterThe Seven Fires of Hell ! 193numerous ordeals, none of the men survived. They were last seen at the Berlin railroadstation, just before the Nazi regime collapsed.1944/45—SunsetThe internal organization of the two camps that remained within the Piotrkow citylimits was divided in two. Szymon Warszawski was in charge at BugaJ. In the secondcamp, Solomon Gomberg, who had headed the sanitary service in the ghetto and haddisplayed laudable leadership, took over. The Jews adapted quickly to their newsituation, resumed communication with their relatives in Skarzysko, and establishedstrong ties between the two local camps.The Allied armies were advancing from the east and the west by this time, arousinggreat hopes in the hearts of the Jews. For the first time in the history of the occupation,the Jews witnessed a Polish partisan attack on the Kara glass factory and even helpedthe partisans commit sabotage.The camps were supervised by Polish firefighting units under the command ofuniformed Nazis and Volksdeutche civilians. In the Kara-Hortensia camp, threeVolksdeutche made a great impact on living conditions: Herford, who was in charge ofthe camp, and Hortensia’s two security officers, Foerster and Seeman, a pair of Naziswho tyrannized the Jews and embittered their lives. The supreme authority in the camp,however, was the Jewish Department under the city’s Gestapo command.The Polish firefighting squads, who led the Jews to and from work, permitted themto buy food along the way and take out such valuables as they still possessed in order tosell them to Gentiles. Additional contacts with the outside world were often made whenthe squad was lenient and willing to turn a blind eye. Thus several inhabitants of thecamp succeeded in deserting the ranks and slipping onto the Aryan side; in the samefashion they returned to the camp when they found no refuge on the outside.A young Jewish woman from Lodz, Ala Margulies, reached the area one day. Shehad been sent by the coordinating committee of Jewish organizations that o{)eratedclandestinely and received funds from overseas. Margulies tried to slip into the camp,but she was caught and handed over to the Gestapo for interrogation. Her contact in thecamp was Mrs. Renia 2^ks-Irmay, who now lives in Haifa. Additional attempts weremade to establish contact with outside groups at that time; agents of the coordinatingcommittee even transferred rather large sums of money to a group of young people inthe camp for purpxDses of relief. At no time, however, did these efforts lead to organiza-tional action toward any goal.Life in the Kara-Hortensia camp was relatively comfortable, but people were tooanxious about the unknown future to feel at ease. The Polish rebellion in Warsaw raisedhopes. However, while the insurrectionists engaged the Nazis in desperate struggle, theRed Army, positioned across the Vistula in the suburbs of Praga, failed to lift a finger.When the rebels’ fate became clear, these hopes, too, were dashed.In the camps, religious life was carried on to a certain extent, and enough inhabitantsconcerned themselves with spiritual needs to ensure the continued existence of publicworship. In BugaJ, religious life thrived under the leadership of young Chassidic yeshiva194 / A TALE OF ONE CITYstudents, including the martyred shochet R. Leibel Kupiec, R. Mordechai Znamirowski,who maintained religious instructions, and R. Shimshon Maimon. In the Kara camp, asmall community of young ultra-Orthodox formed around Elazar Sheinfeld, LeibBaumgold, and Silman, who set up a sort of Gerrer Chassidic shtibel in their room.The laborers in the glass factory camp were given Yom Kippur off; only the mostessential workers performed their duties that day. Kol Nidrei was recited in one of thelarger rooms, with the participation of nearly everyone in the camp. They were joinedby an unexpected visitor: Christmann, the managing director of the glass works. Theelderly German was moved by the heart-rending performance of Israel ChaimBlumstein, who led the prayers. Unable to restrain himself, the German executiveprovided the Jews with some emotional words of encouragement.Rumors were circulating about the final evacuation of the few surviving Jews in theGeneralgouvernement. The Skarzysko camps had already been evacuated, partly toGermany and partly to the Hasag factories in Czestochowa. A similar fate had befallenthe other remaining camps. There were no illusions about the future of Piotrkow.It was further rumored that the Germans were retreating quickly under Russianpressure, taking with them the surviving Jews so as to leave no witnesses alive. Thecamp leaders, Warszawski and Gomberg, were in frequent contact at the time andcoordinated an orderly transfer to the camps in Germany.The evacuation rumors were confirmed on November 25, 1944. Instead of theregular squads of Polish firefighters, SS units stationed themselves at the camp boun-daries. The night shift that returned from work was not replaced with the morning shift,for the camp had already been sealed. When the night laborers reached the gates of theKara-Hortensia camp, they found members of an SS operations unit guarding theapproaches.The camp was engulfed in disorder. People took leave of each other with shockingdisplays of emotion. By noon, everyone had been taken out to the roll-call square withall their belongings. The SS left no room for thought, driving everyone into the middleof the square and ordering them to arrange themselves in two columns, three abreast,men on one side and women on the other. Then the captives were rushed to the platformof the Kara factory railroad station, where several cattle cars waited, their appearanceengraved into the memories of those who had seen the death train pass them in Heshvan5703 (October, 1942).The Nazis loaded the survivors into the cars, pushing and beating them to help themalong. SS men with submachine guns were stationed at the door of each car. The womenhad been placed in separate cars, and the farewells shouted through the barred windowswere heart-rending.At sunset, a service locomotive was coupled to the cars and pulled the train to afreight siding, where the cars carrying the Jews from Bugaj were appended.All that night, the train moved from main tracks to sidings, the passengers knowingnothing about their destination. Before dawn, it was sensed that several cars had beenuncoupled. The shortened train resumed its journey, finally stopping on a siding at theCzestochowa station. Two hours later, several high-ranking SS officers appeared andissued orders: the cars were to be separated and scattered in different directions.The Seven Fires of Hell j 195On April 11,1945, Buchenwald was liberated. Above, the children walk through the opengate to freedom. Among them are: Lulek Lau, Fredek Margohs, Lalek Russ, Salek Sandowski,Goldblum, Zylber, and others of our boys. The fourth in the left column is Ehe Wiesel.The three sections of the train were transferred to weapons and munitions factoriesin Czestochowa—^Rakow, Warta, and Czestochowianka. The first part, which had beendetached during the night, had vanished. Later it became clear that its 500 occupants hadbeen sent directly to Germany, the men to Buchenwald and the women to Ravensbruck.The survivors of Piotrkow, about a thousand in number, remained in the Czes-tochowa camps, where they passed through an additional gate of hell. As the pressureon the Russian front increased, the turn of these few remnants, too, came. On January15 and 17,1945. SS troops appeared and gathered the Jews of Czestochowa in order todispatch them to the next portal of agonies. The Piotrkow survivors in Czestochowiankawere taken to the cattle train on January 17, six hours before Red Army forces brokeinto the city. On the next day, January 18, the train pulled into Buchenwald. For manyof its passengers, this was the last stop. For others it was a life raft, which they clutcheduntil liberation of Nisan 28, 5705 (April 11,1945).Even during that last gasp of Holocaust, the survivors of Piotrkow were made todrain their cup of suffering. From Buchenwald and Ravensbruck, they were scatteredto other hell-camps in Germany and Sudetenland, where they encountered others from196 / A TALE OF ONE CITYtheir city who had undergone different ordeals. In the last four months of the Holocaust,they were forced to pass through the seven fires of hell at double time; the agonies fromwhich they had been spared thus far became their lot at the last moment. In death-marchconvoys they plodded along the roads of Germany, feet swollen under the cocked riflesof jackbooted Nazi troops. Some of the dead of Piotrkow fell onto shoulders of thecountry roads and Autobahnen of Germany. The corpses of others were heaped on thepiles of bodies that were commemorated as a testimony to everlasting shame.Among the survivors of the community, beaten in flesh and spirit, knees failing andmorale collapsing on the very threshold of freedom, there remained only several hundredliving witnesses to the devastation of European Jewry, including our city Piotrkow.The BeginningFriday, September the first.Soon, school would start again. Meanwhile, we had all returned from summervacation and found Piotrkow in the mist of events that seemed like fun to us youngsters.The OPL (Civil Air Defense Board) was mobilizing people to dig zigzag trenches allover town. The windows, marked with long paper stripes in the form of an X, somehowlooked grotesque. Bulbs in public places were painted blue. Polish Foreign MinisterBeck said in his radio speech that the country’s honor was at stake. Now we were todefend it. On every street corner hung huge placards announcing that “We’ll not giveup a button” and how “Mighty, consolidated and ready” we were.Would there be a war? Many people didn’t think so. “Nobody wants a war,” theysaid. Meanwhile, the army barracks of Szpitalna Street were swarming with more andmore mobilized men.The salesmen of peace told the world they had made a deal in a place called Munich.It had cost only the freedom of Czechoslavakia. .. not to mention Austria. . . and stillbefore a land of black men with spears: Abyssinia. The rape of Spain was almostforgotten; just recently, the latest broadcast brought the news about the German-Sovietpact. And the weather was indeed beautiful, a real “zlota polska jesien.”Saturday, September the second.Airplanes cruising in the clear sky since early morning. We were sure that they wereour planes. In the afternoon, we went for a walk toward the Trzeciego Maja Avenue.Suddenly the sirens blew, but the bombardment had already started. People ran into thestreets. Children cried and men cursed. The first raid lasted a good ten minutes and thehouses on Slowackiego Street were in ruins. The very first bomb hit the Bernardynskigarden. Romek Zaks and a few others were killed—the first fatalities of war in Piotrkow.We ran towards home, glad to be alive. A large cloud of smoke came from the eastside of town. Also, the military barracks lay in ruins. We waited in agony and suddenlywe heard the bombers again. Moments later the house shook. Now the Stukas bombedfor a long time and a great deal of damage was done. The Kopydlowski barrel factoryjust near us was in flames. We waited, praying, for the planes to leave and, as though inanswer, the silence came.The Polish cavalrymen on horses with their swords were no match for the Stukas’long-range machine guns. The old-fashioned Polish infantry could do nothing againstthe incredible speed of the vast German army on motorized wheels. A monstrous,mechanized war machine such as the earth had never seen, was roaming toward us.197Sulejow after the September 1939 bombardment.Sunday, September the third.The bombardment went on and on, soothed only by the silent prayers of the people.The Warsaw radio was playing military marches and, only occasionally, the programwas interrupted by the familiar words, “Hello, Hello—^Attention, Attention! It’s com-ing. . . It’s over. . .” In the afternoon an excited speaker reported the important news:England and France declared war on Germany! “Now our troubles are over!” everybodyshouted.Alas, they were not over. More and more bombing followed. Somebody spread arumor that there was poisonous gas in the air. People started to panic. Luckily, the rumorwas unfounded.Several policemen were leading a handcuffed man across the street. We were toldit was a captured spy, a Volksdeutch who was signaling the German bombers.Toward evening, we’d decided to leave town. For a large fee, a droshke took us inthe darkness to Przyglow, a village near our hometown.Monday, September the fourth.Until afternoon there was silence. In the Przyglow forest, we felt somehow moreThe Beginning I 199secure. At about three o’clock we heard the planes again. The black-crossed vulturescame diving and dropping firebombs just a little ahead of us. The target was Sulejow.A second wave of planes vomited a barrage of machine gun bullets into the town. Theinstant they passed, heavy bombs started to fall again. The town went up like a torch.Heavy clouds of smoke came from the distance, Sulejow on fire!Later, in darkness, we passed through the ill-fated town. Most of it was in ashes;some houses were still smoldering. There was a smell of burning flesh and burning wood.Dead bodies of people and horses were scattered everywhere. All was havoc.Humanity had been endowed by the Germans with their Beethovens and Schillersand Bachs. Now the German people presented us with a horrifying new innovation ofGerman culture, the Blitzkrieg.Friday, September the eighth.We returned to Piotrkow. The roads of Poland trembled beneath the treads ofhundreds of tanks moving eastward. These were followed by thousands of Germansoldiers moving with absolute precision. The Invaders were here!On our way we met detachments of Polish soldiers, now Kriegsgefangene. We sawtowns and villages leveled into smoldering rubble heaps.In Piotrkow, we luckily found our home intact. Just a street away, the entire blockof houses on Zamkowa Street had been destroyed. All that remained there were thechimneys. Now and then an entire wall stood out. A solitary sink hung in the air.The Wehrmacht and the Luftwaffe were finishing their ultimate mechanizedslaughter. Now, the time had come for the SS, the Shupo, the Sonderkommando and theGestapo.The first terrible chapter of war was on the verge of closing, with other, mosthorrifying, chapters still forthcoming.New Bulletin—Ben GiladiTestimoniesFirst VictimsRomek Zaks, the first victim.It began on the day the mobilization of the reserves wasannounced, one week before the outbreak of World WarTwo. We suddenly realized we were in grave danger.Avraham Zaks (Romek), the son of Yehudah andManya Zaks, was about twenty at the time, and hisgirlfriend, Luisa, a Jewish refugee from Germany, had toldhim exactly what awaited us Jews. He did not hesitate fora moment and decided to enlist in the army and fight theenemy of Poles and Jews.His parents did not object. He rushed over to the draftoffice, where a long line of men of all ages was waiting, butwas sent home and told to wait until he was called. Therewere many Jews with a secondary education who had theright to serve as junior officers, but they were all sent home.Romek was disappointed and disheartened; he foundno peace in his nerve-wracking inaction.We were glued to the radio day and night, awaiting a miracle. But a miracle did notoccur, and the inevitable happened: war was declared. That night, Friday, September1st, no one slept. The house was full of guests, relatives, and refugees from Czestochowawho hoped to find refuge from the Nazi occupier.Romek, pale and nervous, entered his parents’ bedroom, and kissed his mothergoodbye as if he knew he would not see her again. Which is exactly what happened...The next day, on the Sabbath, everyone in town was scurrying about, peering at thebright blue sky where silvery airplanes were buzzing. Everyone was wondering whatthose maneuvers meant when a deafening thunder shook the house. As the peoplehuddled around the radio we realized that a bomb had hit our house. A terrible wail washeard in the next room.We ran into the room and saw a blood-chilling sight. Romek was lying on the floorin a pool of blood. His body was still warm, but he was lifeless.Someone brought him water and tried to revive him, but the hand holding the glassstopped in mid-air as the person’s eyes met the eyes of a doctor who happened by.Romek’s soul had departed from his body through the hole in the chest where, a fewseconds earlier, his warm heart had been beating.This is how the terrible war began in Piotrkow. For Yudl Zaks and his wife, Romek’sdeath was also the end.The burial took place beneath a shower of explosions, during the occupation of thetown by the Germans. The expulsion from the house, the methodical robbery of the200Testimonies / 201business, the transfer to the small ghetto and to Treblinka those were the next stagesof death, a prolonged process of dying.Romek’s mother, known for her strong character and intelligence, did not recoverfrom her son’s death and could not forgive herself for not sending him to the land ofIsrael after the departure of her first-born son. The father, a good-hearted and happyman, was destroyed by a heart ailment.I alone have survived to tell the story of the destruction of this family. After I escapedfrom the murderers at the end of the war, I immigrated to Israel to join my older brotherAharon.Rina Irmay (Renia Zaks)—HaifaEditor’s Note: Another young man was killed by the same bomb. At the time, he was in theBemardynski Garden, just across the street from Romek’s balcony. His name was AbrahamWajnrot.Eliezer-Lolek EpsteinEliezer Lx)lek, the son of Joseph Epstein, while a student of the “gimnazjum,”belonged to the “P. W.”, which was the military preparatory division. When the war brokeout, his f)osition was to guard the water station, located far down on Bujnowska Street.On the second day of the war, while the Germans were bombing the city, somebombs landed on the freight station as well as the water station, where Lolek fell at hispost.We only learned about his death on Sunday night. All the fallen victims weretransferred to the Catholic cemetery. The sight of the dead was horrible. Lolek’s father,after searching for a long time, could not locate his body. Only on Monday was he foundunder the rubble of the destroyed building on Buynovska Street. The president at thattime said that he would receive a military funeral, as befitted one who gave his life forthe Fatherland. His father refused the offer, but asked instead if they would relinquishthe body to be buried in the Jewish cemetery. All the father’s efforts were futile, but hisappeal to the Rav, Rebbi Moshe Chaim Lau zts”l brought the desired results. The Ravimmediately sent for Schwartz, the wagoner, and he, together with the father of the fallensoldier, under threat of German airplanes overhead, brought the victim to the Jewishcemetery, where, late that night, he was given a proper Jewish burial dressed in hismilitary uniform.Izkor BookThe First Transport to the Labor CampDavid Perach (Blum)—RechovotDuring the hot summer days of the month of Av, 1940, the Judenrat sent requeststo several hundred young people to meet at the gathering place near the Kehila and tobring with them eating utensils, two sets of underwear, work clothes and other smallnecessities.150 youths, I among them, lined up one Friday at 3 o’clock in the afternoon. Fromthere we marched, under the strict security of German policemen, to the freight station,where they packed us like animals into freight cars. Only at about 8 P.M. that eveningdid the train finally begin to move. The resounding strains of “Hatikvah” suddenly brokeout in all the cars of the transport. Courageously and proudly the youths sang the Jewishnational anthem as it had never in their lives been sung. So we travelled along, or, tostate more accurately, we dragged along for three days and three nights, until we arrivedin Belzec (in 1941 that camp was converted into a death camp for Jews of Galicia andLublin).The following day we Piotrkower were transferred to Cieszanow. We walked the30 kilometers.The Obersturmfuhrer Dolf, may his name be blotted out, was truly an animal, andnot one of us escaped his bestial beatings.The camp was located in an area that had been bombed, across from the large BetHaknesset. There were more than 5,000 Jews in the camp: from Warsaw, Siedlce,Czestochowa and other cities. We had to rise at 5 A.M. The first shift worked from 6 to12 and the second shift, from 12 to 6. The work consisted of digging trenches near theRussian border.We marched to work lined up in rows. In addition, we were made to sing for theentire time that we marched, and the SS men who accompanied us on the left and rightkept beating us and also shooting into our ranks. The camp leader was a man calledGlinatzky and his assistant was named Goldbloom, but he surely brought no honor tothe Jewish people.Each time we were admonished that if one of us were to dare to escape to theRussians, five of us would be shot. One fine morning, a Piotrkower named Kaczkacrossed the Russian line; an alarm was sounded and a tumult ensued. The head countindicated that one of the group was indeed missing. They took us aside and an SS officer,riding on a white horse, ordered five of our group to be shot. A group of 19-20-year-oldfriends did not break. But the younger ones, such as the Kozlowski brothers, Diamantand others were crying hysterically. That day, in fact, I was the group leader.Tsvi Bladi (now residing in America), Avrom Eisen (now living in Israel) and Iapproached the officer and asked him to take the three of us and let it suffice. It appearedthat the officer was surprised by the way we reacted. He scrutinized us from our heads202The First Transport to the Labor Camp / 203to our feet and announced: “You are brave Jews. Why don’t you all return to camp.” Wewent back singing so loudly that the heavens seemed to split. Later the writer of theselines received 50 zlotys as an award from the Kehila in Piotrkow.The day following the above-mentioned occurrence was a sad one because, at theorder of Dolf, Blumsztajn, the first victim among our Piotrkower, was shot.We worked in Cieszanow until Sukkoth, after which we were transferred to DzikowNowy, Dzikow Stary, where we remained until January 1941. Then we were freed toreturn to Piotrkow.Izkor BookEditors Note: The conditions in these places were dreadful. Hard labor from dawn to dusk—whippings and shootings. The most meager food rations and lack of elementary, sanitary facilitiescompleted the scenario of living hell.The gallant man who helped free the boys was Solomon Gomberg, emissary from Piotrkow.Due to his bravery, eloquence and initiative, he somehow was successful in obtaining the releaseof our young men and bringing them home to Piotrkow.The UnforgottenBen Giladi-New YorkThe sirens wailed, the bombers skimmed the rooftops, and in the streets people wererunning, bending their heads in panic.When the smoke settled, the youngsters of Piotrkow suddenly discovered that thejoyful event of the first day of school did not exist anymore. The bloody banner with afierce black eagle clutching the swastika was fluttering over every school building intown now occupied by German soldiers.In addition to the atrocities and bestialities inflicted by the Nazis, the younggeneration faced a strange dilemma. There was nothing to do other than hide from theoppressors, to play cards and gamble. Demoralization spread slowly. Former studentswere involved in the black market and smuggling, and smoked cigarettes. Education,essential for the young, leading to wider horizons and molding characters, was desperate-ly needed.It seemed that no one cared. Soon, however, the teachers of Piotrkow started animmense campaign of useful action. They were eager to continue practicing their nobleprofession and to be productive again. And, most of the youngsters were thirsty forknowledge and eager to learn.My recollection of the illegal classes begins with my mother introducing me to apetite, lovely woman. Magister Hela Rosenbaum was a lyceum teacher from Warsaw.She rented one of our rooms and, in exchange, I became her student.My curriculum was that of the second year of high school. Soon we were a groupof eight students. The studies were based on the 1938/39 educational program.The rooftop room was small but spotless, with a curved ceiling and a narrowwindow—a typical attic. A large table stood in the middle of the room; the smallblackboard hung against the teacher’s bed, always ready to be removed and hidden incase of a raid. In this tiny room, Hela Rosenbaum opened to us the wide and wonderfulworld of knowledge. She made us feel equal to all the youngster who were free. Sheplaced us on the same level as the outside world.She taught every subject: Literature and History; Latin and Mathematics; Physicsand Hebrew. We all felt that such learning added something important to our under-standing, to our capacity for growth and, above all, to our sense of freedom and dignity.It took six months to absorb a full school year’s program. Homework became animmense pleasure. In class, everyone felt privileged to respond to questions. This wasreally great and true education.Hela Rosenbaum soon joined forces with two other teachers: Mgr. EugeniaRosenzweig, a former pedagogue of the Jewish Gimnasjum in Piotrkow, and Mme.Eichner from Warsaw. They soon started full-scale education for several classes. Eachone of the teachers taught the subjects that she had taught before the war. An average204The Unforgotten / 205A group of youngsters, students in the Ghetto of Eugenia Rozycka-Rozenzweig and Hela Rosenbaum. Identified are: (from the bottom)Fredek Erlich (now in France), Julek Miller (now somewhere inAustralia), Rutka Horowicz-Kriger (now in Israel), Heniek Hendel(now in Israel), and Lolek Altman. They aU wear armbands. Whoremembers the names of the others? ... (Mrs. Rozycka, now retired,lives in Jerusalem. She worked for 20 years in Yad Vashem.)class of approximately ten pupils went to the teachers’ homes on a rotating basis. Forexample, on Monday to Mgr. Rosenbaum for Algebra, Geometry, Hebrew, and Latin;on Tuesday to Mgr. Rosenzweig for Polish Literature, German, and Social Studies; onWednesday to Mme. Eichner for History, Physics, Chemistry, and so on.The teachers worked all day and succeeded in serving five or six different classesduring this time. They also taught students on a public school level—the younger kidswho also needed schooling. Their tuition was modest. Some students that could notafford the tuition were taught gratis.This was the ghetto. Conspiracy was essential. Every false move invited seriousconsequences. We were told to enter the teaching places one by one, to carry ournotebooks under our clothes. Textbooks were scarce and therefore, cherished and shared.We had to be careful not to say anything to anybody connected with the Germans.Sometimes, we had to stop in the middle of a class session and disperse rapidly whenthe SS was raiding the block.But the feeling of friendship among the students and the relations between thestudents and the teachers were rewarding indeed. We felt gratitude for their devotionand their guidance. They taught us how to read. They told us what to read. And when,206 / A TALE OF ONE CITYLittle boys in the ghetto.on our way to “school,” we passed other youngsters walking aimlessly through the streetsor hurrying to play cards or billiards, we experienced a sense of productivity andusefulness.There were other teachers engaged in underground education in Piotrkow: NatalieStem, Miriam Bialowas, Ala Englard, Stefek Rosenbauam, Rachell Makowska, ElaSztybel, Eva Kurtz, Sara Szepska, Mme. Bomstein, Renia Zaks and many others.In 1940, during one of the “breathing spells” in the ghetto when the Nazis weren’tpushing so hard, the teachers, with the help of Zalman Tenenberg, the first chairman ofthe Judenrat (deported later to Auschwitz for illegal activities), organized a “Kiermasz”(bazaar). The artistic evening took place at the Joseph Hertz auditorium and the proceedswere designated for “Winterhelp.” The event was one of the brightest spots in ourburdened lives. The auditorium was decorated as during the good old school days beforethe war. The artistic part was unforgettable. I still remember my fellow students: AdaMakowska reciting Bialik in Hebrew; Szymek Librach reciting “Piotr Plaksin” and“Dancing Socrates” of Tuwim; Edzia Orbach doing a sketch. A dramatization ofAntski’s “Day and Night” with songs and dances was also presented. Ala Braun didpantomime. Zosia and Jakubek Bomstein played the piano. The people were thrilled andthe true value of education suddenly emerged. Alas! This was the only major artisticevent in the ghetto. Awful times zeroed in closely and inevitably upon the community.In 1942 the older boys faced forced labor. I went to work at the “Hortensia” glassfactory. My world of studies collapsed. Hela Rosenbaum, the teacher, attempted to teachme after working hours. This attempt, however, proved futile. It was impossible, afterten hours of hard work, to study seriously. Until this day, I fondly cherish the memoryof a dedicated educator and wonderful human being, who ended her life in Treblinka.A few of my fellow students survived. This is not the place to recall the many movingstories of courage, human valor,and mortal struggle. Sometimes, however, I do recallsome of the names of those who did not survive. A piercing memory of awfully nicekids: Hania, Brams, Stefka Brandwein, Olek Goldberg, Halinka Najkron, HelkaDanielewicz, Hanka Horowicz, Adas Zylberminc, Ziuta Sladowska, Moniek Tafko,Qiawka Kon, Sewka Janowska, Lalek Russ, Eva Litmanowicz, Niusia Rosental...The following words of Thornton Wilder suddenly become very significant: “ThisThe Unforgotten / 207is a land of the living and a land of the dead and the bridge is love, the only survival, theonly meaning..As I see it, underground education during the era of German tyranny was one of thenicer chapters in the history of the Holocaust. There is the fascinating truth about theuprisings. There are the poems and stories of the ghetto, which are important historicaldocuments. There are also records written by lost men and women, and awful indictmentcast at humanity. But at least, in chapters such as the above, one finds a ray of hopewhich, like a lonely star, shines over the somber wilderness of the Nazi jungle.New Bulletin SourcePiotrkower Chalutzim During the War, 1939-1945The speaker of Radio Moskva was greeting the new year of 1941 when ZelmekHorowicz wrote this letter from Poniewiez, in the Vilno area, to his sister CeskaWarzager in Palestine. There, she, her husband Motek and brother Salek experiencedtheir dream of Chalutziuth.Zelmek, a young lad and a Hashomer Hatzair himself, fled the Nazis, as other youngpeople did, he found himself with his Hachsharah in the Vilno area, at this time underthe Lithuanian regime.Zelmek's letter reflects thus the present problems and future dangers ahead for theJewish people. He writes about the bad news from the Piotrkow Ghetto. He writes aboutfamily and friends from Piotrkow who were sent to Siberia, who landed in Warsaw, theUkraine or France.The article by Jerry Bengal (on page 210) provides the background of groups ofyoung Shomrim who tried to reach the promised land. Almost all of them were latermurdered by the Nazis.This group of Shomrim in Poniewiez was the flower of the youth. Among them wereindividuals such as Mordchai Anielewicz, Tosia Altman, Joseph Kaplan and AriehWilner—^all in the leadership of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising. Mordchai and some ofthe others were sent to Warsaw by the Behazith group from Poniewiez.The letter is an interesting study of a turbulent time. It expresses the feeling of theconcerns of an intelligent young man caught in the trap of history.New Bulletin208Piotrkower Chalutzim During the War, 1939-1945 / 209vi|^''*1 ^iili^ *# ^5M*- #***!'%' iwlW!i% V liAi*, iS^C*§4#|« ^#1^: » €%%#'lsiC)|*»iS Jills'##l*liiJ:^i% .,*., 'l*:M': . 4: ■/ »:jr A j I .. ( Kir *■*■ , .* * *» j * / ».,* 1 *».C.. *■■M lljitt*l ^jtJ» %■ lite|.4i |^#^C| ,ll| jiJfc. I**! yii#',,. list." ^*4^^ 4|4^€' % M|^|^|:;   |bl ife.*#l ^ ^%di te# *** *1*.I# 144 t#*#4*4#|il##i|#'^ 1.4^ *I| .|||I^,*-^*^«*^ lii« ^tij»^ H'l^' ,*i I#, ..t|^, ;ife4%jyl||. '*41^. # * .,* ■ ',' j ■ Mr «» ■ 'A • *':; ■•* JMIl^^4^! ..ll”*^. I*,  ^||%^»44; im »l* h»km^ 'li^w,.!*»<i#fc :«il*|:t:4si*|*p|'^^ - 1/ . Ck J* ic/A. wa^LUi210 / A TALE OF ONE CITYAt the start of the war, September 1939, we were in Radom in kibbutz Hachshara“Behazit.” There were six Piotrkower. By the third day of the war, we had been walkingunder German bombs and machine guns, without food or water, toward Lublin, Koveland then to Rovno. This was quite an experience. When the Russian occupant came tothe Western Ukraine, we received instructions to proceed to Vilno and with the hope forfuture Aliah and escape to freedom.In Bialystok, we met Mordchai Anielewicz and his group from Warsaw; thentogether we traveled to Vilno.Meanwhile, the Lithuanians got the Vilno region from the Russians in exchange formilitary bases.At that time, a Rikuz of 1000 Shomrim was created in Vilno, organized by thekibbutzim and led by the Hanhaga. There, contact with our people in Palestine wasestablished. The American Joint was also starting to help. Some Chalutzim managed tomake Aliah. Some members of Bund were successful in reaching the shores of America.I remember the heated discussions in the Rikuz regarding the young generation inthe Polish Ghettoes, and especially the Ghetto of Warsaw. It was then resolved thatShomer Hatzair, as a youth organization, was obligated to send leaders into the Ghettoesand not to abandon the children and youngsters to despair. As a result, MordchaiAnielewicz, Tosia Altman, Joseph Kaplan and others were sent through various bordersback to Poland.Later, they were all leaders of the resistance, with Mordchai as the commander ofthe Warsaw Ghetto uprising.In 1940, kibbutz Bechazit was forced by Lithuanians to leave Vilno and to go toPanevezys, deep in Lithuania. There a new kibbutz Hachshara was built based on ourprinciples of work, Hebrew culture and Zionistic ideas.The enclosed photo was taken in Panevezys (Poniewiez). The following Chalutzimfrom Piotrkow are, from left: Szymek Wegliszewski, Zelmek Horowicz, ZlataRosenblum, Shlomo Rubin, Jerry Wegliszewski-Bengall and Szlamek Zauer.Jerry Weglishewski-Bengall—Toronto—New BulletinPanevezys, Lithuania, May 1940. Standing from the left: SzymekWegliszewski, Zelmek Horowicz, 2^ata Rosenbaum, Szlomo Rubin,Jerry Wegliszewski-Bengall (the only survivor), and Szlamek Zauer,The Last StageMeyer Zar (Zarnowiecki)—South Bend, IndianaAfter the outbreak of World War II, “Hashomer Hatsair” faced enormous difficultiesin continuing its educational and social activities. Courage and the indomitable‘‘Hashomer” tradition helped us to continue and, in one way or another, keep our headsabove water.When the bombardments were over and those who had fled gradually started toreturn to town, we convened a meeting of the “ken” (nest; inner group) to decide howto structure our activities in light of the dreadful reality. Most members felt that weshould start out for the Russian border while there was still a possibility. Some membersindeed set out to achieve this goal. Among them were Mordechai Ar-On, his brotherShmuel, Jacob Hershlikowicz, Itka Kaminska and others. Those who stayed behindrealized that the organization had to continue to function as an efficient body. Thus, theolder members continued to meet for discussion and an exchange of views. Our hopewas to make contact with the central organization in Warsaw and, eventually, we didsucceed. Our central meeting was an apartment on 21 Pilsudski Street. Meanwhile, theGerman occupation continued to make inroads into Jewish life. The ghetto was estab-lished and Nazi oppression increased.The Visit of AnielewiczIn the period between the outbreak of the war and February, 1940, we managed tocreate a world of our own in spite of the increasingly difficult conditions. We lostourselves in talk and debate. We even read poetry. We continued to hope and to searchfor direction. The visit of Mordechai Anielewicz to Piotrkow did a great deal tostrengthen our spirit and to imbue us with courage.Mordechai’s visit took place by chance. One of our members, Shoshanna Guterman,had been to Lodz to visit her family. There she met Mordechai in the ghetto. We hadasked Shoshanna to make contact with Shomer members in Lodz. We were veryinterested in knowing how they were coping in these difficult times and what advice andencouragement they might possibly give us. It was through the members in Lodz thatShoshanna found out that someone from the central organization, namely, MordechaiAnielewicz, was visiting. Shoshanna attended the meeting which Anielewicz conducted.She was greatly inspired by him and told him about our activities in Piotrkow. This ishow he came to know of our existence and decided to visit us and lend his moral support.By this time, travel from Lodz had grown increasingly problematic. Shoshanna andAnielewicz had to travel on false papers. They traveled to the railroad station throughthe cemetery. From Lodz they made it to Belchatow, where a new border divided the“Reich” from the General Government. They arrived in Belchatow during the curfew,211212 / A TALE OF ONE CITYwhen Jews were not allowed out on the streets. The one Jewish home they found refusedto let them in; However, Shoshanna obtained the address of Wenglishevski’s parents.Wenglishevski was one of our members, and his parents lived in Belchatow. Crawlingalong the street, Shoshanna and Anielewicz eventually reached the home of theWenglishevski’s, who of course, received the travelers with open arms. Their generositywas rewarded when Mordechai was able to give them news of their two sons, who hadjust escaped to Lithuania. The following morning the travelers set out on foot forPiotrkow.At about three o’clock on Saturday afternoon, there was a “Shomer” meeting at ourapartment. I played the mandoline while the others softly hummed. The windows wereshut and the room was dark. Suddenly the door opened. There stood Shoshanna andMordechai. Shoshanna introduced us to this member of the central leadership committee.We listened with great interest to Mordechai’s lecture. He first discussed the politicalsituations of Nazi Germany, Russia and the Allies. He then went on to the position ofJudaism within the new constellation. He finished his talk by focusing on what hadhappened within “Hashomer” from the start of the war until the present time. He told usthat our movement was active in the Ukraina and concentrated in Lithuania, where agreat many preparatory “Shomer” kubbutzim functioned. At its convention in Lithuania,the members had decided to sent three delegates to the occupied zone in Poland. Theirfunction would be to help set up a resistance movement. Mordechai was one of thesedelegates. In his talk, he clarified that our goal was nothing less than war with the Nazis.German crossroads signs in the ghetto.The Last Stage / 213He knew that we had no chance of winning such a war, but as Zionists it was our dutyto protect the name and honor of the Jewish people to show future generations that theirblood had not been spilled in vain. Mordechai also outlined the few limited possibilitiesfor Aliya to Eretz Israel. The only way was through Japan and Rumania. Very fewmanaged this dangerous route. Mordechai Anielewicz stayed with us for two days andthen continued to Warsaw.Organizing ActivityIt was now quite clear to us that our goal was war. We decided to organize theyoungest members and proceeded to follow through on this idea. From that point on,our activities were aimed in three separate directions. The older members continuedmeeting as they had done previously, while the younger members were guided bycounsellors. We instituted a secret code for communicating with Warsaw. Thus, we wereable to maintain regular contact until the end of the war. As a matter of fact, someonefound a postcard signed by Jacob Aronowitcz, Hanka Zigelman and Meir Zamowieckiafter the liberation. Immediately after Mordechai Anielewicz’s departure for Warsaw,a “Shomer” convention was held there. Because he looked so Aryan, we sent JacobAronowicz to be the representative of the Piotrkow “nest.”The convention again emphasized the urgent need to train Jewish youth in activeself-defense against the Nazis. When Jacob returned, he brought the Movement paperwhich was produced in Warsaw and distributed all through Poland.The situation grew worse. Signs of the oncoming Holocaust were apparenteverywhere. Eye witnesses brought reports of unbelievable brutality and even genocide.Self-defense became a burning issue.At the outset of 1942 we received a letter from the central leadership which requestedthat we send a delegate to Zarki, where the movement had set up an agriculturalcommunity. This time Shoshanna Guterman, who had Aryan papers, went. She met withMordechai Anielewicz and Arye Wilner, who demanded that we organize in under-ground cells which would gather weapons or infiltrate German work places, as well asestablish contact with other underground groups. Some of us managed to acquire Aryanjjapers. We made contact with the Communist Party, which ordered us to take part in aweapons-gathering operation. Unfortunately we were unable to reach our goal in thisarea. We couldn’t transfer weapons to the woods and our dreams of self-defense crashedagainst the hard rocks of reality.Izkor BookEditor's Note: Mordechai Anielewicz later became the commander of the Warsaw Ghettouprising. Shoshanna Guterman is presently the wife of the author, Meir Zar (Zamowiecki). Sheand her husband reside in South Bend Indiana. Both brothers Wenglishewski, Itzchok andSzymek, were in Vilna and Poniewiez. Itzchak now lives in Toronto; Szymek was killed by theNazis. Itka Kaminska is a member of kibbutz Beit Zera. Jacob Aronowicz, Mordechai, andShmuel Bar-On, Hanka Zigelman and Jakob Hershhkowitz aU perished in the Holocaust.The Cheerful BakerHe was called the “Kalisher Baker” because he had actually been bom in Kalish.He had left his birthplace and came to our city following the monstrous devastation leftby the Amaleks during WWI. He lived with his family in the heart of the Yidn-Gas. Inthe dwelling into which he moved there was a baking oven. It was not just any ordinaryoven; it had a large furnace and a Piekelik (an upper warming area). The housewivesbragged about the ckolents they got from him and their husbands licked their fingersafter eating the Sabbath Kugels. In short, he was our baker and liked by all of us as werethe other bakers.And yet, he was quite different. He had a special status as far as his fellow tradesmenwere concerned. The bakers of our town were simple people who wore boots that werecovered with flour and had worried expressions on their faces. But he, Itzhak Leib, wasa Jew, a Chassid, a person of stately appearance, with a long beard and payot. A slice ofhis bread had a tmly Chassidic flavor, albeit no form. His place was a veritable malonorkhim for stranded people. In the winter he even obliged them with a glass of warm tea.Staro-Warszawska Street—^The “Yidngass” on earlyShabbat afternoon. “Ruchele” carries her “cholent” potfrom the “Kalisher Baker” down the street.214The Cheerful Baker ! 215Reb Itzhak Leib Rusak was quite different. “A person does not live just to bakebread,” he would say habitually. For him, baking was really only a necessity in order tobe able to support his family. Like the smoke from his oven, he more than once ascendedto heaven in deep meditation, his eyes closed and his head held high. He did not dozeoff like his colleagues while the dough rose after he had kneaded it in the doughbox. Hewould put on his glasses barely over the tip of his nose and immerse himself in a volumeof mussary or sink into a Chassidic book. Whenever he read a lovely tractate he wasunable to contain himself, burst out into hearty laughter. Overjoyed he would bang thetable and would vigorously, wake his apprentices and regale the half-asleep with hisbeautiful thoughts. More than once he was so deeply engrossed in recounting a Chassidictale that the bread in the oven would bum while he continued to tell the story to its very end.Every Friday one would know that hwsisErevShabbosKodeshby observing ItzhakLeib. His preparations for Sabbath Hamalka started early. Everything and every comerof his home would be polished. The large tea urn would be filled with fresh water. Onlythings pertaining to Shabbos'wovXA be placed in the oven, such as challahs, eyer kichlach,roast goose, and other delicacies. Returning from bathing with a beaming red face andhis beard combed wide, he would close the boxes of dough and cover the kneading tablewith a white cloth. It was easy to see that the chores of the week were done and that theholy Shabbos was upon him and would soon arrive together with the cholents: large,wide, wealthy pots, also Chassidic devices. Sometimes a few small pots would sneak inamong them, as well as those of the Chassidic poor. The pots would be placed in theoven according to the status of their owners: the pots of the wealthy in the middle (sothat they would not bum) right in front of the pots of the poor, whose contents at timesremained half raw.An hour before the lighting of the candles, the door of the oven would be shut withthe cholents inside, to be opened on Shabbos afternoon with a broad, resounding *'GutShabbos, ” That was how Itzhak Leib Kalisher conducted himself. On Shabbos, afterprayer, he would come into the bakery, greet the crowd with a smiling face and a goodShabbos,'" then return home to his family. He himself would not go near the oven. Thegatekeeper's son, Antoni, would remove the cholent and put the pots into the oven onFridays because the Jewish bakers had to go to the ritual baths.Itzhak Leib would spend a sanctified Shabbos and immerse himself in a holy worldunder the shtraiml and in his black silk frock. Pious men would come by for a glass oftea. While sipping the warm beverage, all would be regaled with interesting Chassidictales. Reb Itzhak Leib was a master at storytelling and was able to enthrall the group.Many of his stories were the creations of his mind, but all were full of brotherly love,strength and joy. After several glasses of warm tea, the hearts and souls of the men wouldalso become warm; the fresh bread would have been removed from the ovens on MotseiShabath but the Kalisher baker would still be celebrating Shalosh Seudot and singingSabbath songs until the stars were high in the sky. Only then would he open his boxeswith the sour dough to the tune of a holy song from the HamavdilWhen Purim came, Itzhak Leib would be full of joy. Year after year he participatedin the Medurat Joseph, which was presented at the home of the rabbi. He played the roleof Jacob like a real artist. Before then he would prepare himself for xbe Purim festivities.216 / A TALE OF ONE CITYHis grey beard notwithstanding, he would study his role for the Purim play with all theother young lads. He also disguised himself for another role, that of Meshulach. Hedanced and sang a variety of songs in a mixture of Polish and Yiddish and would notcease until the crowd was caught up in the spirit of the festivities, singing along withhim in ecstasy while dancing incessantly all through the night.For Passover, the entire bakery would put on a new face in order to bake the matzohs.Everything was washed and scrubbed. The walls were repainted. The oven was kashered.The floor was scrubbed with soap and hot water. The tables were covered with shiny tin. Anew barrel was placed in the comer and covered with a white cloth; every day at sundown,water was poured into it and poor women and girls wearing freshly washed aprons kneadedthe dough swiftly and rolled it with new rolling pins. The entire Chassidic communityobtained their5/i/n/ra matzohs from the Kalisher baker’s premises. With what kind of ritualswere the Erev Passover l^atzohs baked? The most pious Chassidim, Lamdanim, togetherwith the head of the Beit Din, cut the pieces of dough. A beedle (Shammos) carried themover to the table. The Chassidim kneaded, formed and rolled them. The Shames sheni wouldtake the matzohs over to the oven while singing a Passover tune. Itzhak Leib would bestanding at the oven and, with a new shovel, push each matzoh into it, all the while singingsongs from XheHalleL The crowd would chime in and soon it seemed as if the matzohs weredancing into the oven. The Kalisher baker was oveijoyed, raised his voice even higher andheartily roused the crowd to song and celebration.Reb Itzhak Leib probably would still be strolling around God’s holy earth had it notbeen for the Holocaust. Our community, too, was destroyed and our hero was amongthem. Nevertheless, he died, not in fear, but with a smile on his face.When bad news spread through the Jewish community, even the great scholars,politicians, and optimists would shake their bent heads. The Kalisher baker did notsuccumb to bitter fear but would shake his head and say: ‘'The darker the times, thenearer is the coming of the Messiah.” With a strong Emunah, he awaited the coming ofthe Messiah. Those were the last days in the life of the community. The streets wereempty, the houses shuttered closely; it looked like a cemetery. The silence was brokenwith cries and moans. Occasionally, a door would open somewhere; a figure wouldashamedly and stealthily exit with a knapsack on his back and wander away. ThatSabbath, the oven of the Kalisher baker remained cold and empty. No cholents werepushed out by Antoni, who had already been ensconced in a comfortable Jewish flat.The children of Yitzhak Leib had already departed for their legally assigned workingplaces, while he himself remained behind at home with his sickly wife. Dressed in hissilk coat with a beaming smile on his face as ever, he stood at the open bookcases, quietlyhumming a sad rdgun. He pulled out one book after another, nervously turning the pagesas if to strengthen his confidence and belief. He had the feeling that all the forthcomingtrials, tribulations and atrocities that were mentioned in the Holy Books as supposedlyoccurring just before the coming of the Messiah were about to happen or already wereupon them.So the baker would noisily shut his books with his fists and rejoice singing in ahighly pitched voice ''Menucha V*SimchaF* His wife was amazed. She had not ex-perienced him in such a state of holiness for many years. His melodies intermingled withThe Cheerful Baker ! 217the cries and moans of those outside.Surely the last day had come. It was a beautiful autumn day. The sun, in a clear bluesky, shone as always over the roofs of the houses of the Jews. From time to time, a mildbreeze scattered the yellowed leaves of the chestnut trees and swirled them from oneside of the street to the other. The nearby church, as usual, marked the hours for the townwith the chimes of it bells. In the ghetto, these chimes were nervously counted. Eventhough it was a regular weekday, Yitzhak Leib donned his Shabbos clothes and the whitekittel with the silver threads. He prayed a Yom Kippur prayer service, sang Hallel withintense love and chanted, “It may be that today is the last time that I can praise Godwell.” He turned to his wife, however, she could not hear what Yitzhak was saying; theshouts and screams outside drowned out his Hallel. His wife continued to putter aroundthe rooms; she pulled together clothing, dishes, and valuables. She laid them out in twoequal piles, one for him and one for her, to be taken with them for the resettlement. Herjewelry and the bit of money they had buried were also divided into two equal parts. Thetwo mounds of possessions grew taller and taller. Once more the shouts, as if from Hell,grew louder and louder: “Everyone out, whoever remains will be shot.” She hurried andbrought more warm undershirts and flannel underwear to take along; also spoons andknives. The baker from Kalish, watching her, cried, “In the world to come, we don’t eatwith spoons!” His wife stood there with a garment in her hand and looked perplexedlyat her husband. He spoke again: “All knives, forks, and Jewelry—give them to me.” Hespread out all of the jewelry which his wife had put together and announced, “These areour weapons—^I proudly carried the image of God all through my life. Shall I lowermyself today? Should I bow down before the killers, beg for mercy, allow myself to bedriven out? No!“ he shrieked with all his might, “I will fight for my life, which God hasgiven me, and if I must die I will die like a grandchild of the Hashmonoim and not likea mouse. Father of mercy, although I am old and weak, give me the strength to hear yourname once more.” He turned to his wife and said, “Give me the shrouds.” The clothingfell from her hand. She pulled the clothes of death from out of the piles. She was a modestwoman, his wife, and always did as her husband asked. They wrapped themselves inshrouds. “See, this is our armor,” he said, pointing to the shrouds. “Now we are ready.”With a wild shout, the door was broken down. Two Nazi killers entered, two beasts!Upon seeing the distinguished old man dressed in the white shroud, with knives in hishand, they momentarily were taken aback and stood still.“Get out, old man,” they shouted. Yitzhak Leib remained calm and did not answer.When one said, “Shoot,” the baker from Kalish threw what he held in his hand into theirfaces. Shocked by the old people’s nerve, both killers moved to one side in an instant.Yitzhak Leib calmly said the last prayer of confession. His wife repeated it after himword for word.Their voices, with all their might, then exploded with “Shma Yisrael.” Two gunshotssilenced the hearts of the two holy ones.Outside, in the street, someone chanted, “Blessed be God Who is the righteousjudge...”Izkor BookThe Bunker of FarnaRoman Mogilanski (New York)The young Roman Mogilanskiafter the liberation.Buchenwald No. 87872.The ‘‘Judenrein” action in Piotrkow had already lasted two days. Nobody ate, nobodyexchanged greetings, and nobody thought of looking at a watch—all notion of time haddisappeared. People slept dressed anywhere—on floors, in attics, or in the empty roomsof those who had already been taken to the Umschlagplatz and to the freight cars. Weonly heard the continuous jiggling of broken glass panes. At this terrible sound, the armsstiffened and eyes became wide with fright.A distant cry and screams. Along the stone brick pavement of the narrow street,which lead to the huge Fama church, there ran a little man with a bundle on his back,while another man in SS uniform stretched his arm and, from the tip of his fingers, therebroke forth quickly a sharp snapping sound. The running man dropped down.A strange, sharp cry of “They are shooting!” passed along the street. Demons madetheir appearance. They were looking for the hidden Jews. Doors to the poor, shabbyapartments, stores and cellars were broken in. Old men’s arms were fractured; women’sbosoms were kicked by heavy, dirty heels. Many were perishing from torture and bullets;others were taken away by the Polish police and the Jewish collaborators in their round,ridiculous hats.A few people were hiding in the dark bunker under the corner house, acrossGrabowski’s drug store. There they stood, expecting a miracle. Now and then, a rustling;an even, sleepless breathing could be heard. The brain cannot familiarize itself with thesesounds in the darkness and silence. Perhaps they were asleep; none could tell.At night —^it must have been late—another two stole in quietly.“Is it you?” asked one of them, without seeing anybody, and the sudden sound ofhis voice seemed to light up the darkness for a moment.“Yes,” answered the schoolboy. “It’s all right!”“Sha-aa! They might hear you,” said the owner of the cellar, catching each of themby the arm and pulling them down.The newcomers placed themselves by the wall, while one of them was rubbing hisforehead with his hand.“What is the matter?” asked the weeping mother in a whisper. “It is blood.”Then they all grew silent again. The injured man applied a handkerchief to his wound218The Bunker of Farna I 219and became quiet. There followed again a thick silence, untroubled by time. Again asleepless breathing!On top, underneath the ceiling, a very faint whiteness appeared. The schoolboy wasasleep, but the others raised their heads and looked up. At last it became clear that thecellar had a tiny window through which the break of day peeped in.Then hasty, frightened steps were heard, and there appeared a tall, coatless man,followed by a young woman with a baby in her arms. The morning was advancing, andone could read the expression of wild fear that stamped itself upon their faces.“This way! This way!” whispered the man.“They were running after us, they are looking for us,” said the woman. Her shoeswere put on her bare feet, and her young body displayed strange, white, malignant spots,reminding one of a corpse.“They won’t find us; but, for G-d’s sake, be quiet!”“They are close by in the courtyard. Oh! Be quiet, be quiet. .The wounded man got hold of the mother and the owner by the hand, while theMother seized the man who had no coat. There they stood, forming a live chain, lookingon at the young woman with her baby.All of a sudden there broke out a strong and familiar sound, bringing them closer totheir terrible fate. What fate that was they knew at once, but they were unwilling tobelieve it. The sound was repeated. It was the cry of the infant.“Lull him, my dear,” said the Mother. Everybody’s chest and throat were battlingagainst faintness. The young woman marched up and down the cellar, lulling and coaxingthe baby.“You must not cry; sleep my golden one... It is I, your mother, my heart... ”But the child cried on stubbornly, wildly. There must have been something in thewoman’s face that had no tranquilizing effect.And now, in this warm and strange underground atmosphere, the woman’s brainwrenched out a wild, mad idea. It seemed to her that she had read it in the eyes, in thesuffering silence of her companions. And these unhappy, frightened people—^she wasthinking of them. They understood it in the unspeakable tenderness with which shechanted, while drowning the infant’s eyes with her own.“He will soon fall asleep, I know. It is always like that; he cries a moment,then he falls asleep at once. He is a very quiet boy.” She gave the tall man apainful smile.From outside there broke in a distant noise. Then came a dull sound, and a crack,shaking the air.“They are searching,” whispered the schoolboy. But the infant went on crying,hopelessly.“He will destroy us all,” screamed the owner of the cellar.“I shall not give him away—no, never!” exclaimed the confused mother.“Oh G-d,” whispered the wounded man, and covered his face with hands. His hairwas unkempt after a sleepless night. The owner of the cellar stared at the infant withpersistent eyes.“I don’t know you,” said the woman in a low voice. “Who are you. What do you220 / A TALE OF ONE CITYwant from me?” She rushed to the other men, but everybody stepped back from her withfear. The infant was crying on, piercing the brains with its shouting.“Give it to me,” said the Mother, her eyebrows trembling. The young woman turnedaround. She stood up on her toes, and with high, uplifting arms, she handed over thechild to the Mother. It seemed to her that by doing this she was committing a terriblecrime, that hissing voices of the men were cursing her, rejecting her from life foreverand ever.Finding itself in the loving, delicate hands of the Mother, the child grew silent,asleep.All of a sudden it grew dark in the cellar. Somebody had approached the littlewindow and was listening. At this shadow, breaking in so suddenly, they all grew quiet,they felt that it was coming, it was near...But the young woman interpreted this silence differently. To everyone’s surprise,the woman turned grey in a single moment, as if they had poured acid over her hair. Assoon as the child’s cries died away, there resounded another cry, more awful, moreshattering and heart-tearing. The young mother rose up on her toes, grey and terrible.Like the goddess of Justice herself, she shouted in a desperate, inhuman voice thatbrought destruction with it. Nobody had expected that sudden madness.The remaining people in the small Ghetto told each other of the shooting of the men,the boy and the infant by the SS-men. No one touched the mad, old woman of 26: shewas taken away with the Mother to the dark basement in Flattau’s house on Gamcarska,which served as a temporary jail before the synagogue, Tomaszow and Treblinka. It wasguarded by the Jewish police.Blood from my split head, mixed with tears, ran down my neck. The henchmanHamer was punishing me viciously with his long, heavy club for trying to kiss, for thelast time, my Mother in jail at Gamcarska. I didn’t feel any pain: I felt the paralyzingfear and grief for my Mother, my Mother.From the Bunker to the SynagogueIn October, 1942, at the time of the great aktion in which the Jews of Piotrkow weredeported to Treblinka for extermination, my martyred wife Rivka concealed herself ina bunker prepared in the cellar of the house at 2 Plac Czamieckiego. With her were mostof the other members of my family: my parents, Shmuel Gedalia and Esther Friedel; myolder sister Rachel (Rozia), her husband Mordechai Frankel, and their son Hansel;Mordechai Frankel’s mother Bella; and several other families. In all, some thirty personshad taken shelter there.The bunker and all its occupants were discovered after the great deportation (October14-21). Everyone was taken to the mini-ghetto and jailed, first in the ghetto police lockupand, several days later, in the synagogue, which was used as a prison for “illegals.”Extensive efforts to liberate them by intervening with the authorities were fruitless.My entreaties to the Judenrat and the ghetto police, several members of which wereacquaintances or friends of ours, were similarly useless.I corresponded with my late wife by means of Mordechai Kaminski. In one of theseexchanges, a tragic vacillation shows through: whom to save first? My late wife insistedthat a child with his mother, i.e., my older sister, had priority. However, my hope ofrescuing some members of my family by means of a German policeman proved falsewhen, one afternoon, a Gestapo man shot two Jewish policemen, Sandowski andGoldstein—may God avenge their blood—for having succeeded in freeing their parentsfrom the synagogue. Immediately after this, the German policeman was removed fromthe case altogether.destroyed synagogue in 1945.221222 / A TALE OF ONE CITYI was working at the Kara factory at the time. Every day after work, I was escortedto the mini-ghetto and kept under guard. There,j however, I devoted most of my effortsto liberating my relatives from the synagogue. I even avoided having to go to workseveral times, notwithstanding the risk this entailed.One day, after returning with my work group to the ghetto, I was given the terriblenews that all 600 Jews imprisoned in the synagogue had been transported in peasants'wagons to Tomaszow. In fact, they had been taken to the nearby Rakow forest, wherethey were murdered in cold blood and hurled into a mass grave which 42 men amongthem had been forced to prepare the previous day.Meir HorowitzMassacre of the ChildrenIn July, 1943, a Jew from Blizin appeared in Piotrkow and advised the communityto sign up voluntarily for the Blizin labor camp. Conditions there, he explained, wereespecially convenient for parents of small children. Artisans were concentrated in Blizin,and their children were given special care while the parents were at work. Thispropaganda made a strong impression. Mrs. Bronya Lieberman, daughter of communitychairman Szymon Warszawski, was enthusiastic about the idea of going to Blizin anddid everything she could to persuade her friends to sign up for the trip.The “block” (the mini-ghetto) was facing liquidation at the time. Some of itsinhabitants would be housed near the Kara and Hortensia glassworks; others would livenear the factory in Bugaj. The others, including the children, were to be sent elsewhere.The lists were drawn up quickly. After a roll call and head count were held, thetransport headed for the train, children and adults marching together toward the“paradise” of Blizin.As the crowd approached the train, still in Piotrkow, the Germans separated thechildren from their parents by force. They shoved the parents into the cattle cars andbrought the children back to Piotrkow, housing them somewhere outside the Jewish“block”. It is hard to describe the despair that gripped the parents on their way to Blizin,having left their children to their terrible fate.The children were kept for several days in an isolated building in town. Then, onechilly morning, they were led out of Piotrkow to a place where a large grave had beendug for them. German soldiers armed with bugles and drums played various tunes, andthe miserable children, half-naked, were ordered to dance. As they complied, the soldiersopened fire with machine guns. The youngsters collapsed, still half-alive, into the massgrave. The ground over the martyrs’ corpses continued to palpitate for many hours, asif protesting the untimely and murderously brutal termination of these young lives.This episode is undoubtedly one of the most horrifying in the annals of the Piotrkowghetto, and will remain forever engraved in the memory of every Jew from the ghettowho survived.Dr. Shulamit MorgensternIzkor BookVicinityLorraine Justman-Wisnicki—New YorkDeportation From GorzkowiceOctober 17, 1942. The machinery of destruction organized by the Germans withutmost precision and secrecy reached out toward a small town—Gorzkowice, in thevicinity of Piotrkow. An ice cold breath of impending death woke up the inhabitantsfrom their last peaceful sleep.Concentrated at the railroad station, and hardly aware of our tragic fate, we waitedfor the train. In front of us, behind us, around us—green German uniforms. Assigned tokeep guard until the arrival of the freight trains, the German police stationed in Niechcicewere to keep a watchful eye on the Jews.“You are going to Ukraina to work. You shall be happy there!” Deceitful assurancesrevived sparks of hope and faith in a possible future.To everyone’s surprise and delight, the Committee of Polish Women obtainedpermission to distribute hot soup to the shivering crowd. What a moral lift! What a nobledeed!Though the cold was biting, and the winds grew stronger, the atmosphere was stillcalm. People talked to each other, moved around voicing their fears, suspicions andpolitical views. Some of them surrounded Rabbi Dawidowicz to pray together with him.Profoundly believing in God and His Divine judgement, they were resigned to accepttheir destiny.I looked up to the overcast sky and searched for an answer from above, for Alliedplanes coming in our defense. Those were but daydreams, childish delusions. Insteadcruel reality took over, suppressing more and more the fleeting picture of imagination,stifling naive trust and diminishing moral strength.As from the very depths of the earth a luxurious automobile emerged in front of therailways: all eyes turned in one direction. A tall SS man in black uniform with Naziinsignia stepped forth with a Hitler salute, exchanging a few words with the Chief ofGerman police.“Ordnungsdienst austreten!” thundered the SS man with a bearing of absoluteauthority. “Ihr bleibt mit den Frauen zuruck! ” Following another order, a doctor and theChairman of the Jewish Council with his wife and son rushed to the newly formed line.Altogether there were 20 people. The SS man scrutinized the dense crowd of degradedhumanity and once more exclaimed with disgust and contempt, Weg mit der Scheisse!Then he left.Pandemonium broke loose. Twenty people, with meager luggage in hand, were tobe assembled on an isolated end of the station to await further directives: the chosenones... the lucky ones who were allowed to remain. It was now unimportant for how long.223224 / A TALE OF ONE CITYRevolting images in disarray... inner conflicts tear apart one’s selfhood. .. “Whythem? Why not the workers of German plants and factories?”For the chosen group, individual dilemmas: to stay, or to go by train to the unknownbecause of their children, because of their parents: it is not easy to be a hero.Najman made his last painful decision. Loud sobs escaped his chest, which he beatwith his fists like a madman. Strong feelings of family love, of duty overpowered alllogic and turned the scale of his life. There, at the end of the railroad station, seemed tobe temporary safety, for a day, for days. . . who knows. Yet, here were his children,speechless with fright and insecurity. Trembling with every fiber of his muscular, youngbody, Najman, in a gesture of utter despair, threw his blue, symbolic cap to the ground.This cap, brought with seven others by Manela and Zamel a few days earlier fromPiotrkow, became unexpectedly synonymous with survival. And now, by a twist of fate,arose a chance for someone else. Yudka Jakubowicz, standing nearby, picked up thecap—the golden fleece of life—to Join the chosen group with his bride, lovely HankaDykerman.Soon another glimmer of self-denial galvanized the attention and interest of many:the rescue of little Ania, the 4-year-old daughter of Dr. Rubinsztajn.Behind the fence, among curious onlookers watching the last act of the Jewishtragedy, stood a Pole, a friend of Dr. Rubinsztajn. He had come to fetch the child:however, he was a day too late. The girl had but a few minutes to walk over to the otherside. Yet there were no volunteers daring enough to extend a helping hand and cross the“Rubicon” with her. Then, in a split second, I saw my father heading in the direction ofthe fence. At his side, a young child. He stopped briefly to talk with the German guardat the post and then disappeared. Minutes stretched into infinity... I spotted him again.He returned unnoticed by the guard and, with wiry steps, came back to us. In his blueeyes, deep satisfaction, for he had performed an important task, an obligation of his heart.In times of the extreme degradation of mankind, when Jewish blood was cheaper thana loaf of bread, he did not forget to be human.Soon enough, new, shattering happenings quickly overshadowed everything else,tearing to shreds the thin fabric of our hopes and illusions. A force of black-uniformedGermans arrived. They had a special mission.Through the air tore a barbaric, diabolical order. “Shuhe ausziehen!” (Take yourshoes off!)The throng of people recoiled in terror. Exasperated voices of protest, indignation,and pleading, but above all the overwhelming roar of the “Special Commando” men andthe sight of their dreadful rifles.The children, left without shoes, whimpered from cold.Mr. Altman, the Chairman of the Jewish Council, tried to intervene, but in vain. TheGermans didn’t have any mercy.At the fence, as in a goldrush, quickly mushroomed clusters of young Poles—warmerchants and speculators. “Heigh, Moshek, Josek, Srulek, come here! We have woodenshoes for you! We heard what’s going on and want to help!”Josek Zamel was first to respond. “How much?”“400 zlotys.”Vicinity / 225It was a most exaggerated sum for a pair of sandals. One could get beautiful leatherboots for that price on the black market. Yet, Josek Zamel had no alternative. His motherstood there, in stockings only, shivering from cold. Nothing was too expensive to easeher suffering. So, he purchased the wooden sandals. Others, though enraged andperturbed, followed his example.In the middle of that mad bargaining and commotion, a peasant woman handed downa little blonde girl of five, Franka Pfefer—Lipowska’s only child, Halinka. The womanmuttered defiantly, “I am scared to keep her with us. I don't want to risk my life. Themoney we'll give back after the war.. .” Franka fainted.Night was already falling. Merciless winds blew mists of dust into our faces. Theskies were covered with black clouds, which seemed about to burst any minute and comethundering to earth.I sat on a knapsack stuffed with personal belongings, next to my mother. She pressedher pale cheek to mine and caressed my hair with her hand. Her eyes glowed with innerfire, as she said with determination: “You have to stay! You must not go with thetransport! Father will supply all necessary documents, and then—run away! Do you hearme?! Run away !"A11 of a sudden, the jeering whistle of the engine. The rhythmic rumbleof the wheels. “The train! The train is coming!”El Mole Rachamam for the Belchatower '^Kedoshim ”Menachem Sharon-Szmulewicz (in Talith), says the prayer surrounded by the Belchatowerleaders from all over the world. The time—September 1989. The site the Nazi annihilationcamp in Chelmno, where people from the “Third Reich” annexed territories (as Belchatowand Lx)dz) were gassed and destroyed. Towns like Warsaw and Piotrkow were situated in the“General Government” and our “Kedoshim” were sent to Treblinka. The Belchatow delega-tion also unveiled a bronze plac[ue in their hometown which proclaims the existence andhonors the Martyrdom of this once thriving Jewish community.226 / A TALE OF ONE CITYI felt my mother’s breath on my face. I felt her fast-beating heart next to mine. Withtrembling hands she released herself from my embrace. Father tore me away from herand pulled me to the end of the platform, to safety, where the chosen ones waited inheartbreaking silence.A wild horde of SS men jumped out of the cattle train—a bellowing, angry hordewith clubs, whips and pistols. They broke into the petrified multitude of men, womenand children and pushed them forward into the black cavity of ill-smelling wagons.“Mother!” I still had a last glimpse of her. A vague flash of a vision. In my narrowedperspective, a distant smile, a farewell gesture... My mother, who gave me life for thesecond time, was soon beyond my reach, lost in an undulant human sea.It was a macabre, frightening reality.An agonizing blood-curdling discord of screams, outcries, shouts and curses. Andthen the screeching sound of closing doors and the gruesome whistle of the locomotive.I felt like an empty vacuum sinking into a bottomless abyss of nothingness.The train with its human cargo—our love, our world—moved into the darkness ofthe cold night. Destination: the gas chambers of Treblinka.The last Jews of Gorzkowice:Chairman of the Jewish Council, Mr. Altman with his wife and son; YudkaJakubowicz with his wife Hanka, and his sister; my father, Jakub Justman and myself.Majlech and Marysia Rosen, Zygmunt and Micia Pfefer, Motek and Zosia Winter, Josekand Lodzia Zamel, Henryk Magazanik, Mietek Manela, Dr. Rubinsztajn, and HaskielekCwilich.Dr. Rubinsztajn was shot at the railroad station in Gorzkowice during an unfortunateescape, and the remainder of the group, 19 people, was transferred to the Synagogue inPiotrkow several days later.What I Saw in TreblinkaDudek Lewkowicz-ChicagoSeveral days before the evacuation, some thirty people were deported from Novo-Radomsk. They were the last Jews in hiding to be discovered and were held by the Jewishpolice. At the same time, three Jews from that town appeared in the Piotrkow Ghetto.They had either escaped from the transport or perhaps even from Treblinka itself, andthey told of the fate which awaited those who were being deported. No one could fathomwhat they were describing and, in fact, the Judenrat commanded the Jewish police toarrest them for spreading false rumors in order to get gold and precious stones cheaply.Nevertheless, the ghetto boiled like a cauldron as a result of the many rumors. Everyonetried to locate and guarantee himself the best work-cards and each one was certain thathe would be able to avoid the terrible fate of deportation.On October 14, at about 7 or 8 P.M., Latvians and Ukrainians surrounded the ghettoand began to shoot. I lived near the northern border of the ghetto, where, from the veryfirst moment, you could hear the shots, and as soon as anyone dared to look through thewindow, he was shot instantly. At night armed bands entered the homes, and not onlydid they help themselves to valuable articles, they also ravaged young girls.Finally, the action began.It was expedited systematically and calmly, one house after the other. Every secondday, 6000 Jews were deported; on the last day it was our turn. Everyone left carryinghis knapsack, lining up four across, and in this fashion they hustled us to the ZamkowyPlatz, where we were again told to line up in fours.The Piotrkower from TreblinkaThe late Dudek Lewkowicz with his wife Mania and their Dudek Lewkowicz.four month old son Mark, in the UNRRA Camp 522 inEschwege, Germany on August 28,1946.227228 / A TALE OF ONE CITYSome time later, many people, who had been imprisoned in the synagogue since theearlier transport left, were also brought to the Zamkowy Platz. Members of the Gestapocirculated amongst us saying that whoever possessed government money should sur-render it, since we would be traveling to another country, where we would not be ableto buy anything with it anyway.Many young children, who had probably been deserted by their mothers, or perhapshad gotten lost in the maddening throng, were also among us in the Plaza. The Gestapomen, however, were so ‘‘kind” that they gave the first, “best” women a child to care for.At about noontime, we were marched to the train station, where they again detainedand searched us. Whosoever had a good pair of shoes, or good clothes, had them takenaway and thus, in only socks and slippers, were chased into the cars. About 80 to 125people were herded into each freight car, and when the entire transport had boarded,they made us wait in the station for many hours. In torment and fearfully crowdedconditions, we waited even longer and our guards, after a while, attacked us, seekingvaluables, or offered to bring us a bottle of water for a large sum of money. Eventually,probably at about 7 P.M., the transport began to move in an unusual direction. We werelater to find out that the reason for the long detention of the transport was that there weretwo empty freight cars, which caused them to conduct an additional roundup in order tofill them and complete the transport.It was in the dark of night and difficult for us to make out which stations we hadpassed, but at dawn we were able to see that we had already passed through Warsaw andwere now nearing Malkinia. From time to time we could see peasants along the way;they hung around the train lines as if they were working in the fields, despite the factthat it was already late autumn. They waited for someone in the freight cars to throw anarticle of clothing or perhaps a vessel of some kind, which they might have used to servetheir natural needs, through the window. Everyone, including the children, had beenconfined since 12 noon. The peasants collected the pots and various articles of clothingand signalled to us in a secret way that we were going to our death.After circumventing Malkinia, our transport arrived in Treblinka. We didn ’t actuallysee the Treblinka station, but some 7 kilometers beyond Malkinia our transport remainedstanding in a field, waiting. After a while, we were removed to the “place of destruction.”A wire-covered gate, decorated the green leaves so that no one would be able to see infrom the outside, opened. However, from a distance of several kilometers one could seethe smoke and smell the stench of burning flesh. Also, freshly filled ditches were evidentnear the camp. The area around there had been a forest that was cleared and the earthlooked like whitish-yellow sand.After our cars were directed to the ramps and the doors rolled open, Jews from earliertransports appeared. They were the so-called “transport crews,” wearing red ribbons.They drove us out quickly and cleaned the wagons as we were leaving. They hustled usalong to the nearest place, where they separated the women and children from the men.The women and children were ushered into a barrack located to the left of the plaza,especially intended for them to strip down to their bare skin. After undressing and placingtheir clothes on the ground, they were transferred to another barrack, which wasconnected to the first, where benches were arranged for them to sit on. About twentyWhat I Saw in Treblinka / 229men who worked as barbers entered and shaved the women’s hair, which was laterpacked into sacks, disinfected, and, afterwards, sent to Germany.After being shaved, the women and children were rushed from the barrack througha beautiful “avenue” covered with white sand into a second camp, where the gaschambers were located. These were low, hermetically sealed brick barracks which hada wide, gate-like door on one side and, on the other, a small door. As many people aspossible were packed into this space. After the doors closed, a nearby compressorextracted the air in order to save on gas, and, for lack of air, the people choked and theirlungs exploded; thus the Nazis did not have to use much gas at all.While the women were undressing in the barrack, the men stood in rows across fromthe barrack and undressed too. Afterwards, they folded their clothes and knapsacks andtied their shoes together (those that still had them), and were chased, carrying theirpackages of clothes, to an adjacent plaza which was also surrounded by barbed wire andcovered with green vines. Every few steps there stood a Gestapo agent, carrying a largeblackjack, chasing ;and beating everyone as he passed. This is how they rushed the men,with their meager packages of clothes, along. They were instructed to throw their shoesonto one mound and their clothing onto another. Following this, they, too, were quicklyherded into the same barrack which the women and children had just left and wereordered to gather up the remaining clothing. When everything was completed, the menwere reunited and continued on the same path to their deaths.How was it, then, that I survived?I was standing together with everyone else when the camp elder called me andordered me to stand aside. At first, I didn’t obey, thinking that he had singled me out tobe beaten. He called me again and remained standing against the wall with his face turnedaway. He then walked away and chose several other young people. In addition to myself,he also chose Yerakhmiel Schwartz, a certain Gomolinski, whose brothers I later met inSkarzysko, and the two Zizek brothers.As we stood there waiting for further orders, to my utter surprise I recognized greatpersonalities of the Piotrkow Ghetto amongst those waiting to undress. I also saw anumber of Judenrat members and the Piotrkower Rabbi. I realized then that the PiotrkowGhetto must have been completely liquidated. We stood to a side and with suffocatingbreath we witnessed the final moments of those near and dear to us. Our hearts stoppedwhen we heard the Rabbi intone the “ Vidui” (confession of sins) aloud. The entire throngrepeated the prayer as they accompanied the Rabbi on his final journey.After this entire procedure was completed, we were lined up in rows and sent out tothe Plaza for our work assignments. Gomolinski and Zizek were transferred to anothercamp, and Yerakhmiel Schwartz and I were sent to the “Lumpenplatz,” where we weregiven the task of sorting clothes. This was a huge plaza with mountains of clothes andshoes. Several other people from the Piotrkow transport were also chosen, but I neversaw them because they were transferred to another camp (Treblinka, a penal camp, whichwas located some 4 or 5 kilometers from the death camp). Several hundred Jews andPoles worked there, hacking out stones to be used for paving roads. No one couldpossibly survive the hard labor and meager rations for more than a few weeks. Eachweek they brought back 30 to 50 barely alive humans, who were later to meet their end230 / A TALE OF ONE CITYin the gas chambers. Nothing more could be seen of them than bones and two frightenedeyes.On my second day in that fearful hell, which no one can adequately describe, I meta Piotrkower, Bimbaum by name, and also Lieberman, the second of three brothers, whohad lived in Piotrkow and owned a jewelry store. His older and younger brothers hademigrated to Uruguay, I believe, but he had remained in Warsaw, where he later married.From the Warsaw Ghetto he and his family were deported to Treblinka, where now onlyhe survived. I did not meet any other friends from Piotrkow because they had alreadydied or been murdered. In Treblinka I met a larger group of Jews from Czestochowabecause, prior to the evacuation of Czestochowa, it appeared that the Germans hadchanged their tactics. Before then, the Germans would send the clothes from the earlierdeportees to Lublin to be cleaned and sorted. Now they decided that the sorting, cleaningand examining of the clothes for money, gold and diamonds which may have beenoverlooked should be done on the spot. For that reason, a larger number of people werechosen to sort the things from the transports arriving from Czestochowa and the vicinityof Kielce.There were almost 700 of us and every group had its appointed job. There were“Koch-Yudn”—^Jews who worked in the Jewish, Ukrainian and German kitchens. Thosewho worked in special workshops considered themselves part of the “elite.” There wasa “forest company” which went into the woods every day and returned with straw fromwhich brooms were made. They were also engaged in doing some smuggling for the“elite.” The most sought-after article was alcohol, for which they were not paid a highprice. There were also the “transport crew” and the “Lumpen crew,” to which I belonged.I sorted and examined trousers; others, jackets; another groups sat and cut up entirebreads and challahs into tiny pieces, looking for gold and diamonds; others sorted bedlinens; still others sorted men's, women's and children's underwear. Shoes, too, weresorted. I worked at sorting haberdashery and wool. I was supposed to check to see if thepackages of wool contained any American dollars, English pounds or even preciousjewels and diamonds.In the beginning of November (it was either the first or the second), a transport ofJews, deported from Tomaszow-Mazowiecki, arrived in Treblinka. On a certain day—Ithink it might have been mid-November, (we had no calendar and could not differentiateone week from another, and since we worked Saturdays and Sundays, too, we couldn'teven tell what day of the week it was; however, because of some newspapers we hadfound, we could orient ourselves more or less)—a transport arrived with Jews fromBerlin. They came in closed, regular passenger cars with seats. When the doors weregently opened and they were politely led onto the ramp, they asked if this was the“Treblinka Colony.” We were lined up as if we were porters. We took their valises sothey would not have to carry them. We supported the older ones by slipping our armsthrough theirs and guided them carefully. They were to learn the truth only when theyreached the baths.A few days later, another transport arrived from Czechoslovakia and several peoplewere chosen to work. Because several people escaped or were killed every day, the totalnumber of laborers had to be increased to equal the number listed in the reports.What I Saw in Treblinka / 231In late November, a transport came from the Radom Circle. The rumor was thatthese must be Jews from Staszow. The doors were opened, but no one walked out—onlythe “transport crew,” who threw the bodies of dead men, women and children out of thecars. They had been shot and were frozen. Some of their heads were swollen and largerthan their bodies, with eyes popping and their clothes bloody.Several wagons (from which people had evidently tried to escape along the way,)were broken. The Germans had ordered the train to an off-route station and there they“calmed” the people with bullets; the rest froze to death because they were detained inthe freezing cold for several days and nights.At that time we were all taken from our work to convey the corpses of thebefore-mentioned transport. Four people carried a corpse in a blanket or a sheet. Fromthe ramp we had to run to the nearby plaza, strip the body naked and toss it into theburning ditch. There were about 6000 dead corpses. Because the process of burning thebodies wasn’t going fast enough, we had to lay out the dead uniformly. I shall never,ever, forget this picture as long as I live.Then, four Jews from the Kielce area escaped one night, but they got lost and werecaptured near the Ukrainian barracks. At noon they were led out to the plaza, and afterbeing ordered to take off their clothes and get down on their knees, they were shot. Laterthe “beautiful” S.S. man whom they nicknamed “Lalke” (doll) lectured us on the factthat there would be no purpose to our trying to escape because, no matter where we ran,we’d return, sooner or later, to the same point. We had no other opportunities and herelife was good for us—we had food and clothing. The “doll” had a dog called “Barry.”Our fear of him was as great as that of William’s dog, who used to attack children atTrybunalski Plaza in Piotrkow. “Barry” could tear a chunk of flesh from anyone in thewink of an eye, and after such an encounter you had one foot in the next world anyway,since it would be impossible to get up in the morning and stand during the attendancecheck. When the housemaster reported that there was a sick person in his barrack, thatperson would be removed and promptly given either a fatal injection or a bullet to thehead.Early in December, 1944, the general province was already free of Jews and onlysmall remnants remained in the diminished ghettos. That’s when a transport of Jewsfrom Grodno arrived. This particular transport did not show up, as all the others did, inthe morning. It arrived much later, at night. After they were led to the plaza and madeto undress, these Jews put up resistance. But what arms did they possess except G-d intheir hearts and perhaps a few bottles of water? A few may even have had a knife. Theshooting began and, in a little while, all was quiet again. One person from that transportsucceeded in forcing his way into our barrack. He stabbed one of the men who wasbarring the door to the barrack with a knife and entered.The Gestapo was alerted, however, and arrived soon thereafter. We were made tolook at him. In the early morning, after the attendance check, we were forced to returnto the plaza to clean the clothing of those who had been aboard the transport fromGrodno, since they were immediately sent to the gas chambers and were not forced tocarry their clothes to the appointed area. It seemed that the murderers wanted to befinished with that transport as quickly as possible.232 / A TALE OF ONE CITYAgain, we witnessed a horrible sight: the dead little bodies of tiny children, discardedand frozen, lay around like worn-out, unimportant objects. It was the end of yet anotherJewish ghetto.Also at that time, a transport of Jews arrived from a concentration camp and notfrom a ghetto. These people, after being driven from demolished ghetto streets, weredetained for a time in an enclosed camp. About 20,000 Jews had been gathered thereand now they were brought to Treblinka, but without knapsacks on their backs, thin, andfilthy. They were also lice-infested, and after that transport came through, an epidemicof typhus broke out in Treblinka. As soon as someone developed a fever, the doctorwould visit him the following day and, by order of the “Lalke,” administered an injectionwhich promptly “cured him of all his pain.”During the entire time I was in Treblinka, my thoughts moved in only one direction:not to die in such a horrible way. The place where so many Jews were put to death wasvery important to me, but I wanted to die in another manner, not from contagious lice.I was constantly plagued by the thought of escaping from that hell.Everyone thought about escaping but lacked the courage to undertake such an act.We would be running from one danger to another. Where could a Jew go then, and whowould have permitted him to enter, especially in that region where poor Ukrainians lived.They would gladly have stolen a pair of shoes from Jewish feet, not to mention acceptthe 5 liter of alcohol or 10 kilos of sugar which the Germans would have given them forinforming on a Jew whose clothing he would be allowed to removed later anyway.Escaping was quite easy at first, because, in the afternoon, before heading “home”from the plaza where the clothes were being sorted and stacked in the mountainous hills,one could hide there. Then at night, one could escape by running through the barbed-wirefence covered with ivy. Later, during the count, at attendance time, when two or threepeople were missing, they could be replaced by the next incoming transport. As timewent on, however, and escapees became widespread, so that even the speeches of the“Lalke” were no longer effective, as the fear of being shot did not keep people fromrunning away, the Germans initiated another tactic. Every Kapo who had 200 people inhis work detail received fiver “overseers,” each of whom was responsible for 40 people.Prior to every attendance check, he would line up his people in rows and, when one wasmissing, the other 39 had to find him. Also, one could no longer run away from theworkplace, and certainly not from the barrack, which was surrounded by Ukrainianguards every night.There now remained only one possibility for escaping and this had to be calculatedby split-seconds.At that time they began to construct guard towers with electric reflectors. Utilizingan electrical current to the reflectors, they could not simultaneously direct it to the wireelectrified enclosure, since the current was too weak; this made escaping possible. Idecided finally to take advantage of my only and last chance to escape. The latrine waslocated behind the barrack where I “slept,” or passed my sleepless nights, and about 2meters from there was the beginning of the work area, which was also separated bybarbed wire covered with ivy. So I, and a friend from the barrack whose sleeping placewas next to mine, undertook a plan which was to give us no rest; we decided on a dateWhat I Saw in Treblinka / 233right before Christmas holidays, since many Gestapo officers left for home on furloughat that time. They would be preparing for this for many weeks, packing their best andmost expensive belongings, not excluding dollars and gold and precious gems for theirfamilies. The Ukrainians, too, would be busy preparing for the holidays, collectingalcohol from everywhere, plus sausages and gifts. We came to the conclusion that thiswould be the most advantageous and logical time, allowing us the opportunity to stealout of the camp and run for a distance of at least several kilometers.One morning, immediately after being awakened, while it was still dark outside, weleft the barrack to go to the latrine area to see how the situation looked like and to checkwhether the guard was stationed in front of the barrack or at the side of the latrine. Herewe noticed two other camp inmates, who had already cut the wires in order to cross tothe “Lumpenplatz” and from there to escape to the other side.Instantly I told my friend that we must leave now, because the opportunity to escapethis way might not be available to us the following day. We moved from words to actionsin a second, following the first two men to the Plaza. I had hidden some money whereI worked, but now we could not risk losing any time returning there to look for it. Afterwe worked our way through the last barbed-wire fence, we glanced for the last time atthe horrible place and darted forward, running through a heavy snow that had begun tofall over hills of sand which were heaped near the train tracks. We followed the road tothe forest. In order to eradicate our tracks from the snow, we entered a small forest andhid there. After waiting there until midday, we started on our way again in a pouringrain. I opted for the road to Sokolow because going toward Malkinia would have beenmore dangerous. At about 2 in the afternoon, we circumvented Sokolov and continuedfurther. At about 3 o 'clock we stopped in a small village to rest a while. It was impossiblefor us to go any further because the hours of the civilian curfew were from 5 A.M. to 5P.M. and the nearest town, Cizow, was about 27 kilometers away.In order to provide ourselves with food along the way, we entered a villagerestaurant. It appeared that the owner was a Pole who had been evacuated from Gnieznoand, after consulting with him about where we might spend the night and perhaps locatea cart to take us to Cizow, he advised us to choose the simplest way: the train. We stillhad time to catch it. We decided to postpone leaving for the train station and orderedsomething to eat. He then seemed to figure out who we were and promptly changed histone. Pretending not to be suspicious of us, he even suggested our having a drink andlater introduced us to his friend, who worked at the Soltys, explaining that, thanks tohis intervention, we would now find a place to sleep at the home of a certain Ukrainianwho had a wagon in which he would take us to Cizow the following morning.We agreed to this because we really had no other choice. Soon the “writer” from the“Soltys” arrived and brought along a Ukrainian peasant, who invited us to spend thenight at his home. He promised to drive us in his w^gon to Cizow at dawn the nextmorning. After we arrived at the peasant’s house, his mother brought in two bundles ofhay for us to bed down on the ground. Even before the light of the constantly availableoil lamp had a chance to extinguish itself, the same village “writer” arrived, in thecompany of a Polish p)oliceman.I realized that we had been trapped in order for them to extract money from us. The234 / A TALE OF ONE CITYpoliceman started to shout at the peasant for allowing us to sleep there because we mightbe partisans, spies or even Jews. After we identified ourselves (we gave Aryan names,of course), the peasant defended himself by saying that the clerk from the village officehad brought us there. Again, a discussion ensued between the policeman and the clerk,who said that we the inkeeper’s friends and that we were introduced by him as peoplehe knew in Cizow.After the questioning, the policeman escorted us to the inkeeper. While we werethere, the policeman and the “writer” pretended to go to the German police, but in factthey remained outside, waiting for the inkeeper to resolve the matter with us.The inkeeper began his speech by saying that he knew we were Jews, escapees fromTreblinka, so he would like to help us. He advised us to escape through the back doorto the highway and from there into the forest. We understood right away that as soon aswe left his house that night, the “writer” and the policeman would shoot us on the roadlike dogs and remove everything we wore from our bodies. In addition, they would alsoreceive, as a reward from the Germans, 5 liters of alcohol and 5 kilos of sugar for eachof us. We immediately interrupted his talk at the word “Jews,” and I asked how much itwould cost.Actually, I had no money, but my partner-in-destiny had a thermos bottle, where hehad hidden some Polish money and German Marks. After we concluded a deal with himfor the sum of 1200 Polish Zlotys, he called the policeman and the “writer” in and theydivided up the money. Afterwards, the policeman took us to the peasant’s house, sinceif he exposed us at the inkeeper’s house, he would also be shot. The policeman explainedto the peasant that everything was in order and we had permission to remain thereovernight.We sat in the dark Polish house, impatiently waiting for the night to end. At 5 A.M.the peasant harnessed his horse to the wagon and took us to Cizow.We finally arrived there without any problems. Again, we wandered through astrange city, seeking something that was impossible to find. We searched for any Jew,but all we saw were the remains of a small ghetto, a dead picture without a sign ofhumanity.We hired a horse and wagon to take us to Siedlce because we did not want to chancetaking the train. It was always filled to capacity with salesmen and smugglers transport-ing their wares, and the police often conducted searches.We arrived in Siedlce at 3 P.M. and again, after walking several blocks, we wendedour way, as evening arrived, to the train station and purchased two tickets to Warsaw.The train left Siedlce at 6 P.M. and we arrived at the main station in Warsaw at 8 P.M.The conductor told us that a train would be leaving for Czestochowa at about 8:30 P.M.It turned out, however, that there would be no express train to Czestochowa earlier than12 midnight. There was no other choice but to buy two tickets and wait. Impatiently, wecounted the minutes on the clock. At ten minutes before twelve, a megaphone announcedthe first cars were being reserved for Germans and the rear ones for Poles. After goingout to the platform, we opted for the front cars, since I reasoned that they would not besearching and checking the Germans.Having passed through Skiemiewice and Koluszki without mishap, the train stoppedWhat I Saw in Treblinka / 235at the Piotrkow station at 3 o’clock in the morning. We couldn’t go into the city becausea patrol might stop us and we had no documents. We decided to follow the train tracksin the direction of the “Kara” and “Hortensia” glass works. I heard the town clock strike5 A.M. Through a side road we headed toward the Jewish cemetery, where we wouldbe able to turn onto Leonarda Street and enter the so-called tailor shop, which was locatedin the building which had once housed the “Ort” school. As we approached Leonarda,a policeman, warming himself at a fire, didn’t want to allow us to pass. He announcedthat these were the streets where the ghetto had been located, they had not been cleanedafter the Jews were deported. Though the night was dark, it seemed even darker to oureyes. The policeman told us to return to the station. (I told him that we wanted to go tothe “Silever Kolejka” and come around the other side of the city, so that we could avoidthe ghetto area from Cmentarna to Garntsarska.) Despite the fact that we could hardlydrag ourselves any further, we took his advice. We headed toward Kosciuszki Platz viaTorunska and there we heard the sound of wooden shoes. At that moment we met witha party of Jews whose leader was policeman Lolek Weishof; they were on their way towork at the “Pheonix Glass Works,” which were located not far from the Towarowastation.A new glimmer of hope rose up in me: perhaps I was not the last of the survivors ofthe Piotrkow Ghetto. After asking about my family and my friends, and after purposelyasking several naive questions, such as “Is it true what they say?” I accompanied theminto the Glass Works. Lolek Weishof refused to take me into the block, saying that hefeared denouncers, but he did take my friend, because no one knew him, and he broughthim to the members of my family who had survived. My friend gave them news aboutme. The following day, he left the ghetto.I, on the other hand, while at the Pheonix Glass Works, knocked at the door of aPolish family whom I knew very well from my business dealings before the war. I askedthem to p)ermit me to stay with them for one day because I had something to attend towith some Poles we knew in the neighborhood before I could enter the ghetto. Theyrefused. I went to another Pole, who lived about a kilometer from the Glass Works,where I was able to stay for one day. In the evening I went out to see the city and, afterspending the night, I left at dawn and went to wait for the group of Jews who would begoing to work. This time their leader was Tuvye Perlmutter, who agreed to take me intothe block. He told me about the 13 informers and said that the best thing to do would beto tell President Warszawski about my return. I obeyed him and, after coming into theblock, we went right up to Warszawski’s apartment. He was very angry and shouted thathe must now know about me and sent us away to see Lawyer Zylbershteyn, thechief-commander of the Jewish police. Zylbershteyn asked me innocent questions aboutTreblinka and directed me to Teitelbaum; there I had to answer more questions. It’spossible that these questions sounded naive to me because no human mind could becapable of understanding what really had happened in Treblinka. With Teitelbaum mywanderings ended.In the “White House” and the Police Station of the Piotrkow Ghetto, there was nolonger any tumult, because only 2400 people remained, many of whom did not comefrom Piotrkow236 / A TALE OF ONE CITYAfter reuniting me with my dear ones, the Judenrat wanted to get rid of me so theywould not have to report me to the Gestapo. Warszawski’s son-in-law, Lieberman, dideverything he could to save me, as did the Judenrat member Samelson. They evenadvised me to leave the ghetto and travel to Radomsk, where there was a labor camp, orto Czestochowa. After all, I was in the block illegally.After being in that horrible ghetto for several weeks, living happily under one roofwith my surviving sister, her husband and their two sons, I prepared to escape beyondthe ghetto walls. My plans to reach the partisans in the forest never materialized becausea party of men and women were deported to the munition factory in Skarzysko. I waspart of that party.Izkor BookThe Purim Massacre in PiotrkowDr. Michael Lubliner-Los AngelesThe annals of Jewish communities in many parts of the world include peril and cruellaws which threatened the lives of Jewish individuals and sometimes endangered thesurvival of the whole community. In a few fortunate cases, the danger was suddenlyremoved, or the dreaded law was inexplicably abrogated. Then, that community wouldcommemorate each anniversary of the happy change by observing a “Second Purim,” afestival which mimicked the original Purim, which marks the deliverance of the Jewsof Persia from the evil machinations of Haman. Historians have listed some 90 “secondPurim” anniversaries observed by various Jewish families and communities, beginningwith the early Middle Ages and ending with the so-called “Hitler Purim” proclaimed bythe Jews of Casablanca in 1943.In tragic contrast to these “Second Purim” celebrations, Jewish history also knowsof instances in which the joyous festival of Purim itself was turned into a day ofmourning. On such case in point was Purim, 1943, in the Ghetto of Piotrkow, whereNazis trained in the art of murder set out, by orders of their Fuhrer in Berlin, to annihilateall the Jews. In contrast to the harsh decrees enacted against Jews in earlier times, thisparticular order was not openly promulgated but was kept a closely guarded secret,known only to a select few high officials who had been sternly warned not to permiteven rumors of the Nazi plan to leak out.This sad Purim came about at the end of the winter, 1943, in the so-called “LittleGhetto,” a stunted remnant of what had once been the flourishing Jewish community ofPiotrkow.After the mass “evacuation” of Jews from Piotrkow in October, 1942, only 2,000Jews had been left in Piotrkow. This number included refugees from the immediateenvirons and also from other cities and towns of Nazi-occupied Poland. They werecrammed into a Procrustean bed south of Staro-Warszawska, once the “Jewish Streetpar excellence. It was ringed by a thicket of barbed wire that turned the area allotted toPiotrkow’s remaining Jews into a convenient cage within which the murderers couldgun down their victims any time they chose.The streets on the other side of the barbed wire, formerly part of the larger Ghetto,were lined with houses where Jews had once lived but which were now deserted shells.With their doors agape and their window frames having had their glass panes knockedout, they looked like so many skeletons with toothless mouths and empty eye sockets.They spread an atmosphere of stark terror with their graveyard stillness, a silence brokenonly from time to time by the sounds of the Nazis knocking down walls and tearing openfloors in search of hidden treasures which the deported Jews had supposedly left behind.It was in this still atmosphere, heavy with constant dread, that the Jews tried tomuddle through life. The intention of the authorities was to keep their frightened victims237238 / A TALE OF ONE CITYin a permanent state of suspense. Every day brought a new regulation, but so disguisedthat the Jews would not be able to suspect its intent. Thus, it often happened that ashipment of food would arrive just before a “partial evacuation,” or on the eve of a massexecution.This is the way things happened on that tragic Purim which I am to describe. Onlythe pale sun, hiding behind the Ghetto houses, shed a feeble light which infiltrated thefrozen roofs as if seeking to melt the winter ice upon them. But its light could not warmthe human shadows in the Ghetto prison; their bodies were too stiff, their souls toocongealed for that.To whom would it have occurred that this day was Purim, the merriest of Jewishholidays? Perhaps there were some who managed to keep track of time; those who kepttheir Judaism with self-sacrificing devotion even under the most inhuman conditions,or those exceptional individuals who stole a glance in the underground newspaperssmuggled into the Ghetto by some Polish and Jewish workers. Among the “contraban-dists” who managed to sneak this literature into the Ghetto at the risk of their lives wasour friend, the young Zionist activist Feivel Steinberg of blessed memory, whose ownoptimism helped cheer many who were on the verge of despair.When, on that bleak winter day, a truck bearing armed policemen pulled up in thefront of the house at 12 Jerozolimska Street, the headquarters of the Ghetto Committee,no one suspected that this would be the start of an orgy of murder. On the contrary, thereappeared a faint glimmer of hope, whose feeble glow briefly diminished the gloom ofthe Ghetto. There were whispered rumors that Jews from various Ghettos in Poland wereabout to be exchanged for German citizens living in Palestine, in Sharona, a colonyfounded by the Knights of Templar. This fortune had come to Jacob Kurz, Rosenthal,and several others;hhey had been permitted to leave the Ghetto of Piotrkow and hadarrived safely in Palestine.The Nazis saw to it that this rumor would spread widely through the Ghetto. Theystressed that “for the time being,” the privilege of “repatriation” to Palestine in exchangefor German citizens would be limited to ten Jews in all: each one would have to showproof that he had graduated from an institution of higher learning.On the Purim afternoon in 1943, the Ghetto was more alive than it had been in manya day. There was unusual activity, particularly in the courtyard of the so-called “JewishCommittee,” at Reder’s house, which had been designated as the assembly point forthose “privileged few” who, it was said, were eligible for “repatriation” to Palestine.The first ones to arrive at the assembly point were Stanislaw Silberstein and hiswhite-haired wife. As a wealthy, assimilated lawyer and the son of Wilhelm Silberstein,a former president of Piotrkow’s Jewish community, he had been a highly esteemedpersonage before the war, as well as in the circles of the Polish intelligentsia. As it turned1 Kurz, Rosenthal and Itzkowitz, natives of Piotrkow, had emigrated to Palestine as pioneers long beforethe war. They had returned to their home town to visit relatives, only to find themselves stranded in Polandwhen the war broke out. Thanks to efforts made by friends in Palestine, these men were eventually permittedto return there in exchange for Germans who had been living there. Subsequently, the late Jacob Kurz wroteThe Book of Testimony (in Hebrew), a documentary history of the early phases of the destruction of PolishJewry.The Purim Massacre in Piotrkow / 239out, Stanislaw knew better than the others what the true intentions of the Germans mightbe, as his prompt reaction to the news that the Germans were about to “exchange” Jewsfor Germans was to pull out a vial of poison. When the others saw this, they kept himfrom taking the poison. He asked them to look out for his only daughter.The next “privileged” individual to report was Dr. Maurycy Brams. With him werehis wife, his dark-haired young daughter and his sister-in-law (a member of the Kaganfamily). This humble but most efficient and devoted communal leader, whose gaunt,ascetic features were brightened by shining, gentle eyes, had been helping his needyfellow Jews to the point of self-sacrifice, particularly since the outbreak of the war.Unlike Silberstein, Brams was in high spirits. He was certain that he was about to besent to a country where he would not only be freed and independent himself, but be ina position to help the Jews who remained in the Ghetto.The mood of Szymek Stein was entirely different. This brilliant young Jewishlawyer, bubbling over with life and wit, had been educated at the Jewish Gymnasiumand was an active Zionist. As soon as he arrived at the assembly point, he had apremonition of what the Germans were really planning to do, and he tried to escape—toolate, unfortunately.Also among the “privileged few” was the psychiatrist Dr. Leon Glatter. Altogether,ten individuals had been “selected” for the “exchange.”As the “repatriates” were shepherded into the waiting truck, the mood in the Ghettostreet grew tense. The “lucky” few were followed by curious, searching glances fromthose who had to remain behind.The truck with the “repatriates” drove off in the direction of Sulejowska Street.Supposedly, they would be taken to Radom, the chief city of the district to which Piotrkowbelonged during the Nazi occupation. There, they would join a large transport of “privileged”people from other Ghettoes and set out together on the journey to freedom.The next morning dawned dark and somber in the Ghetto. The Jews were suddenlyconfronted with the incredible reports of blood-curdling scenes in the Jewish cemetery.People in the know told gruesome details about the fate that had befallen the privilegedindividuals. In order to make a proper production of it, the Nazi hangmen had imitatedthe account in the Book of Esther of the execution of the ten sons of Haman—exceptthat, to the ten Jewish victims, they had added an eleventh one.^All the Nazi bigwigs of the Piotrkow district had gathered at the mass grave, whichwas surrounded by gendarmes, policemen, and army officers with machine guns at theready. They drank, made merry and even read an obscene parody of the Book of Estherbefore killing the “repatriates.”Polish policemen who had been present at the cemetery later recalled the horriblescenes they had witnessed with their own eyes: how Dr. Brams had collapsed when hesaw his beautiful daughter dragged to the mass grave, and how Szymek Stein hadappealed to the conscience of the Nazi police chief not to take the lives of innocent human2 It should be noted that those who were supposed to complete the quorum, or the alleged eleventh one,were never identified. The rumors that the Jewish watchman of the cemetery and his wife were among themproved false. However, according to some reports, the mother of Szymek Stein had to come with him.240 / A TALE OF ONE CITYbeings. But the hearts of the Germans had remained cold to his pleas. All the Nazi officersaid was, “We are carrying out our order,” and this with a cynical, satanic sneer.In order to avert any suspicions the Jews might have had, the Germans drove themall over the city until nightfall. Only under cover of pitch darkness did they finally takethem quickly to the cemetery, where even the optimists in the group lost the last of theirillusions.The tears for the Martyrs of the Purim massacre had not yet dried when there camea new wave of mass executions. Dozens of young, vibrant Jews were gunned down,including some who later were found to be carrying forged “Aryan” passports.And so the sufferings of the Jews were prolonged like a thick, blood-soaked chain,day in and day out, leaving no breathing spell in which to contemplate what had happenedthat day, or even the hour before, in the words of our Sages, “The latest sorrows causethe earlier ones to be forgotten” (Ber. 13).To this day we are wading through a vast sea of tears over the horrible deaths andunspeakable sufferings of millions of victims—our fathers and mothers, sisters andbrothers, wives and husbands and children, and other loved ones—whose final restingplace we do not know and for whom no adequate dirges have been composed. To thatdeluge of tears let us add still more for the ten Martyrs of Piotrkow.Bulletin No. 39, 1976Piotrkow, November 3,1988. Jakub Rener from Paris (right) and a representative of theChristian “Pax” society lay a wreath on the grave of Dr. Maurycy Brams and the“Purim Massacre” Martyrs. Rener attened the extensive ceremonies marking the tragic46th anniversary of the liquidation of the ghetto of Piotrkow.My ParentsIrving Cymberknopf—TorontoIt was my destiny to be born on January 2,1925, in the town of Piotrkow Trybunalski,Poland.It was also my destiny to lose both parents in September 1942. They died within onemonth of each other. I was 17 years old.Today, close to 50 years later, I cannot understand how I survived the deep emotionalpain of that period of my life.It happened to all of us who were born as Jews in Poland during that period.However, I can only speak about the effect the experience had on me.I was an only child. The love I received during the first years of my life had a lastingeffect. I was very close to my parents. Since they were murdered, in 1942,1 have notforgotten them for an instant. The pain of my memories is constant and unforgettable.It took 50 years before I was able to even try to write down the manner in which mybeloved parents died. I had to do something. And if not now, when? I didn’t want thetragic story of how each of my parents died to be forgotten—not by my children, andnot by their children. I want their stories to be recorded for their heroism and for thestrength of their beliefs, but mostly because they deserve to be respected as humanbeings.My mother was a very devoted person. She believed that everything that happens isG-d’s will. My father was also observant. But he believed in individual strength and inthe ability of each person to shape his own destiny. Each in their own way struggled forlife and against death.In 1941, my mother, in her wisdom, bribed someone to obtain a position for me inthe local glass factory, called Hortensia, believing that one who worked would survive.At that time, the so-called Final Solution for Jews had already begun in other cities. Wedid not believe what we heard. We considered it in our interest to remain in the city. Theghetto was established with its barbed wire. The limited space was cramped with people.In our 2-room apartment lived 12 people. Before, there had been three.As the liquidation of Jews in our city progressed, my parents and the immediatefamily started to dig a bunker, a simple hole in the ground, thinking that once theliquidation (Aussiedlung) was over, they would re-enter the population which wasworking in the glass factory and in the other places, such as the one which was called“Bugaj.” After the deportation, the Ghetto was greatly reduced in size. The workingpopulation that remained was about 2,500 people out of a population of approximately30,000 Jews. When it was time for our people to be deported to “other places” (in fact,the people in our city were taken to Treblinka), my parents and four other families,including their children (a total of 10 people), went into hiding in the bunker (2 Rushniks,2 Cymberknops, 2 Rimers and 4 Lichtensteins).241242 / A TALE OF ONE CITYApproximately 28,000 people were taken from the ghetto. There were many bunkerswhere people were hiding. When these people started to come out they found themselvesoutside the ghetto boundaries and they had to smuggle themselves back into the ghetto.The ghetto was surrounded by barbed wire and every few meters there stood Ukrainianand Lithuanian guards. One had to be extremely fortunate just to be able to make it tothe ghetto.In this respect my father was brave. Perhaps this was due to the fact that he had beenin the Polish army in 1920, when Poland became independent. He was the one whosmuggled himself and the other 9 people back to the ghetto. I remember how I trembledwhen he ventured out through the barbed wire again and again to a distance of about athousand meters, avoiding the murderers, to bring back my mother, my aunts and 6children. All were gathered in this small apartment that belonged to my uncle Janckel.At that point I was so happy to have my parents and the rest of my family together. Myfather pressed me close to his body, my mother kissed me without stopping. We weretogether for only one day, for the next day the Jewish police started to look for peoplewho had left the bunkers, and for that matter anyone they could find. My parents wentinto hiding in this small apartment. The Jewish police came in, found my mother andfather and took them both to the Synagogue, where there were a few hundred Jews fromthe bunkers and hideouts. The Germans brought Poles with horses and wagons totransport the Jews gathered in the synagogue to a nearby city called Tomaszow, wherethe liquidation had not yet been carried out.Instead of going with the people, my mother hid herself in the attic of the synagogue.My father was outside, in one of the wagons. He was waiting to see my mother comeout of the synagogue. As he did not see her coming out, he knew she had succeeded inremaining hidden. This is how he told it to me, and he also told me how he had decidedto escape. He took the whip which was used by the Polish driver for the horses andwalked away as though he were a Polish driver. He looked like a Pole. This helped. Hewent in one of the empty houses outside the ghetto, waited until night and then smuggledhimself back to the ghetto.When my father came into the room, I was in bed and totally speechless. Thehappiness I felt in my heart to see my father alive was limitless. It was dark and it waslight, it was death and it was life, it was disaster and it was joy. We hugged and heldeach other close all night.Two days later, the Jewish police started a new search. My father hid himself. I wasworking legally and did not feel the need to hide. When I came back from work, threepolicemen were waiting for me. One was my teacher, one a neighbor and the third afriend of my father’s from childhood. They took me to the synagogue, where a fewhundred people were already gathered. What was to become of us was unknown. I wassure that this was the end. For three days without food and water except for the snow Icould gather through the window at night, I kept myself and others alive. I still can’tbelieve how I survived those days.On the third day, in the late afternoon, a Gestapo officer came in and started callingnames. He called approximately 20 names, mine among them. A total of 562 people—men, women and children—were in the synagogue. I started to walk out of theMy Parents / 243From the Jewish cemetery inPiotrkow to Har Menuchoth in Jerusalem.Irving Cymberknopf exhumes again the remains of his mother Bina in 1977. (She waskilled in 1942 during the deportations to Treblinka and buried in the Wolborski Forest.In 1945, Irving brought her remains to the Jewish cemetery and put her to restaccording to Jewish custom.)244 / A TALE OF ONE CITYsynagogue. In front of the synagogue, a Gestapo officer stood with white gloves and arevolver in his hand. Beside him lay a dead body. That moment is imprinted in my mindforever. It was the first time I had witnessed death so close to me.We lined up to be counted. A group of people came towards us. They were also linedup. Among the people in this group stood my beloved father. I do not know until thisday how I could remain standing just across from him and not run to him as I wanted todo. I cannot forgive myself to this day for not having done so. He was going to thesynagogue and I was coming out.My father, I found out later, had turned himself in to the Jewish policemen. He hadtraded his life for mine. He went in and I went out. He went to meet death and I survived.After one week in the synagogue, 42 young, capable men, including my father, weretaken out and marched to a nearby forest, known as the Rakow Forest. They were orderedto dig ditches, and as they finished digging the holes, 4hey were ordered to take theirclothes off. At that moment, my father attacked a guard and tried to escape. However,he never made it. During the fight, eight people were able to save themselves and comeback to the ghetto. It was through one of these eight survivors that I learned how myfather died. My father was a hero.Now, for the story of my mother’s death.At the last minute, a Jewish policeman discovered her hiding in the attic of thesynagogue. She was the last to be taken out of the synagogue. My father never saw this.She went with the transport to Tomaszow. On the way, she didn’t see my father and wastold he had run away. So she, too, ran away from that transport and managed to stay ina farmer’s house for two weeks. Since our business dealt with farmers’ supplies, she hadnot difficulty in finding a place. Our relations with them had been very good in the past.At this point, I would like to mention that, after my father returned from his escape,we found out that she had been discovered by a Jewish policeman on the second day.This was told by another policeman who had been present at the terrible occasion of herdeath. I cry to this day. My heart cries. My soul cries.After being at the farmer’s for two weeks, she decided to return to the ghetto. Onthe way, she was caught and taken to the forest called Wolbosherwald, and beatenbrutally. Finally she broke out into hysterical laughter. Then she was shot. So, a farmerwho was an eyewitness told me.In 1945, after the war, I returned to Piotrkow and visited this farmer. With his help,after a day’s searching in the forest, we found her body. I knew the remains were thoseof my mother. I recognized her by her clothes and by the Star of David she had on her.My mother was a great woman, a great believer. She said: “If this is G-d’s will, then letit be so.” Very few people could say that, very few indeed. Yet she also struggled tosurvive. She had a good nature and her actions were filled with love and kindness.I brought her remains to the Jewish cemetery and buried her according to Jewishcustom. I erected a tombstone. In 19761 went to Poland for the purpose of exhumingand bringing her remains to Israel in order to bury her there. I was unsuccessful.In 19771 went to Poland again and, with the help of the Dutch Ambassador, I wasable to bring her to Israel in 1978. She is now at rest on Har Menucha in Jerusalem.My mother left me with the strength not to abandon my faith, and my father left meMy Parents / 245with the conviction that one has to strive to find strength within oneself and with it onecan maintain control over one’s life even in the most dire of circumstances.There is yet another story to be told.When I returned to Piotrkow, I found the sack that my mother had buried, in mypresence, close to her mother’s grave in our town’s Jewish cemetery. It contained somejewelry, our silver candlesticks and a silver kiddush cup. These items were our mostvaluable goods.After the war, upon my return to Piotrkow, I retrieved that sack. Although most ofits contents have been lost or stolen since, I was able to hold on to a gold chain, whichI presented, together with its history, with great pride and pleasure to my daughter Binaon her wedding day. It is priceless to me because it is one of the few tangible things leftfrom my youth—from the time when I basked in my parents’ love and devotion. To beable to pass it on to my beloved daughter brought some comfort to my scarred neshomeh.Exhumation of the “Rakow Kedoshim” just after the war. From the Rakow Forest to“Kewer Achim” at the cemetery in Piotrkow.The Topic of ResistanceBen GiladiFirst, we huddled together in the ghetto of Piotrkow. Slowly, edict by edict, theenemy claimed our dignity, our property, our strength and our lives. In the beginningwe did not comprehend. Then we prayed. Then we accepted. But gradually we learnedhow to resist because we shared one common dream—the dream of survival.With the establishment of the ghetto, the most pressing needs were food and housingbecause of the enlarged population, of which 45% were other Jewish souls from theareas incorporated into the Reich. In order to stay alive, many people started to smugglefood into the ghetto in exchange for money, clothes and other valuable items. Very fewbakeries were functioning legally. To supply the pressing demand for daily bread, dozensof little, illegal bakeries came into existence. The butchers, despite strict prohibitingorders, were supplying meat.Such activities were punishable by death; many paid the price of being arrested anddeported, among them shochet Yehoshua Lemer and butcher Berek Pudlowski, whowas caught when bringing a cow (live) up flights of stairs for slaughter.Bribery was a big factor in disobeying the draconian rules of the oppressor. Forexample, in 1940, a large group of young men was deported to various forced laborcamps in the Lublin area. A man named Gomberg was dispatched by the Council andwas successful in releasing the boys in exchange for a large sum of money paid to theSS monster Dolf.A hard task was satisfying the extortion for demands by the Germans. On December2nd, 1939, the Council was ordered to deliver a thousand men for forced labor each dayand to pay their wages. In addition, the constant demands for the delivery of pianos, furs,furniture, etc., plus three cash contributions of a total of three hundred and ninetythousand zlotys greatly afflicted the people. In January, 1940, the Stadtkommissardemanded all leather and textiles from Jewish stores. The Council then submitted severalmemoranda to the occupants boldly describing the desperate situation and requestingthat the community be spared in the future.The people also responded with defiance. They sold or gave away the furs and otherforbidden articles to the Poles or simply destroyed them.Widespread welfare and medical aid was initiated in the ghetto by the Council—akitchen for the needy, milk distribution for babies and children, shelters, clinics andmany other facilities. Despite hard living conditions, some cultural activities wereorganized.People tried somehow to brighten up their gloomy ghetto existence. There were afew illegal libraries, providing a vigorous book exchange; amateur theater groups wereactive and performed, from time to time, before selected audiences. Musicians alsoperformed, mostly chamber music.246The Topic of Resistance I 247The ghetto was established in the oldest and drabbest part of the city. All the parksand gardens were located beyond our reach. In 1940, a special squad of “new made”gardeners was organized. They planted flowers and greenery, beautifying the gloomyghetto backyards and squares.The religious people, in defiance of the rules, observed the Sabbath and Holidaysas much as possible. A group of orthodox activists was responsible for saving holy booksand scriptures. They succeeded in saving over three hundred religious objects fromsacrilege.A separate chapter of courage and dedication was written by the teachers of theghetto. Soon after the smoke in 1939 had settled, they started their immense and veryuseful activities. Some joined forces and maintained a regular educational system,conducted in strict secrecy. Every false move invited serious consequences. Theyoungsters were told to enter the flats one by one and carry their notebooks under theirclothes. Sometimes the class had to stop in the middle of a session and disperse rapidlywhen the Germans were riding the block. This underground education was one of themost powerful expressions of passive resistance.Various organizations continued their activities in the ghetto. Understandably, theywere limited. The Bund movement held regular meetings and maintained close contactwith their Central Committee in Warsaw, receiving underground literature and outlinesfor eventual active resistance. In July, 1941, a Polish underground courier, MariaSzczesna, was arrested by the Gestapo while carrying illegal publications and the namesof the most of the Council as underground activists. The Germans learned who wasinvolved in the resistance and rescue endeavors. Shortly thereafter, a few of the Councilmembers were arrested, among them chairman Zalman Tenenberg, treasurer 2^1man(Stach) Staszewski, Maierowicz, Fraint and others. One of them, Jacob Berliner,surrendered to the Germans of his own will in solidarity with the arrested colleagues.They were sent to Auschwitz, and, shortly afterward, a telegram arrived stating that theyall had died.Despite the loss of their most important leaders, a group of Bund’s younger activistskept in contact with Warsaw. Even in 1943, they were receiving large sums of moneyand underground pamphlets. All this was distributed among their fellow members.Many others were arrested and killed for possession of illegal material, among themJosek Goldberg Welwek Goldberg Mendel Goldberg248 / A TALE OF ONE CITYItka Lipnicka, Niusia Mordkowicz and Lusia Weishoff. Lolek Kon lost his life forpossessing a stinging satire about Hitler and Stalin.The Hashomer Hatzair movement also continued its work in the ghetto. In February,1940, an emissary from the Warsaw Hanhagah Rashit came to Piotrkow. His name wasMordechai Anielewicz; he later became the commander of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising.His mission was to spread the gospel of resistance. After his visit, the contact withWarsaw was kept and Jakov Aronowicz, the head of the Ken in Piotrkow, attended aconspiratorial meeting in Warsaw dealing with future resistance policy and behavior. Aspecial code was used in communicating with Warsaw. After the war, letters in suchcode, written by Aronowicz and Zarnowiecki, were found in the underground ghettoarchives.Movements such as Betar, Hanoar and others also conducted meetings and discus-sions. The subjects were mainly resistance and freedom.There were several attempts of active resistance in the ghetto of Piotrkow. Let usmention with esteem the heroic outbreak of brothers Goldberg and Liberman, membersof the Betar. At their workplace, they made contact with a Polish foreman. For anexorbitant fee, the man was feady to deliver guns and ammunition and also firemen’suniforms. He claimed to be a member of an Armia Krajowa unit and promised safepassage to their hideout in a nearby forest.On a set day, the foreman delivered the arms and uniforms. He did not tell the boysthat the bullets were blanks. At midnight, the five youngsters crossed the ghetto wall.The man led them to the Sulejow forest and left them there. They were soon surroundedby Germans. A gun fight ensued. But how do you fight an enemy with blank bullets?Soon they were captured, some of the boys wounded. The Gestapo brought them in fortorturous interrogation. Shmuel Katz, the hatmaker who made the firemen’s caps, andSzymek Nyss, who helped them to cross the ghetto wall, were implicated. All thoseseven courageous men were brought to the Jewish cemetery and shot.Some young men were successful in joining the Polish underground. One of them,Julek (Kazik) Szmulewicz (Small), escaped from Bugaj and was accepted by an ArmiaLudowa unit, a left-oriented fighting force which had a policy of helping Jews. Withthem, he fought the enemy and, after the war he became an officer in the Polish Army.Heniek Goldhersh (pseudonym Wyrwa) and Heniek Ryterband fled from Bugaj andjoined a different AL group. Just days before the Russian front reached Piotrkow in 1945,they were in combat with the Germans in the Milejow forest. Heniek Goldhersh lost hislife; Heniek Ryterband survived.At the same time, another young man also escaped from Bugaj. His name was MotekSzteinberg. He had difficulties in making contact with the underground and returned tothe camp. Miraculously, he wasn’t killed by Dietrich or Fisher and survived theHolocaust. He lost his young life in 1948 defending kibbutz Degania on the banks of theKinereth.It’s impossible to mention all such stories of valor and heroism in one short essay.History teaches that there are two ways to resist—^actively and passively. Activeresistance is possible when the will rises in enough people to make the supreme sacrificefor honor and freedom. However, support from the outside is the ultimate conditionThe Topic of Resistance / 249Julian (Kazik) Szmulewicz.(Pseudonym “Jelen”)Motek Sztajnberg. Escaped fromthe Bugaj to join the partisans.Returned, however, unable tomake contact. Died heroicallyduring the Israeli War ofIndependence.Bernard (Bendit) Flatto.Fought in the French Resistance.Hersz (Heniek) Goldhersz.250 / A TALE OF ONE CITYFor ages, the Jews in Poland were dispersed among hostile, sometimes reactionaryand prejudiced masses. When the Germans came, we were contained in ghettos, whereannihilation could proceed swiftly at a moment’s notice without even the remotepossibility of resistance. We were also cruelly deceived and alone. Still today, we cannotrid ourselves of the awful feeling of isolation that we experienced so deeply at that time.To set a foot out of the ghetto meant to be hunted day and night. And from the outsideworld, in answer to our cries, came only shattering silence.The road to survival we instinctively took was the only one possible fit for sanity.Those who blame us today for our lack of active resistance then are only trying to coverup their own guilty consciences, to cover up the dark moments in the history of mankind,when the world stood silent.Yakov and Eliezer Liberman.At the grave of Hersz (Heniek) Goldhersz. (Pseudonym “Wyrwa.”)The Radoshitzer Rebbe, Reb Itzchakl FinklerYechiel Granatstein—JerusalemIt was during the early days of the Polish autumn. The days were especially beautiful,sunny and bright. Yet, the tension that had been evident all summer long now grew fromday to day, hour to hour. The fear of war was overwhelming, yet people refused to believein that horrible possibility; they wanted to hope that, at the lasts moment, it could stillbe avoided. Then, one fine dawn, they awakened and all their fine illusions melted away.German bombardiers were showering incendiary and explosive bombs on cities andtowns; Hitler’s armies crossed the border into Poland and, almost unhindered, penetrateddeeper and deeper into the country.That day, a family celebration in the home of Rebbe Itzchakl was disturbed. The“shevat yemey hamishta” that followed the marriage of his eldest daughter Dina to theson of the Ziditchuver Rav, Harav Yehoshua Eichenstein, had not yet been completed.Due to the outbreak of war, the guests left in a great hurry and the joy in the house wasquickly extinguished.The Rabbi’s house was not the only one; the joy went out of all the Jewish homesthat day. Fear overwhelmed everyone. Jews began to look for an escape, not knowingwhere to turn. Those of Piotrkow took the road to Sulejow, not wanting to be presentwhen the German army marched on the city. But German airplanes caught up with themand, as everywhere else, rained death on the roads.Rabbi Itzchakl did not believe in running without a goal. For those who came to askhim what to do, where to run, he had one answer: Stay where you are, because no matterwhere you turn, the German soldiers will get there first.In the early days, many people would gather in the cellar of Rebbe Itzchakl’s house.Among others, there were the Piotrkower Rav, Harav Moshe Chaim Lau and his family,as well as Rebbe Itzchakl’s brother-in-law, Reb Yankele Horvitz.One day a Chassid of his from Belchatow arrived at the Rebbe’s house with a truckand suggested that he will transfer his entire family to the part of Poland which wasoccupied by the Soviets. But Rebbe Itzchakl wouldn t even consider the idea, explainingthat he would not desert his Jews during such a stormy time. He advised his Chassid totake this opportunity for himself.For the first 5 months, Rebbe Itzchakl hid in Tsimbler’s house. There they “davened”together. During this time, the Germans searched, but could not find him.One day the “Judenrat” received an order from the Germans to register young peoplefor work. They were to be sent to Lublin. Many asked Rebbe Itzchakl for guidance. Headvised them to avoid the registration as much as possible, i.e., simply not to register.The “Judenrat” heard about the advice the Rebbe was dispensing and warned him notto get involved in this matter because if those on the list didn’t show up for the labortransport, others, not on the list, would be picked up off the streets. Rebbe Itzchakl251252 / A TALE OF ONE CITYresponded categorically that no one had the right to compile lists of people for work,and certainly not to determine whom to include and whom to omit. He stressed especiallythat Jews themselves must not do such a thing.Some time later, the “ Judenrat” appealed to Rebbe Itzchakf to become a member ofits leadership. He refused. They also recommended that his son Hilel, although still quiteyoung, should enter the medical service of the “Judenrat”, even if it meant that, as aresult he would have to do hard labor.News began to arrive about deportation actions taking place in Warsaw and Lublin.Jews understood that Piotrkow, too, would not be able to escape such actions. In thosedays, Rebbe Itzchakl urged people to prepare bunkers for themselves, to place theirchildren in the care of Gentiles they knew outside the ghetto and, generally, to doeverything in their power not to be vulnerable to deportation. In his house, too, a bunkerwas built, and when that mournful day arrived and the action began in the city, RebbeItzchakl, his family and others entered it and spent the next month there.When the Germans started searching for those who were hiding, the Rebbe’s bunkerwas discovered. Everyone was led to the synagogue, where the Rebbe advised hischildren not to let themselves be led voluntarily into the freight cars—to fight back, evenif it meant their lives. It did not, however, come to that. The president of the “ Judenrat”,Warszawski, removed the Rebbe’s entire family from the synagogue and transferredthem to the small ghetto. But this would not last long. Their house again became a centerfor the remaining broken and suffering Jews. There, those who were left of familieswhich had been destroyed gathered and spent time with the Rebbe, refreshed by thewords of Torah, until one day, the house was again destroyed. The Rebbe and his childrenwere captured and assigned to labor details, loaded onto trucks and sent off to a campin Skarzysko.After this deportation, there remained in Piotrkow only Rebbe Itzchakl’s youngerbrother, Reb Chaiml, and his young daughter, Kayle. Reb Chaiml, who was ill at thetime, died shortly afterward but had the honor of being given a Jewish burial near thetomb of his father, rebbe Meyerl. His wife, Golde, may she live long, was the daughterof the Modzhitzer Rebbe, Rebbe Shaul Yedidya; together with Rebbe Itzchakl, his oldmother, the daughter of the Zvoliner Rebbe, Rebbe Shmuel Eli and his daughters. RabbiShaul was also sent to Skarzysko. They survived and now live in America. Their onlydaughter, Kayle, also survived the camps and now lives in America and Israel.Rebbe ItzchakTs only son, Hilel, met with another fate. On the day when those closeto him were deported and taken to a tamp, he was at work in the Hortensia Glass Works.He remained in the apartment for a short time, but continued to “daven” with a “minyan”and even celebrated “shalosh seudot” every Saturday night (after the Sabbath). Then,one day, Hilel was also deported. For a time he was with other Piotrkower in a camp inCzestochowa; from there he was transferred to Buchenwald.People who were with him and are now living in Israel tell of his wonderful behaviorin the camp. Reb Hilel Blankovski (Jerusalem) was in Buchenwald and relates that Hilelsmuggled a pair of “Tfilin” into the camp and “davened” in them each day, therebyjeopardizing his own life. He would then pass them through the barbed wire to the otherbarracks for others to use.The Radoshitzer Rebbe, Reb Itzchakl Finider / 253Thus he remained alone, separated from his loved ones; then the news reached himthat his father was no longer alive. This broke him completely. For a while he said“Kadish” while going to and from work, but the pain of losing his father, with whom hewas so close, was very severe. Daily, his health became more fragile and on March10,1945, only two months before the end of World War II, he breathed his final breathand died in Raimsdorf, Germany at the age of 25.Rebbe Itzchakl in the Skarzysko CampFor about half of year Rebbe Itzchakl lived in the Skarzysko Camp, where he workedat assembling grenades. During that time he suffered great emotional and physical pain.Simultaneously, he displayed outstanding spiritual courage, sacrificing for the Jews andobserving ‘‘mitzvot” under very difficult circumstances in the camp. The hunger hesuffered, because he would not eat the food prepared by the camp kitchen staff, and theunaccustomed physical exertion, could not diminish his spiritual wholeness. His aris-tocratic appearance of earlier, more normal times, was also still with him. Although hewas dressed in his usual attire, and the beautiful beard of earlier times no longer adornedhis face, the people, nevertheless, immediately discovered his personal qualities andrecognized in him an extraordinary human being from the first day they were in awe ofhim, helped him at his work and did everything to make things easier for him.It did not take long for the barrack where Rebbe Itzchakl lived to become anunderground “Bet Hamidrash,” a spiritual nest which attracted and paternally warmedand soothed broken hearts.And So Ended the Difficult Struggle“The Rabbi’s Barrack”—this was how all the Jews in the camp referred to the placewhere the Rebbe lived. In the evenings, during the late-night hours, on the Sabbath, oron holidays, tired and exhausted Jews quickly entered and crowded together in the cornerwhere his bed was and breathed a little easier, refreshed by a Chassidic story or Torahwords, or just a hearty word of consolation that made one forget the pain and sufferingof the day which had just ended.The dense darkness of the barrack was reminiscent of the “Shalosh Seudot” in a“Bet Hamidrash” or in a Chassidic shtibel, where orthodox Jews would shed theirearthliness and feel uplifted.It was so easy to forget at times that one was in a German Camp while visiting theRebbe’s barrack. It seemed that he transformed the entire atmosphere of his BetHamidrash”; the feelings of exaltation, although perhaps lacking the heartfelt joy ofthose earlier days, had that same pure cleanliness in its spiritual level, if not an evenhigher one because, finally, it came “from the depths, yes, the very depths.Sounds of moans and sobs would permeate the barrack. With semi-extinguishedglances, those lying on the boards would look towards the corner where Rebbe Itzchaklsocialized with his followers. It was dark all around, but in the corner, like an eternallight, a fire glowed; not even a spark would allow itself to be extinguished.254 / A TALE OF ONE CITY“Hod W’gwurah” — This is the shofar that Moshe Weintretter made for theRebbe in the Skarzysko camp, which Rebbe Itzchakl then blew on “RoshHashana at the risk of his life. (Courtesy Yad Vashem, Jerusalem.)As I have stated, Rebbe ItzchakTs own sacrifice to fulfill a “mitzvah’Vas unnatural.Every morning, before leaving the barrack, he would wrap himself in a “talit,” don the“tfilin,” cover the “shel rosh” with his hat, which he would pull down over his foreheadas he walked with the people to work while reciting the prayers from memory. The Jewswho walked in the same row with him would pray along with him. The same scenariowould replay itself on the return trip from work, when they would recite the “Minchah”and “Maariv” prayers together.As the final days before Rosh Hashana approached in the camp, Rebbe Itzchakl wasovercome with the idea of providing the Jews with a “shofar,” and actually fulfilling the“mitzvah” of blowing the “shofar.” No sooner was the idea born than it began to givehim no rest. He told everyone who could be trusted that the idea should not be thatdifficult to realize. One had to really want it and God would provide.A Pole who worked in the camp received a sum of money from the Jews to buy ahorn, but it was from cattle, and the Rebbe had to reject it, as it was against the law. Nowthe people asked him to forget about it, especially since there would not be enough timeleft to prepare the “shofar” properly. But Rebbe Itzchakl was adamant and couldn’t beconvinced. Again the same Pole was approached; they explained the law to him—^whichhorn could be made into a shofar and which could not. The very next day he returnedwith a whole head of a ram.From that moment on the Rebbe worked feverishly. He shared the secret with aPiotrkower Jew named Moshe Weintretter, who happened to work at the locksmith’s,then handed him the ram’s head with the horns attached and asked him to do whateverhe could—as there must be a “shofar” to blow “Tkiyot.”To tell the truth, Moshe Weintretter had no idea where or how to begin, not theslightest notion. Nevertheless, he busied himself with the task day and night: soaking,cooking, doing everything his intelligence told him to do and, as Rosh Hashana arrived.One Jew told another with great joy that there was a “shofar” in the camp.Yes, they really did blow “tkiyot, shvarim, truot” in the German labor camp inSkarzysko, in Rebbe ItzchakTs barrack. Endless tears accompanied the soft lamentingThe Radoshitzer Rebbe, Reb Itzchakl Finkler / 255voices. The Jews’ prayer of suffering rose up to heaven, spread out before the “KiseyHakavod” and begged, “Call off our evil decree.”(By the way, many of the Jews who “davened” that Rosh Hashana with RebbeItzchakl in the barrack survived. They also took the shofar with them to Poland, wherethey returned following the war. At that time, Jacob Patt, the famous Bundist leader ofprewar Warsaw, visited Poland and was given the shofar by Heshel Reisman, one of thesurvivors of the Skarzysko camp, now in Israel. The shofar is now located somewherein a museum in the United States.)This was how the holidays were celebrated in the Rebbe’s barrack: Before Sukkoth,Rebbe Itzchakl, with the help of his two daughters, would build a miniature “sukkah,”which leaned against a wall of the barrack, fulfilling the obligation to “sit in a sukkah.”On Simchat Torah they would march, Bible in hand, celebrating the Torah and softlysinging songs and melodies of bygone years. In honor of Passover, Rebbe Itzchakl wouldbake several “matzot” on a small stove, which would last all eight days. Jews from thecamp gathered in the barrack where he had baked the “matzot” and together they wouldrecite “Halel” as they had done long ago in their homes.The Difficult Struggle EndsOne day Rebbe Itzchakl’s daughters were taken from him and transported to workin a munitions factory. The Rebbe worried about their destiny and suffered greatlybecause of the separation. The last thread that connected him to his home was suddenlysevered. Rebbe Itzchakl was then transferred from Skarzysko to Germany. Findinghimself in Schlieben, the Rebbe again “davened” for a group on Rosh Hashana. At theexact moment that he was delivering a sermon, planes dropped bombs on the camp andhe was wounded.There haven’t been any exact details of what happened afterward. There aresurvivors who tell that the Rebbe expired on the road from Schlieben to Buchenwald.Others say that he died in Buchenwald.Rebbe Itzchakl’s difficult struggle had finally ended. His exhausted body couldn’ttake it any more. His two devoted daughters were far away and couldn t help him,couldn’t prepare the food to keep him alive.Cruel reality overcame the physically depleted man and conquered him. But in thisstruggle of a saintly Jew who had tried with all his might to maintain the purity of hissoul, in this struggle, Rebbe Itzchakl, the Radoshitzer Rebbe, was elevated even higherand was spiritually and morally the victor, paying with his life, as witnesses relate, duringone of the last days of the month of Kislev (November 13, 1944).A survivor of the camps, A. Rotenberg, who now lives in Israel, described (in a letterto the newspaper “Hatzofeh”) the personality of Rebbe Itzchakl Radoshitzer with thesewords:“For those who knew him during the hellish Nazi years, his image will forever shine.He died in Flossenberg, where he was brought, ill, from Schlieben. He was taken therein a weakened condition because he refused to eat the food which was cooked in thekitchen. Some time before, the “Lagerfuerer” in Skarzysko tried to force him to eat pig s256 / A TALE OF ONE CITYmeat, but accomplished nothing. He pushed the meat into the Rebbe’s mouth, but theRebbe didn’t swallow it. This is how he was. He lived with his faith and faithfully, hedied.”He was a “tsadik” during his lifetime and so he remained to the end.Yes, such a person was the Martyr, Rebbe Itzchakl Finkler, the Radoshitzer Rebbein Piotrkow.Izkor Book (translated from Yiddish by Pearl Krupit)Editors Note: When I brought the above essay to Mrs. Krupit for translation, Benjamin Meed,the President of the American Gathering, and Wagro had just walked in. (Mrs. Krupit is thesecretary to Mr. Meed.) Seeing the article, Ben excitedly told me the following story: WhenJacob Patt, visiting Warsaw just after the liberation, received the shofar, Ben and his wife Vladkawere also present. After living for a few years in New York, Ben and Vladka, on their first tripto Eretz^lsrael, took the shofar from Mr. Patt in order to bestow the holy object on Yad Vashem.The shofar was first put in a valise, but at the last minute, Ben Meed became restless. Just beforeboarding, he raced instinctively to the luggage area, retrieved the shofar and placed the holyobject in his bosom pocket. Lo and behold! The valise was lost in transit. Today, the “third shofar”of the Radoshitzer Rebbe, Itzchakl Finkler, zts”l, is one of the most sacred exhibits at Yad Vashemin the holy dty of Jerusalem.(Mr. Yechiel Granatstein, the author, is a prolific and gifted writer. He is the son-in-law ofRebbe Itzchakl and the author of numerous books, including a biography of his father-in-law.He and his wife, the Rebbe’s daughter, live in Jerusalem.)K1 £R JCRK* rnmmiAHriMgaer ttwgkm m rwMH* mtm MdMWS'MwtiMMMIMMtn. ~ **•titmtmmrnmUi. wHi - iM*mm-: Mrnm: -Omm.-KKnaetkmtt: ain Onirai.-tawmuttanmmmgui*K»-HHi « 4#!»• M mum, *mm mmm. »«««•Sj.i.ft'. Um-The record from CampBuchenwald with astamped notice:“Died on 13 thNovember 1944.”The Long DayBen GiladiDedicated to the fellows of Kara and HortensiaThe most ghastly moment of the twenty-four hours of camp life was awakening,when, at a still nocturnal hour, the shrill waking signal tore you pitilessly from yourexhausted sleep and the longing of your dreams The day started when it was still darkoutside. Katzman, the militiaman, was screaming at the top of his lungs: “Na zmiane—szykowac sie!” After thirty minutes, the workers of the day shift were ready at the campgate. Herfort, the vicious Volksdeutch, checked the ranks, making his usual con-temptuous remarks. He opened the gate and the Werkschutz took us toward the graybuildings of the Kara glass factory. Once within the factory complex, the workersscattered, each group heading toward its assignments. There was a lot to be done. EmilHaebler was building his new, huge factory at full steam, using blood, sweat and tears.The “Shaidim tanz” (devil’s dance) started promptly as usual. Blum, Sosnowski,Rozenwald and others, wearing only their underwear but with handkerchiefs serving asmasks over their faces, were running back and forth carrying heavy loads of sand, sodalime and all kinds of strong chemicals, pouring this into a large mixing drum where theglass material was prepared. The hankies didn’t help much and the devilish stuffpenetrated their eyes, lungs and skin. They looked ghostly and grotesque. It was hard tobelieve that a body could withstand such severe punishment and yet still function. Thisdevil’s dance lasted eight hours every day.The huge ditch was almost ready, four or five stories deep. This was the foundationfor the new glass furnace. With the maze of wooden boards placed everywhere, it lookedlike a circus, a macabre arena. It was called the “cyrk” throughout the Kara-Hortensiacomplex.The gladiators were the teenage boys who carried the heavy tragas. The beasts werethe Polish laborers loading the tragas with dirt. They were paid by metrage and filledthe tragas like crazy, since this meant a lot of vodka and food for them. It also gave themthe ultimate thrill of torturing the boys who had to carry the loads constantly, unmerci-fully. The Volksdeutch foremen with rubber clubs kept a close watch and saw to it thatthe boys could not rest.Not far away, they were building a new chimney; it was already many stories highand still growing.Two expert masons were sitting on a ledge inside the chimney, piling the brickshigher and higher. A dumbwaiter was moving up and down inside the shaft, held by arope made of steel. The rope was threaded through a little wheel at the top and unwoundfrom an engine-powered drum located on the ground.257258 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe carpenters on Huta Kara, in 1943.Icie Goodfriend was at the controls. His job demanded precision and he was tired.No wonder—^almost every day he worked forced overtime, like all the others, withoutany letup.The workers loaded the conveyor with bricks. Icie pushed the lever and the drumstarted to rotate, pulling the heavy load up. The thing would now stop at the level wherethe masons were sitting, just at the top of the chimney.But this time the lever jammed and Icie, despite his frantic efforts, could not stopthe machine. The heavy load toppled over, tearing a huge chunk of the chimney waydown. Debris was falling everywhere. By a miracle, the two masons grabbed safety ropesand were somehow saved from death. All hell broke out. Vogel, Mrozinski and otheroppressors came running. They accused Icie of sabotage and wanted to call the Gestapo.Somehow, they checked the machinery and found a malfunction. Goodfriend wasseverely punished but his life was saved.The old functioning furnace called “the tub” was a prelude to hell. On one side,Baruch Groman and Yoyne Renkiewicz poured the material into the oven every halfhour, rain or shine, day or night. The procedure took twenty-five minutes of murderouslabor. A five-minute break was much too short. These material pourers were real titans.On the other side of the “wanna,” the thick plates of window glass were coming out,hot and highly breakable. The observers and lifters had a hell of a time handling the jobwithout a hitch or accident. Beasts like the brothers Eswein and Paul Push supervisedthese gates of hell.There were many other places where hard labor persisted with cruel regularity. Theconstruction helpers, the so-called “Uszerowicz group,” poured tons of concrete into thenew structures. The brick and lime carriers broke their backs day by day.The Long Day / 259Then there were the workers unloading coal and sand from the freight trains. Thefellows stuffed coal into the “Gasakis” every fifteen minutes. There was the stone mill,the “Krajownia,” the shipping commando and other places where everyone struggled insweat and pain. Only the craftsmen and the professionals had it a little easier.Director Christmann’s idea of productivity was to put only one Jewish worker wheretwo were needed. The hardship and agony didn’t matter. The only important fact wasthat the job was done cheaply. Efficiency was enforced by the whip.At 6 p.m. the working day was supposedly over. The fellows started to gather at thefactory gate ready to ‘‘go home.” This, however, was wishful thinking. Mrozinski the“zdechlak” appeared and started to call group after group, now giving them differentassignments, mostly to unload freight or to pail up bricks for the next day.For unexplained reasons, he somehow disliked me and therefore sent me down tothe saw mill (the tartak). This extended my working schedule until 12:30 a.m. Since Istarted at seven o’clock in the morning, this spelled out 17 V2 hours of hard labor withoutinterruption.At the saw mill,, I moved the logs to be sawed into planks. Adas Rosenblum was atthe circular saw. He was so overtired that he actually fell asleep for one split second.This proved disastrous and he lost three fingers. They rushed him to the camp am-bulatorium.I was forced to replace him at the menacingly buzzing and still bloody saw.Miraculously, nothing happened to me.At 12:30 a.m., the long day ended. The nightmare of this particular day now belongedto the past; there was only one problem: we were faced with another such day tomorrow.And that’s the way it was at the Kara glass factory in Piotrkow, circa 1943/44. Thetheme was survival, the capacity of men and women to live under the immense pressure,to sustain terrible damage to mind and body and yet be there—sane, alive and still human.Workers at Huta Hortensia. From the so-called “Wojdela” groupin 1943.Piotrkow Trybunalski in Holocaust Literature^^Kiddush Hashem’^—Wartime ChroniclesAmong the Holocaust-related literature, “Kiddush Hashem” deserves a special placein the historiography of those tragic, bygone times, never to be forgotten. Written byRabbi Shimon Huberband as part of the Ringelblum Archives known as “Oneg Shabbat,”the book is replete with information on contemporary events—life, martyrdom and deathin the Polish ghettos, woven into a fabric of autobiographical stories. The text coversevery aspect of Jewish religious and cultural life, of Nazi atrocities and Jewish spiritualresistance.The chronicles, hidden in milk cans in a cellar in Warsaw, were discovered in 1946and eventually translated from the original Yiddish into Hebrew in 1969. The recenttranslation into English was done by David E. Fishman of Brandeis University.“Kiddush Hashem” is a living testimony from beyond the grave, a penetrating voicefrom the great beyond about a tortured world which crumbled under the heavy boots ofGerman bestiality.Shimon Huberband was bom in 1909 in Checiny, near Kielce. Trained as a rabbi,he became a historian, a writer and a poet. He established himself at first in PiotrkowTryb., where many of his works were written. There he founded the Society for JewishScience and lectured each Saturday on topics of Jewish history. His monograph, “JewishPhysicians in Piotrkow from the Seventeenth Century until the Present,” was beingpublished in installments.At the outbreak of the war. Rabbi Huberband and his family decided to escape thefrequent bombardments by following the stream of people who had fled to smaller,insignificant settlements. But the German planesknew no bounds, no restrictions. A hail of bombs hitthe tiny village of Sulejow and killed Huberband’swife, child and father-in-law. Broken in body andspirit, he returned to Piotrkow, but could not recoveremotionally. Everything there reminded him of hislost happiness.In 1940, Huberband traveled to Warsaw, hope-ful to find solace in a new environment. Surroundedby close, devoted friends, he immersed himself inwork. He became active in the Jewish Community,working for the Jewish Social Self-Help Organiza-tion and, at the same time, attempted to carry on hisresearch, both as a historian and as a chronicler ofthe Jewish tragedy and Jewish courage.He won a prize for one of his studies, which heRabbi Shimon Huberband(1909-1942).260Piotrkow Trybunalski in Holocaust Literature / 261entered in a contest sponsored by Yikor, the Society for Jewish Culture. The conditionsunder which Rabbi Huberband worked are hard to imagine. Hunger, poverty, cold andlack of rest and peace of mind were his constant companions. And then sickness—a boutof typhoid fever—overcame his frail body. He recovered and, though weak andemaciated, continued to write for future generations.The sufferings of Rabbi Huberband were terminated by the Germans. On August 19,1942, Huberband—together with masses of Jewish Martyrs—^was sent to Treblinka,where he perished with many others for Kiddush Hashem.Rabbi Shimon Huberband departed from this world as a pauper, and yet he left toposterity an enormous legacy : his writings.Among the numerous pages that truthfully depict the events in various towns andvillages, portraying Jewish people and their struggle for survival, we also find poignantepisodes about life in war-torn Piotrkow Trybunalski. With pangs of nostalgia and tearsin our eyes for the world dissipated in ashes, we present excerpts from the book, KiddushHashem,The BeginningsOn September 1, I entered the synagogue and found a group of “politicians”discussing the morning’s radio news. Suddenly, at about 9:20 A.M., we heard the sirensound announcing an aerial alarm. We soon heard the hoofbeats of the horse-drawnpeasant-wagons leaving town, and the order of the LOPP commanders to hide inside thegateways.It didn’t take long until people from the surrounding courtyard came in with thenews that it was war. A chill passed through our bodies. We all turned as pale as corpses.Many began to cry aloud. The streets were empty,as if they had died out.Hour after hour passed, and p)eople gradually became accustomed to the wartimeatmosphere. Everyone assembled his own food rations and made his last possiblepurchases. Women began, shortly before Sabbath, to bake fish, meat and other dishes.But soon word spread throughout the city that the neighboring town of Radomskohad been bombarded a few hours ago and that there had been many casualties. We beganto sense the entire horror and tragedy of war.On the Sabbath, September 2, we prayed in the early morning. In the middle of theprayers we saw several trucks full of Jews pass us by. The trucks stopped for a shortwhile. The Jews inside told us that they were from Wielun and that yesterday, Fridaymorning, a squadron of German planes had appeared over Wielun and totally destroyedthe city. Several hundred Jews were dead. We all felt as if we were in a trap with no wayout.It was close to twelve o’clock noon. As I ascended the staircase to my apartment, 1heard the tik-tik-tik of artillery fire. Loud cries immediately went out from all the houseresidents. Mothers quickly grabbed their children and ran from their apartments to thecellars, which had been designated as the shelters. When we entered the corridor of thecellar, we heard the first boom of a bomb explosion. The entire building trembled. Soonthere was another explosion, followed by many more.262 / A TALE OF ONE CITY* , - « i V.V,*, , ns,„vr,.' ,urntmtuxt pon omjKkkMfamatimLMeldekarfe fur Juden^ID card of Rabbi ShimonHuberband in the Warsaw Ghetto.Ilubtxb»aii19*1? *1909inWobiiorl;   ..Zd&^nhQtnSir. Het 1Hr f 2 ^Women went through spasms,0«r him Hubtxb»aii SE^'isam children cried and several menOteiOdm 19.1'/.1909 fainted.     Meanwhile, through theIn ... „     janitors son, we received newsWobnort* about the situation in the city. The 19/19 " first bombs had hit a group of1 workers in St. Bernardiner Gardens,u. Arft killing two of them. A bomb splinteriinfbhrung 4m hrhmiimwn^^m hf di« i§ihtlm residence on Narutowicza StreetSS -"-l killed .he younger Zaks, whoimm hehmlkumi xum was Standing on the balcony at thec*ose to thirtyStfQss# III nkhf mnhmU. people perished in Piotrkow, six ofthem Jews. Among them was theyoung Epsztajn, the son of engineer^ ^ Epsztajn, who was one of the direc-" 71' tors of ORT in Piotrkow.On Monday, the fourth of Sep-tember, at about eleven, the recog-I I nizable humming of heavy\m4m wmhm, airplanes sent us all rushing back   , , into thc ccllars. The planes circledim m::eHef} mi2 smpm UmKami the citv for a Iontime fivina verv'jMdJmk'mkfm Szmmm Huhr^hmuk. a long time, tiying veryrz^&nka Scf^kat' z sdfmtm'jami * ^ low. The Polish artillery shot atthem with machine guns, but theplanes went on flying undisturbed, as if the shooting had nothing to do with them.At close to four o’clock in the afternoon. Judge Bornsztajn and his wife burst intoour cellar and told us that a bomb had struck their house on Narutowicza Street.8«fuliffupp# u. Arft ^ ^ ^iti auf Omni d#r Zwmifmn BmcM§hfmg$¥ormhriiixur Vmofdnmg mm 24 Oltoll^r If39 Ikr ^iinfbhrufig 4m Arhmilmwmgm^. hr dim l§4ktlm4m Gmnmmigovmrmmmnh mm 12^ 0*.^ i9W mthm^ miiem xnmhthm\h%\m^iz mr ¥«fl§*Bn AuMmgmmufimrStress# III nlcbt«- L fe. '■»fiti|#4ipr Wmk*^ mwmif lnii ^ifMd mzeMffi IfM2 siffpim UkhKomihlfldtlmtr Nskna Szwmrn imknmmk,.r^leriAi'i ,ddnfg Szfikst' ndfmtm'jmHi * z^i^^^dnirnnkBomsztajn’s mother had been killed and lay beneath the ruins. He and his wife hadmiraculously survived. They reported that the entire city was in flames; that SlowackiStreet was in rubble. The bombing intensified at about five. The fear of death anddestruction inside the cellar was terrible. Suddenly, we heard a strange crackling soundand were left sitting in darkness. A bomb had hit the electricity station, also knockingout the running water. And here we were, in the midst of a hail of bombs and burningfire.Piotrkow Trybunalski in Holocaust Literature / 263Many people left Piotrkow in search of a peaceful, safe place. So did RabbiHuberband, with his wife, a small son and his in-laws. But there was no peaceful, safeplace anymore and in search of it during the bombardment he lost his wife, his child andhis father-in-law.On Sunday the tenth, we all went to the cemetery to bury the Martyrs.Before noon, as we returned from the cemetery after the burial, we met MoisheGomoliski, Rozenwald, D. Kaminski and others.My mother-in-law and I took a coach to Piotrkow. Exactly eight days ago we hadleft Piotrkow as a whole family. Now we were returning with deeply wounded hearts.We arrived in Piotrkow at 4:30 in the afternoon. One was only permitted to be outdoorsuntil 5:00. When we got to the front of our gate, the courtyard residents gathered outside,pitied us from afar and shook their heads in sympathy. We unlocked the door to ourapartment and walked in. On the table there still stood plates with leftovers of fish eatenby my father-in-law, wife and child. I saw my child’s unfinished slice of challah. Wecried until we choked on our tears. Our home, once full of so much life and happiness,was now so sad, so very sad.Our neighbors tried to calm us, begged us to control ourselves and explained to ushow dangerous it would be if our cries were heard on the street. They told us of theattitude of the German authorities toward Jews, of the terrible way in which Jews werebeing seized for work, brutally beaten and afflicted with horrible torture. We learnedfrom the neighbors that on the evening of Tuesday, September 5, when the Germansmarched into the city, they shot and killed close to twenty Jews. Among them were: RebJekhiel Mikhl Promnitski, Reb Lejzer Blumsztajn, Rajchman and Reb Bunem Lebl, whowas wounded and died afterwards.On the following day, they (the Germans) surrounded the block of Jewish houses,which encompassed the streets—Staro-Warszawska, Jerozolimska and Zamkowa. Theyordered all Jews to stay in their homes, and immediately began to p)elt the houses withfire-bombs and shoot at the windows. With the entire block of houses in flames, the Jewsleft their homes and despite the orders, ran out to the courtyard. A few Jews tried to leavethe courtyards for the streets and were immediately shot at.An hour after the fire the Ger nans entered the house at 13 Zamkowa Street, tookout six men, ordered them to run forward and proceeded to shoot at them. Five Jewsdied on the spot, among them Jalowicz, Tilis and the Treger. Miraculously, one personsurvived.On Monday, September 11, all male Jews were in hiding. Those who were caughtwere beaten brutally and then taken to work.On Tuesday, September 12, the seizure of Jews for work intensified. If a beardedJew was caught, his life was put in danger. They tore out his beard along with pieces offlesh, or cut it off with a knife. Many Jews were wounded this way, including MeshulamLipszyc, Moishe Temkin, Anshel Wajs and others.The Germans collected taleysim, talis-kotons and kitls. These holy garments weregiven to Jews to wash floors, automobiles and windows. To clean the filthiest placesJews were given pages from the Talmud and other religious books.Jewish stores were looted daily. Zyskind’s and FrenkePs stores were emptied out264 / A TALE OF ONE CITYand homes continued to be robbed. A large sum of money was taken from Mr. Michelson,under the claim that it was counterfeit. All belongings were taken away from Mr.Zylberszac and others.On Wednesday, September 13, the eve of Rosh Hashanah, 5700, the seizure of Jewsfor work continued. Regardless of how one hid, Jews were still being found. And whena Jew was found, he was first beaten cruelly and then taken to the street where Jews wereassembled. When a large number of Jews accumulated, the beatings began anew. Thenthe detainees were divided into several groups and sent to various workplaces.On the first day of Rosh Hashanah close to twenty Jews gathered in the synagogue. Inmany buildings pmyers were held in private apartments. Such was the case in our apartment.The Jewish people had, relatively speaking, all the fine food they needed for theholidays. But who could eat under conditions of such terrible fright and panic? TheGermans were proceeding from house to house and were carrying out searches. Theytook from the Jews all of their possessions and dealt murderous blows to men and womenalike. Then they took the men off to work, which in fact was not work but an inquisition.As night arrived the sense of fear subsided, because they didn’t seize Jews for workat night, and didn’t perform robberies. But the night brought with it a new set of anxieties.Our blood froze in our veins as we heard the noise of tanks, artillery guns and otherdeadly weapons traveling all night long in the direction of Warsaw.On the second day of Rosh Hashanah, after Shachris, we decided that today wewould blow the shofar. The shofar-blower made all efforts to blow as softly as possible.When the “job” was done, we all felt greatly relieved.However, there was terrible chaos at the Amshinov shtibel, 8 Farna Street, the onlyshtibl in which prayers were held. A number of officers entered in the middle of servicesand took everyone away—^roughly thirty Jews—to prison. They were taken awaydressed in their taleysim and silk caftans, and were beaten en route. Those arrestedincluded Yitzkhok Aron Sochaczewski; the rabbi of Uszakow, named Tiger; the roshyeshiva, Reb Baruch Asher Nudelman; Moishe Chaim Zelmanowicz, his son and others.The news filled us with great fear. Toward evening we learned that the detainedJews, in their maimed and bloodied condition, had been taken away by trucks on theCzestochowa highway.The days between Rosh Hashanah and Yom Kippur were terrifying.The seizure of Jews for work intensified as did the searches of Jewish houses.Whenever they (the Germans) found a few Jews together during the house searches,they would torture them and charge that the Jews were holding clandestine meetings.They also simply harassed people. For instance, when they found a leather eyeglass-casein the home of a seventy-year-old man named Dovid Kaczka (Trybunalska Street), they“established” that the case was for storing ammunition. The matter was “settled” for alarge sum of money.Because of such instances, people stopped visiting each other. Everyone hid in hisown private comer. In addition, everyone shaved off his beard, either entirely or partially,and put on European clothes.The sense of terror, panic and fear was unbelievable. When the day finally passedand the night drew near, people sighed with relief.Piotrkow Trybunalski in Holocaust Literature / 265Two days before Yom Kippur a truck full of soldiers drove up to the synagogue.They went over to the ark, flung the Torah scrolls onto the floor, tore them apart andhurled them into a lot across from the synagogue. Then they chopped down the ark anddemolished the eastern wall, designed two hundred years ago by the artist DovidFridlender.On the eve of Yom Kippur the Kehilah appealed for the last time that all those whohad received notices should contribute the amount requested of them toward paymentof the tribute tomorrow, on Yom Kippur.On the day before the fast, the round-up was larger than usual. They (the Germans)had a good day’s catch. The details of how the Jews were tortured are not within thepurview of this study. In general one can say that the (Spanish) Inquisition was put toshame by their deeds. The Inquisitors were veritable men of compassion compared tothe Germans.The chairman of the Judenrat at that time was the Bundist city councilman Z.Tenenberg. In the beginning of December 1939, Dreksl, the mayor of the city, knownas a vicious anti-Semite, summoned Chairman Tenenberg to his office and ordered thatthe Jews of Piotrkow construct military barracks.The construction materials were extremely costly and this levy was imposed afterthree contributions had already been extracted from the Jewish community. Tenenbergmanifested great courage by categorically refusing to have the Jews pay the contribution.Dreksl began to threaten. Tenenberg told the mayor that he could shoot him if he liked,but the Jews would not give the money and he left the room. The next morning, an urgentmeeting of the Judenrat was convened to discuss the question. During the meeting anemissary from the mayor’s office arrived with a message for Tenenberg to see the mayorat once.The mayor informed Chairman Tenenberg that he was releasing the Jews from theobligation of covering the cost of the construction materials for the barracks.In the summer of 1941, all of Piotrkow’s local Bundist leaders were arrested,including Chairman Tenenberg, Wajshof and Yakov Berliner—a member of thePiotrkow municipality and of the Kehilah, a man who had devoted his entire life to thecommunity. Abraham Cahan, editor of the American Forward, once wrote the followingof him: “When the history of the modern thirty-six hidden saints is written, Berliner willoccupy the first entry.” Wajngarten, Frajnd, Stasienski and others were also arrested.They were taken to Auschwitz for extermination, where they died tor KiddushHashem.HONOR TO THEIR MEMORY!Compiled by Lorraine Justman-Wisnicki, New YorkNew Bulletin^^Posbtnit^ do muk0LEGACY FOR GRANDSONLEOPOLDLEmKNa starych fotografiach z czasow okupacjiSzukam twarzy Najdrozszych z rozpacz^ daremn§,Lecz zawsze, gdy na marzen zatrzymam si§ stacji,Wyrastaj^ wsrod glazow i jezior przede mn^.Nagle si^ ich cieniami zaludnia cien glazu,Jakby do zdj^c pozuj^c na nim si^ oparli.I z plon^cego w chmurnych oczach krajobrazuUsmiechaj^ si^ do mnie. Czy wiedz^, ze umarli...Leopold Lewin* * ^*On ancient photos from the Nazi daysI search for dear faces in grief and in vain,Not once when I stop for a dream on my ways,They grow amid gravestones and lakes full of pain.Suddenly the shadows crowd the tint of stone.Posing for a picture on the rocky bed.And through cloudy eyes landscape-burning toneThey give me a little smile. Would they know they’re dead...Leopold Lewin (translated by Ben Giladi)266RECALLEDTO LIFE267The symbolic monument of our Martyrs at the Vale of Tears—^Treblinka268Piotrkow—Ir Waeim B’IsraelMJ. Bar-Ofiy Tel AvivWe, the sons and descendants of the magnificent Jewish community of Piotrkow,are in mourning. We mourn the crown of our heads, the mother city of Israel, ourPiotrkow, just as children mourn their mother. Our wonderful community was destroyedby the hand of the oppressors, our community was drowned in her own blood amid thevast cemeteries of PolandHow could our Jewish community in Piotrkow, the Jewel of our Crown, have beenso devastated? Oh Piotrkow! What has become of you? Our city, full of Jewish life,streaming with the vigorous currents of our heritage. Lo and behold!—Suddenly, thesoil covered all your being.We shall keep our memories and images of the serene and pulsating life within yourlimbs, of the sweaty, hard days of labor and the days of rest and leisure. We shallremember the Sabbath and the Holy Days, the complete cessation of daily worries in thestores, shops and markets; the shining, festive atmosphere emanating from everywindow and every floor, the homes exulting light and inspiration even toward the gentilepopulation of our town.We remember, as if it were today, the large, excited crowds marching in paradesbeneath fluttering banners on national holidays. We remember the happy rallies andsomber times. We remember the days of the Balfour Declaration or the San Remofestivities; the volunteers collecting groshins for noble causes; the sad days of the TelChai disaster or the other calamities that befell the Yishuv. Like a seismograph, oursensitive Piotrkow community reacted to the positive or negative events affecting thebirth of our awakening nation and the redemption and building of our homeland.Piotrkow! You were not any ordinary Polish city for us here in Israel, not j ust anothergeographical spot on the map of the Jewish Diaspora. You were a strong, historicalsupporting pillar essential to the Israeli saga. During your last generations, you were toIsrael what Cordoba was in the Spanish Diaspora of the past. You were to the Jewishcommunities of the world what Prague was in the Bohemian Diaspora, or what Krakowand Lublin were in the Polish Diaspora. Rabbinical chairs of international renown weresituated within your boundaries, where “Gaonim” and “Tzadikim” solved questionsabout “Halacha” and “Dinim.”You were the home of noble families like the Horowiczes, Eibeshitses and others,blessed with outstanding offspring—uncrowned princes in their spiritual conduct.Within your walls, the bastion of the “Shulchan Aruch" was kept by volunteers soit would not be subjected to stormy disturbances. You saw the early “Hassidimmovements, full of miracles and mystique. The voices of “Lamdei Torah” rang out dayand night from “Batei Midrash.” Your “Hamonei Amcha” were staunch devotees to andadmirers of the Torah.269270 / A TALE OF ONE CITYPiotrkow, you were always the first to give your strength and your resources to everynoble movement, to all kinds of actions and deeds for the people. You were the first tofight for education and enlightenment. You were the first—in the words of your “GaonHatzadik,” R’Chaim Elezar Waks, Z"L, the author of “Nefesh Haya”—to wake thehearts toward the Yishuv in Eretz Israel.” You were the first at the time to respond tothe call of Zion for monetary and moral support. You were also the first to send yoursons and daughters to the battle lines to fight for our nation’s existence and honor. And,especially, you were the first to send the flower of your youth to “Hachshara Halutzitand Aliah” to mold the spirit in our homeland and the rising of Zion.Most of all, you were known in the world of Israel for your richness of soul and forthe treasures of the written word that you so generously dispensed among the cities andtowns of the Diaspora. Your books, “Siddurim, Machzorim, CJiumashim, Gemaroth,”folk literature and so many other publications reached readers overseas, in Eretz Israeland everywhere—from Brooklyn to Shanghai. Jewish mothers, praying and pouringtheir hearts out to Almighty G-d, would tearfully recite verses that were printed“Here—Kechilath Kodesh Piotrkow—^by R’Faivel Belchatowski and sons.”In Jerusalem and Lublin, the young “Talmud Torah” students read from pages thatcame from the printing presses of R’Abraham Rozenwald. From Johannesburg to SanFrancisco, Jews prayed and pounded their hearts when they recited “A1 Heit” from the“Machzorim” for Yom Kippur assembled and printed by R’Mordchai Cederbaum.Hundreds of thousands of observant Jews worshipped and studied on Shabath and onHoly Days in synagogues using “Midrashim” from books set and published in thePrintshop of Henoch, Ben Ishai Zeev Folman.With your enterprise of publishing Holy Books you earned an esteemed name amongthe scattered Jewish communities of the world. This point about Piotrkow was broughtup by the great scholar and writer of our generation, Shmuel Joseph Agnon. With hisartistic perception, he profoundly mourned the enormous tragedy of our Holy Com-munity, “taken prisoner and subjected to torture among gentiles.”In his story, “Siddur Tefilati,” there was a monumental tribute to our belovedPiotrkow. In sadness and sorrow, we too say, together with Agnon, “I opened my Siddurat a different place and stared; and there is no Piotrkow anymore—only holy andawesome prayers are whistling from the pages... ”Itgadal Witkadesh Shmei Raba!Izkor BookPiotrkow After the WarChaim Henig—Ramat GanThe Shtibel at 33 Pilsudskiego StreetNow is the time, and certainly it is suitable, to remember the Piotrkow Jews, the“Sharit HaPleyta” (the remnants of survivors), in the early years following the liberationand the only shtibel where Jews gathered to pray during the holidays.There were no Jews who, for various personal and other reasons, could not yet leavePiotrkow and remained there until 1952-1957.As long as my memory serves me, I want to recall at leasts a few of the Jews whowere active at 33 Pilsudski Street, across the way from the prison. There, we met in twoneglected rooms in the basement (called the “religyeze congregatsye”) and there, too,kosher lunches were cooked. The overseers and cooks were Lutka Weinberg (previouslythe wife of Yakob Milshteyn Z”L; she died in Sweden), Mrs. M. Zigreich, Z''L (whowas known then as Milshteyn, and who died two years ago in Israel, and Mrs.Litmanowicz.The preparation of lunches at that time was a great help especially for the Jews whowere staying there only temporarily and who were preparing to leave anti-SemiticPoland.Amongst the active members of the religious circles were Moyshe Kurnendz, Z”L,Israel Zigreich, the brothers Sh. and P. Hipsher, Nuske Fishpan, the butcher Kirschen-baum, the older Weinberg and his son Many ek, Brauner (of Suleyow), Patsanovski (whodied recently in Haifa), Shmuel Cohen (in Belgium), the elder Bialovons and others.HpiNiD n,2;ans mvn nnl-liQV ly t Ml <9Moshe Tarko at the“Umschalgplatz” ofPiotrkow. From here ourMartyrs were sent toTreblinka.271272 / A TALE OF ONE CITYDr. Zygmunt Tennenbaum brings flowers to theAuschwitz crematorium.Of course, there must always be a difference of opinion among Jews. This one cameas a result of there being three candidates who wanted to manage the religious “shtibl.”It reached a point where the “magistral’ almost had to intercede. A miracle, however,occurred when one of the claimants left Poland, another moved to Lodz, and the crisiswas over.In time, the shtibel grew emptier and emptier. There was no longer a “minyan.“There were “Sifrey Torah, and taleysim” and “sfarim,” and even a “Bal T’fila,” butwhere did one find Jews?When the High Holy Days arrived, the hearts of the Jews who remained awakened;each Jew wanted to be seen in the “shtibl.” In addition to the few loyal “daveners,” therewere those who had long forsaken their “Yiddishkeit”—among them Katchka, theSzmul Kon, Cesia Henig and Heniek (Chaim) Henig.Piotrkow After the War j 273The congregation kitchen.fiddler, Markowitz, who lived with Gentiles, Fuehrer, a Jew from Chelm who lived withan Ukrainian woman and later converted, Birenzweig, a barber who lived with a Gentilewoman, Joshua Eisenshteyn, who had a Gentile wife, Dluzhnowski, now in Israel—evenHershel Goldberg of also came to take a look.”1 U-B is the Polish equivalent of the KGB.Exhumation of the “Rakow Kedoshim” just after the war.From the Rakow Forest to “Kewer Achim” at the cemetery.274 / A TALE OF ONE CITYDespite my responsible job in the “Kranke Kasse,” I always left my workplaceduring the holidays and came together with all the Jews to cry our hearts out rememberingthose who were no longer with us and also the former shuls and “batei t’filot” whichused to be filled with Jews.The greatest experience was when our wives and small children came to see howwe “davened.” For some of the children, this was the first time they had observed sucha “spectacle.”They stood with their eyes opened wide and with flaming cheeks andunderstood nothing of what was happening.My little son, who was 3^2 years old, began to ask questions and wonder. He hadbeen accustomed to going to church with our maid every Sunday; there, the priest wouldcaress his head lovingly. And here questions began to pour forth. That’s when my wifeCesia started to explain everything to him: that we were Jews and that everyone in theshtibel was praying to our God; that we had a large family living in Eretz Israel, thecountry where all Jews lived and to which we, too, would emigrate.After that my son lived with the happy hope of going to another world, as if a newsoul had entered into him. He could hardly wait for the day when he would see hisgrandmother, aunts and uncles in the much dreamed-of Land of Israel.After my wife began to tell him the whole truth about the painful journey we hadendured during the war years, he stopped going to church with the maid and understoodvery well why they didn’t include him in the “protsesye.”To this day my son still wants to know every detail of what happened to us duringthe woeful Hitler years and tries to convey it to his children, so that the “Shoa” will notbe forgotten by future generations.The Remnants UniteChaim Samelson—TorontoThe winter of 1945 was the hardest for the Jews in the concentration camps. TheGermans ignored the seriousness of their defeats on all fronts and continued with theirplans of annihilation. We, the prisoners of the camps, were totally without strength,owing to hunger and cold, and could barely stand on our feet. We clearly felt that wewere dying, and only the Jewish hope and trust that beat within our hearts enabled us tohold on.Every day Allied planes would appear and bomb factories, and we were joyfullyfollowing the flames which the bombs left behind, but which were not as strong as thefire of revenge that burned in our hearts, when, one morning, the order suddenly cameto assemble on the parade grounds. From there we were taken to the train, packed intocars, and, after three weeks of travel in conditions of hunger and thirst, the iron gates ofTheresienstadt suddenly opened before us. From there we were liberated by the Russianson May 9,1945.Hand in hand with our joy at our liberation was the nagging question that all of usfaced: What would we do now and where would we go?I myself decided not to return to Poland, the country where every inch of land wassoaked with Jewish blood. After some consideration I made the decision to immigrateto Israel, the historic homeland of our people.The attitude of the Russians toward us was good. They took care of us and suppliedall our needs. But before our stomachs could adjust to digesting human food, manyamong us, my brother included, came down with all sorts of illnesses.Meanwhile, the Russians issued an order for each of us to return to his homeland.In accordance with my decision not to return to Poland, I declared myself to be aRoumanian, as did my brother and aunt, whom I had discovered in Theresienstadt. Aftermany difficulties, we managed to join a group leaving for Roumania.The trip was not easy. My brother ran a high fever and only managed to reach theRed Cross train we were traveling on at the last moment, with my aunt s assistance andleaning on a cane. The train was insufficiently provisioned so that, from time to time,the healthy among us had to get off to get food from the Czech and Slovak inhabitantsand, occasionally, from the Red Cross itself.Hundreds of Jews awaited us at the station in Budapest. Some of them were meetingfamily members—Hungarian Jews who had been liberated. We, the “Roumanians,remained standing where we were, enviously watching those excited meetings. Shortlybefore the train departed I heard someone ask if there were any Jews from Piotrkowamong us. When I heard the name of our town, I broke for the window and saw a familiarface It was Yitzhak Wenglishewski, from Piotrkow, who had been a member of theHashlrHatza^^ movement in our town. Here, as it turned out, he was active in the275276 / A TALE OF ONE CITYescape operation that was assisting the illegal immigration to the Land of Israel. Whenhe saw me, he called out in a loud voice telling me to get off the train. We left the carone after the other, and Yitzhak Wenglishewski led us quickly outside the train stationwithout attracting attention. After we took various trains through the streets of Budapest,he brought us to the gathering point. Two days later, a special emissary appeared; he ledus to the Austrian border, and that’s how we got to Graz.We stayed in that city for a while; it is notable for its magnificent scenery. Then theorder came to take to the road again.We marched quietly, one after the other, with the high Tyrol mountains rising aboveus. My heart was full of doubts about whether my old aunt and my sick brother wouldbe able to cross those peaks. But, by the grace of God, we made it to the top safely.There, a broad-shouldered Russian soldier jumped out at us. For a moment we froze inour tracks in fear, but we quickly took heart after one of the escape team leaders slippedsomething into the Russian’s palm and he motioned to us to continue.Twenty minutes later we were on Italian soil near a British military camp. Heresoldiers from the Jewish Brigade were waiting for us. They immediately loaded us intocamouflaged trucks, in which we made our way to the Italian interior. Occasionally thecaravan would stop and we would get out for air and to stretch our muscles; then wewould immediately continue on our journey.Finally we made it to Treviso, where the Brigade had pitched camp. They put us upin tents, fed us in the dining hall, and gave us the best of everything. The Jewish soldiersfrom Eretz Israel were indescribably loyal and devoted to us. There, for the first time,we were able to talk freely in the fields and on the trails without fear that someone mightbetray us. On one of my outings I noticed a soldier carrying a book under his arm, which,from afar, I made out to be “A Book of Testimony,” written by Yaakov Kurtz. Full ofcuriosity, I approached the soldier to check on the author’s identity. He turned out to benone other than the Yaakov Kurtz from our town, who had been miraculously saved in1942 from the Piotrkow ghetto by an exchange of German and Palestinian Jewishnationals.On that same day we met, among the Brigade soldiers, Mishek Zemel and thebrothers Natan and Arye Sandovsky. It was a dramatic meeting. They were sure we werethe only Jews from the town to be saved from the talons of the German murderers. Andfor us they were the first sign of life of our townfolk who had immigrated to Israel.The next day we met the brothers Poznanski—the younger, Sandovsky, andGlogowski. My old Betar commander, Yehuda Kushinski, also arrived, along with agroup of partisans from Vilna. We had a lot to tell them. The details of the hardships wehad experienced were still fresh in our minds and our hearts still bled.That same evening. Sabbath eve, we went with the Brigade soldiers into a wide fieldin which a temporary stage had been set up. On stage, a ceremony was held to welcomethe Sabbath, and a Jewish female soldier lit the candles. Then two former commandersof the Vilna district’s Jewish partisans went up on stage; they were Abba Kovner andHaim Lazar, and we all heard the Jewish partisan song for the first time—“Zog nitkeinmol az du gehst dem letztn weg”—and we were told about the courageous struggleto defend the honor of the people of Israel.The Remnants Unite ! 277As dusk faded into night, a huge bonfire was lit and we all danced a wild “Hora.”Our powerful singing—^which expressed the feelings that stirred within us at our returnto our own people, proud, courageous Jews, a new and wonderful generation—echoedlate into the night and ended with a national anthem. We really felt that hope was notlost and we would yet reach a safe haven in our homeland.Izkor BookThe first anniversary of liberation—Bergen-Belsen, April 15,1946. On the right, Bronia Krakowska-Rodal, now in KibbutzRosh Hanikra.A Survivor’s HappinessJerry Wenglishewski —TorontoThe bright sunshine of that beautiful day in May 1845 cannot be forgotten. Thestreets of Vienna were crowded with Soviet military vehicles—all kinds of jeeps, trucks,tanks, and horse carts, moving westward.Yuri was looking at the Russian soldiers and he wanted to shout out his happiness.He was free! Yet he was too weak to yell and he could barely walk. Years of torture,pain, hunger, humiliation and of feeling like a hunted animal always on the run couldbreak even the strongest individual. Only a few days before, he had been pondering theidea of suicide.Now he wanted to laugh, but he could not. He still did not believe that he was free.He could walk in the streets without being afraid for his life—not hunted by the Nazisnor by his own dark suicidal thoughts. He could hardly believe that, after years of livingas degraded, dirty Jew and a hungry animal, he was again a human being.Yuri was confused: He wasn’t sure who he was any longer. Was he a Jew? Or washe a Polack? Many times he lived as a young Polish man and had been abused andtortured as such. Was he a Lithuanian? He spoke the language fluently, and all hisdocuments stated that his name was Jurgis Veglishauskas, of Lithuanian nationality.The Russian columns were moving east through Vienna. Only a few civilians walkedon the streets, mostly “ Auslander” (aliens). The Viennese population were hiding behindtheir heavy house gates. They now feared the Russians. They felt guilty, realizing thatthe Russian soldiers would not forgive them for the sadistic atrocities that the Germanarmy committed on Russian soil.Next day Yuri walked along Ottakringer Gasse. A column of Russian soldiers inhorse-drawn carts were resting and preparing their lunch. Yuri felt a pang of hunger andpain in his stomach. He had not eaten any food for several days. As he approached asoldier with a common greeting in their language (a language he had learned during thewar), he was questioned about his name and business by one of the soldiers. Yuri wasnot sure what to answer. He quickly reasoned that he no longer had to lie, as theGerman-Nazis were powerless. “I am a Polish slave-laborer and I thank you forliberating me,” he answered. The soldiers were good-natured, front-line men andoffered Yuri a loaf of bread and butter. He thanked them profoundly. Tears streameddown his face. He hadn’t had real bread and butter for all the years of the war. Allhe had tasted was sawdust bread. Now he remembered the taste of bread before thewar.Happily, he returned to his little room at Lienfelder Gasse. There he boiled somewater and, with the Russian gift, he prepared his own feast. Chewing on the bread andbutter, his hopes slowly began to rise. After all, he would be able to be himself. But whowas he?278A Survivor's Happiness ! 279Going back in his mind, he began to remember; his parents, brothers and morefamily. He felt a twitch in his heart. What had happened to them? Would he meet themagain?The delicious meal and the rays of sun beaming through the window of his tiny roombrought him back to reality and to the enjoyment of his food. His tired body was nowable to call out: “I am free, I am free!” There was no need for lies, no more humiliationsand no more slave work.Yet he did not believe that 100%. Years of false hopes and experiences taught himnot to take for granted “those good ways of life.” They had not given him his freedom.The Nazis might still return. It had happened before and Yuri had paid dearly for hisunreal desires for freedom. That’s why he was afraid to think of his family or about whatelse his future would bring. His habit of worrying only about the next meal made himthink of his table, laid out with bread and butter. Nothing was more important than food.Food meant a full stomach and energy to fight for the next day.He sensed how degrading his way of life had become—but at the same time he knewthat he was too weak and too tired to understand it right now in any human way. He justsat down and enjoyed his first day of liberty.dsteneichisches Botes Kreuz JL Croix Rouge flutrichicnaeAustrian Red Cross ji AbctphHckhB KpacuHlt KpecxwiEN.i. 15. 9. 1945Minorifenplotz 3, Telephon U 23 2 3Z U 21 2 62)I[3 e statigun gryWie bestatigen hiUit, dass Herr Jury •JENGLISCHEWSKT,geb, 1921, wohniiaft ^Tien IX.i Prankgasse 2 berechttgt tat die _Kreuz und der Zentrale der Repatriation raWir bitten alXe Zivil- und Mtlitarbehdrden, thm betseinen Retsen thren Scbutz ubd Hilf. angedethe^a,^*-- ,,i.fiLetter of recommendation by the Austrian Red Cross giving Jerry Wenglishewskiwide authority to operate across the Czechoslovakian—Austrian border betweenVienna and Bratislava.280 / A TALE OF ONE CITYFor the first time in years he fell asleep on a full stomach and with hope in his heartfor a better future.Or was there any future at all?Next morning Yuri woke up to the sounds of exploding bombs and artillery fire onthe other side of the Danube. Fighting was still going on. Later in the day. someonementioned that the Germans were putting up a struggle in Langenzersdorf, resistanceagainst the advancing Russian units. However, the general feeling was that the Germanshadn’t a chance.Yuri was in good spirits. He still had a piece of yesterday’s bread. The weather wasfantastic and he could hear more Russian army units rumbling through the streets ofVienna. It was a gorgeous day in May 1945.Because of their fear of the Russian soldiers, Yuri’s Austrian neighbors in the houseat Lienfelder Gasse began to invite hyn into their apartments, offering him wine andsweets. It was funny, in Yuri’s eyes, to see that the same people who hadn’t acknow-ledged him as a human being before should suddenly begin to greet him with a loud“Guten Tag.” This was the character of the Viennese. As far as they were concerned,Yuri was a Lithuanian who spoke Russian and could help them to prevent rape androbbery from the advancing Russian soldiers frontline units. Fear is a tremendousstimulant, even for the German people.Throughout the streets of Vienna, corpses of soldiers and horses were lying around.From the other side of the Danube you could hear echoes of the battles. Yuri was troubledwith hardship even though he had eaten for the past few days. He felt better physically,but was very weak. The heat and the stench from the street made him sick and he wantedto retch. The streets had been deserted; not a soul was around.His aim was to get to Kartner’s Ring, where the Hotel Imperial was located. “I mustmake it,” he constantly repeated to himself. “It’s quite far, but I have to find the strengthand somehow reach that hotel.” Yuri heard that the Russian general of the front had setup his headquarters at the Imperial Hotel and intuition made Yuri feel that this was theplace where he would find work and food. He would be able to survive if he could justget to that location. He would then be able to get well, work and soon restore himself tothe moral state of a human being.From Ottakring to Kartner Ring was several miles. In normal times, it would take astreetcar less than an hour. To walk now, in Yuri’s condition, was a difficult taskrequiring an extra, special effort. To walk amidst bombed buildings, a mess of electricaland telephone wires, concrete slabs and ditches slowed down his progress.These were the remains of recent American bombings, as well as battles by theRussians against the German Third Reich—“The Super Race.”He felt happy when he finally arrived at the Kartner Ring. It wasn’t so far to thehotel from there. Now he could see Russians moving quickly in American Jeeps,whizzing in all directions. On Kartner Ring the traffic was heavy with all kinds ofvehicles. Yuri felt stronger now, seeing that he was closer to achieving his goal. He foundthe Imperial Hotel guarded on all sides by Russian soldiers.Yuri walked over to the main entrance and was promptly stopped by a guard. Heexplained in Russian that he wanted work as a translator. The guard told him only toA Survivor *s Happiness / 281stay outside and wait until he could locate someone who might be interested. Afterwaiting for more than an hour, a woman emerged from the building, dressed in a militaryuniform with the insignia of a major on her shoulders. Though Yuri was very tired, hisold zest and daring started to circulate in his bloodstream, contradicting the deep fear inhis guts.Yuri realized that his future would depend on his first response to the major’squestions. To the question, “Who are you and what are you doing here?” Yuri said, “1am a Jew and want to work and eat. I speak Russian as well as German and 1 know thecity of Vienna very well. She looked at him with a long gaze and then ordered the guardto let him through.In the huge vestibule she told him to sit down and wait. After a while she returnedin the company of another major, a tall man in his fifties, who began to question Yuri inRussian. Yuri told him pertly, but politely, that he escaped from concentration campsand had been living sometimes as a Polish worker and sometimes as a Lithuanian worker.He stated that he was bom in Poland and had no clue as to what had become of the restof his family. He continued to tell the major that he was alone, hungry and very tired.He stressed the point that he wanted only to work for a bowl of soup and a piece of bread.Both majors looked at each other; one ordered Yuri to follow him. The major broughtYuri to the kitchen and gave orders to the cook to feed him. He told Yuri to return to thevestibule upon finishing his meal. The cook examined Yuri’s thin cheeks, turnedsuddenly and brought him a large plate of steaming soup, full to the brim. In a soft voice,he kindly told him to eat very slowly. He also placed a huge piece of black bread on thetable in front of Yuri, and again repeated his instructions to eat slowly. It seemed thatYasha the cook understood what hunger was. In the bowl there was more meat thansoup. Yuri devoted his entire attention to eating. Nothing else mattered at that moment.This was a meal fit for a king. He felt suddenly energized. He found it difficult to acceptthe fact that tomorrow he would have food again. Therefore he asked the kind cook fora loaf of bread. When the cook asked “For whom?” Yuri replied, “For a friend at home.”He was ashamed to admit that he wanted it for himself for the next day. It had becomesecond nature to be concerned about his next meal through the recent years.With a full stomach, his hunger satisfied, he then returned to the vestibule wonderingwhat to expect next.Russian officers, captains, majors, colonels and many others had been coming andgoing. Some disappeared behind the vast number of doors on different levels of theluxurious Hotel Imperial. Yuri alone was in civilian clothes, sitting in the lobby. Allaround him were officers with different insignias on their uniforms. A captain asked himwho he was and what he was doing. Yuri could not understand himself, but answeredthat he was a Lithuanian and was going to work as a translator, maybe it was his intuitionagain, or some kind of premonition that, even to the Russians, his liberators, it was betternot to say that one was a Jew.Later he found out that his intuition was right, as usual. Yuri’s liberators didn t likeJews. As a matter of fact, they hated them, though nobody would say it openly. He wassoon summoned upstairs and introduced to the general. General Godin was a tall, huskyman with a round, open face, his chest decorated with medals.282 / A TALE OF ONE CITYAfter a brief interview, he told Yuri that he would accept him as a translator. Theterms were that Yuri had to be available at any time of day or night. He could sleep inone of the hotel’s rooms and eat in the officers’ mess. Yuri thanked the formidablegeneral profusely for his generosity. Godin was the general in charge of the thirdUkrainian front. It was his army that had pushed back the Germans from the Ukraine,Romania and Austria and was now progressing to the west to meet the Americans.The next morning, Yuri was called to the general’s office. He entered just whereGeneral Godin was sitting at a large table surrounded by his adjutants. Yuri waspleasantly shocked; most of the adjutants had ‘‘hooked” noses and invariably Jewishfaces.He thought to himself, “Now I am at home.” A kind of warm feeling swept throughhis body, being a Jew among other Jews. It was a new sensation to him. He could notunderstand what was happening to him. Never, as far back as he could remember, hadhe felt this way. Maybe in his soul, he was longing to be a Jew, a plain Jew among otherJews. Subconsciously, he did not even suspect that during all those years of pain andtorture, he wanted to be among his own kind. Under torture, he had had to yell that hewas not a Jew. His soul had screamed out, “a paradox like this could only happen in aninhumane world.” He, who had longed to live as a Jew with all his heart, had to denouncehimself and live another identity.The general introduced Yuri to his companions and he was assigned to work withColonel Upita. The colonel was a soft-spoken man around forty-five years old. He tookYuri to a waiting jeep with a chauffeur and they started on their way. They drove abouttwenty miles from Vienna to a textile factory. The Russians wanted to start productionof clothing to have a supply for the advancing army. Yuri translated the conversationsbetween the colonel and the director of the factory regarding the immediate start ofproduction, raw materials and shipment of goods.On their way back to Vienna, the colonel indicated to the driver that it was time toeat and it would be nice to have a picnic. The driver found a clear, grassy spot, spreada blanket, brought out white bread, butter, cans of meat and a tall gasoline cannister fullof Hungarian wine. The colonel invited Yuri to sit down, as well as the driver. Togetherthey enjoyed their meal. On this sunny day in the vicinity of Vienna, Yuri had his firstpicnic—a symbol of his return to the human race.Colonel Upita was a well-educated man and inquired into Yuri’s background withmany curious questions about his childhood, education and life during the war. He askedabout the Germans, Austrians and the city of Vienna. Yuri answered openly to the bestof his knowledge. The colonel liked that. Upon arrival in Vienna, the colonel offeredYuri food to take home, but for the first time in years, Yuri refused, stating that he waseating in the hotel and therefore didn’t need it. At that moment he started to regain hisself-confidence. He was reverting from the hungry animal he had become to a humanbeing again.Colonel Upita probably mentioned his satisfaction with his translator to the general,for the next morning Yuri was summoned to the general’s quarters. General Godinappointed him as his personal translator. He would accompany the general wherever hewent. Yuri was honored by the general’s confidence and promised to try his best.A Survivor*s Happiness / 283From then on, Yuri went with the general on all his shopping trips, to cultural events,theaters, operas, conferences and meetings. All of Yuri’s wants and needs were takencare of—meals, clothes, etc.Austrians began to seek his acquaintance in order to acquire favors. A translatorcould be of great assistance in the request for political favors and in other business andpersonal matters with the “Almighty Russian General.” Fate had brought Yuri fromdestitution and hunger to an honored and powerful position.Editor *s Note: Jerry (Yuri) Wenglishewski, a member of Kibbutz Hachshara “Behazif* (thekibbutz of Mordechai Anielewicz and other Warsaw Ghetto Uprising heroes), served honorablyin the “Bricha” in 1945-1948. He was one of the organizers and operatives of the importanttransit center at the Rothschild Hospital in Vienna, helping many illegal immigrants to reachEretz Israel. Another Piotrkower working there was Eliezer Bashan (Leshek Blachman). ElazarPrashker was at the time the head of the Zionist Federation in Vienna.In the Jewish BrigadeAryeh Sandowski (Leibek)—Ramat ChenIn the very last days before the outbreak of World War Two, I managed to escapefrom Poland. Before arriving in the Land of Israel, I spent a month on the open, stormysea with the illegal immigrants of Aliyah Bet. The war severed all contact between meand my family, and all efforts to communicate with them failed.With the first appeal to the Jewish community in the Land of Israel to join the fightagainst the Nazis, my brother Natan (who had immigrated in 1934 and was studying atthe Hebrew University in Jerusalem) joined the first group of volunteers in the waragainst the Germans. By the end of 1940 he was already in uniform as I took my firststeps as a member of Kibbutz Messiloth.As the war continued, the first terrible reports of the bitter fate that had befallen ourrelatives under Nazi rule began to reach us. When the Jewish Brigade was formed, Iimmediately volunteered. It was my desire to fight actively against the murderers andavenge the blood of millions of Jews.As the war front in Europe shifted to Italy, the Brigade went into active combat inthe front lines against the Germans. This was the opportunity to pay back the murderersof our parents, our brothers and our sisters.But in addition to our desire for revenge was a question that was constantlyon our minds: Had any of our relatives survived? Could we manage to help them?Was there really any point to our war if, if fact, God forbid, nobody was left forus to help?In July 1945, after the victory over the Nazis, while we were stationed in Treviso(not far from the Austrian border), Jewish refugees began to arrive unexpectedly fromthe remnants of the ghettos and concentration camps.On one of the refugees vehicles I found many people from my town, including thebrothers Samelson, the sons of the tailor Samelson of Piotrkow, who was the well-knownbenefactor of the tradespeople in our town. They looked terrible. We consoled them andtried to lift their spirits. The sight of soldiers from the Jewish Brigade, who had comefrom the Land of Israel, inspired in those survivors the hope that they might yet make anew life for themselves. Every day new transports of refugees arrived, and on one ofthem, brought in by the Brigade, we were fortunate enough to find our two youngbrothers, Avraham and Yaacov. There were no bounds to our happiness; it is impossibleto describe our feelings in those moments—the great happiness mixed with pain andsorrow upon hearing of the loss of the people of our town, including most of our familymembers, cruelly murdered by the Germans.On orders of the High Command, the Brigade left Italy and was tasked with missionsin other countries of Europe. We will never forget the Brigade’s transit throughGermany, where we met Jews from Piotrkow near the Landsberg camp.284In the Jewish Brigade / 285onsn mmu du nirmndrt n^n : nuwv ;Dnnni "RonnjD nnNi in] : onmuSoldiers of the Jewish Brigade. From left: Nathan Sandowski, Aryeh Sandowskiand their friend. Sitting: Renia Zaks-Irmay and Bronia Shidlowska-Ofir.Among the other tasks assigned us was that of guarding German prisoners inHolland.The desire to find relatives and town members never left us, not even for a moment.At the first opportunity I set out for Poland, travelling together with one of the Brigademembers.On May 3,1946 we arrived in Katowice. From there we travelled to Piolrkow, andI visited the rotten forest in which my parents had been shot to death along with hundredsof the city’s Jews.Later on I participated in a mourning gathering at the grave of Mordecai Anielewiczin Warsaw, where he had fallen while commanding the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising.In the cities I visited I met dozens of Jews from Piotrkow. Before leaving Poland 1took it upon myself to arrange the transfer of two girls from Piotrkow to the land ofIsrael. They were Renia Zaks and Bronia Shidlovski. Accomplishing that involved manydifficulties and adventures. At the Czech border I was taken to the Moravska Ostravajail and from there to the famous jail in Prague. Our route was hardly strewn with roses,since they took us for spies. In jail we spent 10 days in hunger and fear for the fate ofthe two girls. In the end we were released, thanks to the intervention of the Britishmilitary attache in Prague. At that time news reached us of the dismantling of the Brigade,and I, together with my friend, made every effort to reach our unit as quickly as possible.The news of the “Black S” that the English had arranged for the Jewish communityin the Land of Israel, which reached us aboard ship on the way back, left us dumbstruck.It is hard to describe the morale of soldiers whose weapons have been taken away, along286 / A TALE OF ONE CITYwith the right to feel the taste of a homeland. We were very depressed, but our firmdetermination to struggle for the right of free immigration for our surviving brothers andsisters remained unflagging.On that day we demonstrated in Haifa and stoned the English, the ship that broughtthe two girls from Piotrkow dropped anchor in the port. Our protests were to no avail,and, together with thousands of other illegal immigrants, the girls were transferred toCyprus. Those were the first steps in the great struggle waged by the Jewish communityin the land of Israel on the eve of the War of Liberation, which gave us our independenceand the State of Israel.Izkor BookThe Past RevisitedI stood in the doorway of the tenement at Gamcarska Street in Piotrkow and lookedat the flights of stairs my family had climbed so often.I felt sad for a moment. I’d been here before, but I hadn’t really explored the placesince my return to Poland after the war. Now, the time had come to leave this soil and,somehow, I felt the urge to take a closer look at this town, now so strange and quiet.With a bit of imagination, I could “see” the people and my dearest and my friends,full of zest and life as they had roamed these streets years ago.I walked down to Starowarszawska Street. Here, Jewish stores, one after anotherhad given this section of town a lively and folkloristic appearance. Now everything wasclosed and empty. I passed the narrow Grodzka Street and Korman’s delicatessen store.His delicious wursht and parovkes had been a gastronomical treat. Then 1 came to theTrybunalski Place. When I was a kid the droshkes—four-wheeled carriages and hor-ses—^were stationed there. It was a lot of fun to hitch a ride with one of them.I looked up to the second floor of the building where the Merkaz Library had oncebeen located. From there I had obtained whole shelves of Verne, Dumas, Korczak andother writers. The former Gletger’s restaurant downstairs, from where the NaziBefehlstelle had directed the atrocities in 1942, was already open and selling vodkaagain.The photoprints in the display window advertised a Russian war picture.I stood in front of the Rattan’s movie theater as my afternoon memories wore on.It was right here or in kino Czary that we exp)erienced the dreams and splendor of thewide world as we watched the movies: Greta Garbo, Rudolf Valentino, Bette Davis,Qark Gable, Molly Picon, Maurice Chevalier, Marlene Dietrich and Charlie Chaplin. Ididn’t know then that years later I would eagerly look for these movies in the T.V. Guideand watch the late show in order to digest them again, language and all—and to feel therecollection of home and the past, so vivid and burning.Then I walked down to the section of the Jewish Kehila, the Dobroczynnosc, theorphanage, the Maccabi and Maria Konopnicka Public School, all located on a stretchof one block. Here I experienced a feeling of great warmth as 1 remembered all theimportant events and pleasant things that had taken place here. I thought of the childrenand the wise, of the sportsmen and the scholars who had attended these quarters. It hadbeen right here that every year, the big Lag B’Omer Parade started its movement towardthe forests.The schoolyard reminded me of something else. I stood precisely on the same spotwhere Meister Klette had killed people. A few yards away 1 could see the formerpremises of the Ordnungsdienst.Then I went toward Jerozolimska Street and to the front of the main Synagogue. Ithought of the High Holy Days, with everything so sincere and quiet—the earnest prayersand the inspiring sound of the Shofar; the great cantors and their enchanting nigunim.287288 / A TALE OF ONE CITYAnd then other memories: mothers and children; the Shupo, Ukrainians and thepolice; the long line of peasant carriages crawling toward Tomaszov and the last journeyto Rakov.The walls of the Synagogue still stood, there was no roof and the interior wascompletely destroyed. Many houses on this side of the street were missing.From a distance I could see the building that was once the Jewish Hospital—^theonly reminder of help and kindness still standing.Years ago, when I rode the same little puffing train to the Przyglov-Wlodzimierzovsummer resort, my heart was always pounding. That was the place to be! A beautifulriver, lavish trees, elegant villas and pensions, games, and visitors—^all the ingredientsof a full and rewarding kind of life. Upon arriving, I almost missed the station becausethe old wooden structure was no longer there. I walked along the river and the familiarroads, rarely meeting a soul.Finally, the day’s events were coming to a close with dinner at the Sielankarestaurant. A few Army officers with their girls were the only customers. A musicianwas playing Russian and Polish songs. The soldiers drank vodka and tried to sing alongin their drunken stupor.From the window I could see the little stadium where the Katzenelson colony’s“Olympics” were usually held at the end of each summer season.I took a droshke back to town. The coachman was none other than Leonarczyk, myformer boss at the Hortensia factory at the time of the Nazis. He didn’t show any sign ofrecognition; he was aware, however, that I was Jewish. From our small talk 1 rememberonly one episode. When we approached the Bugaj complex, he said regretfully, “Those werethe days when the Jews were living here ... those were the days, mister...”I understood his feelings quite well. He was sorry about the loss of his prey, he missedthe days of blackmail, robbery, and all the fun that people like him used to have with theJews. And suddenly, I realized that I had no more business to attend to in this town.Such are the memories we cherish. They are more than nostalgia for a home town.They are the memories of our earliest beginnings. Earliest beginnings may not alwaysbe pleasant, but they remind us of our youth and of our flesh and blood. We honor theseall the days of our lives.Ben GiladiIn Memory of Jacob MaltzJacob Maltz died in 1976. To write about his life and his endeavors is to write theHistory of the Piotrkower Jewry and the Zionist Dream of our ancestors during the lasteighty years.He was one of the chief leaders of the Zionist Movement in Piotrkow, and hiseloquence, personality and dedication contributed enormously to the spiritual andidealistic education and goals of scores of young Halutzim.He, himself made Aliah in the thirties and continued his fruitful activities in EretzIsrael. His last gigantic task was to turn the Piotrkower Izkor Book from a dream intoreality.In 1971, when Jacob Maltz became 80 years old, 1 wrote the following essay intribute to this great man.The VanguardEvery year, on Israel’s Independence Day, in the main grandstands, against adramatic background of waving flags and enthusiastic crowds, the country’s aging elitewatches the parade go by. The entire government is there, headed by the President andflanked by scores of septuagenarian and octogenarian settlers who are facing a greatdream come true. Among the fine men watching the parade is Jacob Maltz.It all began years ago in Piotrkow. Young Jacob had begun to think deeply aboutthe fate of his people. The Zionist Movement, whose influence was beginning to expandat the time, reached into his world with its challenging slogans and magic attraction. Allthis made an enormous impression and so Jacob started to spread the gospel of Zion.A hard-working and sensitive fellow with a brilliant mind, who spoke in a quiet butauthoritative voice, Jacob Maltz soon became one of the leaders of the Zionists in ourhome town.One of the most vivid memories of my childhood is the house on 9 Gamcarska Streetin Piotrkow, where the beautiful aroma of fresh bread and rolls always emanated from“Toltza’s” bakery. I went to school with Jacob’s daughter Ruth and often visited theirhouse. It was a fascinating place to visit. There were so many books and people. Youheard many exotic words, like “Poalei Zion,” “Keren Kayemeth” and “Hapoel.” In thishouse you were close to a man who, on Lag B’Omer Day, was the center of attention toscores of intense young people wearing blue blouses and colorful ties. In a word, youfelt you were near many important, splendorous things.There was another place where I had the chance to meet Jacob Maltz. He was a verygood friend of my brother-in-law Pinkus and often visited my sister Hela’s home at theJewish Hospital. A wonderful relationship existed between those two remarkable men.Their {K)litical views were far apart—Pinkus was one of the “Bund” party leaders.However, every other human interest kept them together. And when those two men took289290 / A TALE OF ONE CITYJacob Maltz (left) and Berish Rosenblum in 1919. Both were members of the citycouncil as representatives of Poalei Zion.a walk down the street, the people of Piotrkow felt good. There was still a brotherlyunderstanding between folks despite the notorious party conflicts that plagued Jewishcommunities everywhere.Years passed. Years of war and destruction and later years of fighting and hope, Oneday, a man came to see me at the Social Security office in Tel-Aviv; when he approachedmy desk, I recognized him immediately. It was Jacob Maltz. After finishing someformalities regarding his retirement, we went out for a chat. He had told me about hisyears of work in the country’s service and about his devoted activity as the head of thePiotrkower Society in Israel. I gladly accepted his invitation to visit his home.There, for the first time, I came into contact with his great obsession; the project ofthe Piotrkower Memorial Book. Vast, coherent planning and effort went into accumulat-ing the records and materials for this project. The endless photographs, documents andarticles were neatly sorted. I was amazed how much Jacob cherished every item andhow wide was his knowledge about the whole history and people of our home town.Since then, I often visited Jacob and became one of the many whom he mobilizedin order to realize his noble idea.In 1969, I came to Israel and went to see Jacob Maltz. The book was alreadypublished. However, during our conversation. I understood that, in a sense, he neverreally considered the book finished. For it was his intention to add at some future timeIn Memory of Jacob Maltz / 291additional chapters—^“a sort of summing up,” as he said. In his words, every bulletin or“chovereth” published and every scrap of significant writing should be a supplement tothe pages that told the story of our ancestors and ourselves.He spoke about the archives, the library and about “Beith Piotrkow,” and I felt thatas the book had become a reality, the new idea would also materialize; it was only amatter of time.Time is very precious for Jacob Maltz. He is now living in his own world: with hisbooks, thoughts and accomplishments. A lonely man, though.Only when the occasional guest visits him can he show the wonderful vitality thatstill inspires others. Or on Independence Day, he watches the parade go by.So, shake hands, Jacob Maltz, and say “Shalom” to the other “chaverim” in thecrowd! To Zalman Shazar and Golda Meir, David Ben-Gurion and the younger fellowsin the golden chain, Moshe Dayan and Igal Alon. And tell them, “We’re still workingfor our beloved Country!”Ben GiladiI BelieveRabbi Israel Meir LauThe appearance of our Rabbi Lau, Shalita, on television onSaturday night, the Tenth of Tevet 5733 (1973), caused a greatstir among our Piotrkow brothers and sisters and became a topicof conversation. Small wonder, since his words penetratedevery sensitive heart, particularly the hearts of our PiotrkowJews. The following is an excerpt from the rabbi’s program,which he titled “Ani Maamin” (I believe), recalling his life asa child in the Nazi hell.Editor ofHeidim“I believe with perfect faith”—^these words by the Rambam (Maimonides) becamethe hymn of those who died for Sanctification of the Name. Tomorrow is the Tenth ofTevet, the first day on which the calamity of the destruction of the Holy Temple started,leading to the Babylonian exile and the other exiles of Israel, the day chosen as thegeneral memorial day for our six million martyrs who were lost in the Second WorldWar in the most horrible of all the calamities that befell our people, without our knowingtheir place of burial, and without their having been given a Jewish burial as their asheswere scattered all over Europe, and with even their date of death having remainedunknown.We shall not attempt in this program to investigate the Shoah. We shall perhapsattempt to touch on one point which I consider central—the great faith and inspirationof those millions, who appeared to be led like sheep to the slaughter, but whose spiritwas not broken. Their flesh was consumed by the flames, but their soul remained pureand they could sing and hope even during the most difficult moments of human life Piotrkow, my home town, was a city in Poland which had some 22,000 Jews at thebeginning of the Shoah. Students of Torah around the world will recall Piotrkow becauseof the cover pages of many holy books which were printed in the Hebrew print of thattown. It had Jewish organizations from Agudath Israel to the socialist Bund, It hadvibrant Torah life and a great variety of activities.I was about two years old when the war broke out. Despite my young age, I recallscenes of horror which I am sure will never leave me.My father. Rabbi Moshe Haim Lau, HYD, was the last rabbi and spokesman ofPiotrkow even in peacetime, when the attitude of the authorities was good. It wasespecially during the war and in time of trouble that my father’s house became a centerof public activity and a place for people to bring their personal problems.It was in that home where I grew up that I first learned about life during the time of292I Believe / 293oppression and hardship. My mother was also active in the charitable organizations ofthe ghetto in Piotrkow.I particularly remember the scene when I said goodbye to my father. It was in thedeportation yard from where Jews were sent to Treblinka. Father was left in the yard.Mother, my brothers and I were thrust into the synagogue, from where the transport wasto depart. We were able to escape from there at dawn, but my brother Shmuel, HYD,was forcibly separated by the Germans. Mother’s screams reverberate in my heart tothis day. But they were to no avail. The next time we had to line up in the yard to completethe quota for the Treblinka transport, father saw to it that we were not sent to the yard,hiding us instead in an attic.Mother pleaded with father to hide with us, but he refused. He said that everyoneknew him and of his existence, and if he was not seen in the yard they would look forhim and find hundreds of Jews who were hiding throughout the ghetto.When mother and I came out of hiding in the attic, we no longer saw father. It washis last journey to Treblinka, and only a few survivors who came back from there, fromthe gas chambers, were able to tell us about his last speeches, his last words; “For youshall go out in joy,” the confessional prayer he would recite in public, and the singingof Ani Maamim.We were separated from our father and, a short time later, from our mother, wholeft us in the train station; only after the Shoah did we find out that she had died duringthe last months of the war in the Ravensbruck death camp, where she had died of hungerin the arms of a woman whom I met here in Israel.I remained with a much older brother, who took the place of my parents, andNaphtali Lavie and his brother in 1945after the liberation from Buchenwald.Many years later: Rabbi Lau, ChiefRabbi of Netanya; Naphtali Lavie,Senior aide to Moshe Dayan.294 / A TALE OF ONE CITYIsrael Meir, theChief Rabbi ofTel Aviv since1989.Ambassador NaphtaliLavie, Consul Generalin New York, in theearly eighties.wandered with him from Piotrkow to Czestochowa and from there to the death camp atBuchenwald, Germany, leaving behind the ruins of houses, synagogues, public places,with towns and villages in flames. Jewish Europe disappeared without a trace, with onlythe remains of walls bearing silent testimony to what used to be. As Gebirtig’s poem,“Brothers, Fire in the Village,” expresses it, “There is fire, brothers, the fire is burning.”I was taken to Buchenwald by my brother inside a knapsack, for it was a camp formen, not for children. My brother took me there after he snatched me from a train thatwas going to Bergen Belsen so as not to leave me alone.In Buchenwald we were first in Block 66, where Jews were kept. Conditions therewere infernal. A Polish doctor, himself a prisoner, took pity on me and cut the letter “P”from the corpse of a Polish prisoner and sewed it on my clothes; thus I was transferredas a Polish child to Block 8, where Russian prisoners were kept, near the gate of thecamp. There, conditions were much better. I met a Russian officer named Fiodor whotook care of me like of a son and made sure I ate cereal or potato soup every day.One day, while I was in the yard of Block 8,1 saw a group of exhausted prisonersin striped uniforms, known as Musulmen, being dragged toward the camp’s gate.Suddenly I heard one of them calling, “Lulek” (diminutive for Israel). It was my brother,whom I had left behind in Block 66, who was now being brought over with other personsto the train taking him to his last destination, the death train. He ran towards me, heldout his hand across the barbed wire fence, and said, “I would like to talk to you op)enly.You are now a big boy (I was seven and a half); you are the last one remaining. I don’tknow if you will survive, or whether this hell will ever end. I am going away and I shallnot return, but if it ever ends and you survive, remember that there is a place in the worldcalled Eretz Israel, where you have an uncle. Ask them to take you there. Tell them yourname and ask them to look for your uncle. They will find him by the name, and you willnot be alone. I am going. Goodbye, Lulek.”I did not know what to say. If I had the right words for him at that time, I wouldI Believe / 295have said in Yiddish the words of the Song of the Partisans, which we know in Hebrew:“Do not say you are going on your last way.”As I said before, I am not going to attempt an investigation of the Shoah. I wouldlike to point out to you so that you may believe that Jews stressed their singing, theirfaith, and clung to their heritage as much as they could, more than they stressed theirpain and tears.My story ends in Buchenwald on January 9, 1945; then I arrived with my brother,who was saved in spite of everything, in Eretz Israel, where I was bom again. I carryeverything in my head, I see and hear everything, but above all I hear the plea of theMartyrs: “Do not only remember six million dying to sanctify the Holy Name. Remem-ber them living to sanctify the Name, with Shema Israel on their lips and Ani Maamirain their mouths, the voice of bursting faith—I believe with perfect faith.”HeidimRemembrance of Things PastIt is not a question of remembrance but a state of being...Marcel ProustThere were thousands listening silently in the Temple’s sanctuary, and stillthousands more standing outside Temple Emanu-El in the cold April wind, most of themsurvivors of the Holocaust. Many wept openly during the prayers of the memorial servicefor those who had perished in the death camps and who were killed fighting heroicallyin the Warsaw Ghetto uprising.The moment New York’s Governor, Hugh L. Carey, spoke, my curiosity was alertedat once. I had heard this timbre of voice before, with such distinctive diction that couldbe remembered even after many years. I was positive that when I had heard it, a longtime ago, it had been only a fascinating sound without my understanding any of thewords. I tried to explore the corners of my mind and to find out when and where I hadheard this voice. Meanwhile, the Governor spoke:“... We gather here today to commemorate the two momentous and heroic events inour modem history. This year marks the 30th anniversary since the US and Allied Forcesliberated the Nazi concentration camps. And this year marks the 32nd anniversary ofthe Warsaw Ghetto uprising.“Thirty years ago, as an officer in the US Army, I stood with other American soldiersbefore the gates of Nordhausen and witnessed the nightmarish horror of the slave campsand crematoriums. I inhaled the stench of death and barbaric, calculated cruelty... ”Nordhausen! A charming, red-roofed town in Turingen, Germany.... In the heartof the Hartz mountains—and in the middle of town an extermination camp, a long blockof former military warehouses or garages surrounded by a barbed-wire fence.I arrived there from K.L. Dora. No longer able to work, I was destined forextermination. Block No. 6 was a vast, bare structure where hundreds of subhumanbeings with hollow faces and transparent bodies covered with striped rags were lyingon the bare, concrete floor. There were no bunks, no blankets, not even straw or sand.Just cold concrete—day and night. Twice a day there was an “Appell” outside. Aftereach “Appell,” the Kapos carried away the corpses of those who had died of exhaustionor were killed.In block No. 6,1 met some people from my home town, Piotrkow. They told meabout the sad fate of so many of my friends. In November 1944, a large group of menfrom Piotrkow, including myself, was sent to Czestochowa. After a short transition, somewere transported to Buchenwald, then to Dora and finally to Nordhausen.I was lucky. I was allowed to stay in Czestochowa four more weeks before goingthe same route. Four important weeks—a matter of life and death.In block No. 6,1 was told by Leon Nusenowicz how hard they all worked breakingtunnels into the mountains, building future V1 and V2 sites. He told me of the atrocities.296Remembrance of Thin^ Past / 297hunger and inhuman conditions. Strong, lion-like boys like Sioma Pikus or Leib Glikerperished there. Nordhausen seemed to have only one immutable law: “The only way outwas up the chimney.”A shadow of a man approached: “Do you recognize me?” he asked. I helplessly said“No.” He started to cry. This was “Red Isaac,” once a Samson- like man, and I knewhim well.I recognized a neighbor, Mendel Windman (called Szmukler). He also cried whenI asked him about his son, who was my friend. During the time 1 met others; MosheRubin, Baier, Itzek Tennenbaum the restaurateur, the Szlamowicz brothers.Meanwhile, the Kapos used fire hoses to clean the concrete of vermin and excrement.We had to wait until the floor was dry in order to lie down again. The late German winterof 1945 was vicious. The end of March was still icy and frosty.GOVERNOR HUGH L. CAREY298 / A TALE OF ONE CITYCharles (Shapse)Salomonowicz after libera-tion. The survivor of K.L.Dora-Nordhausen.Hugh L. Carey1114 AVENUE OF THE AMERICASNEW YORK, NY I003«-7704.(212) BI9-7ieiMr. Ben Giladi July 20, 1989EditorNew Bulletin135-30 82nd AvenueKew Gardens, New York llU35Dear Mr. Giladij^Thanjre=®^o much for sending me the ’’Remembrance ofThings Past.”Since we in a free co\intry tend to take things forgranted, being reminded of the surrounding circumstances ofwar and the less fortunate makes one again realize thatLife, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness are the mostprecious things we as humans have. And it is to that endwe must uphold all that is good and moral in this country.Thank you again for taking the time to write.HLC/ekA letter from the former Governor of New York State,the liberator of K.L. Dora-Nordhausen.One day, during the “Appell,” we were delighted to see the sky streaked by littlemetal crosses, which sparkled in the sun like diamonds set in platinum. The hum ofengines sounded. The Liberators had arrived.The wailing of sirens was interrupted by explosions. The bombers dived one by one,spreading destruction. Each bomb that fell devastated everything in sight, leaving onlyhuge craters and a sea of flames. This was unbelievable! The Allied Forces hadbombarded the camp!One of the tragic mistakes of the cruel war was that, when the smoke had settled,about 90 percent of the inmates were buried under the debris.I was alone, miraculously unhurt, half deaf from the explosions. Some of thebuildings were still afire. The SS ran away. The camp became a no-man’s land. I walkedamong the ruins looking for food. Some stronger survivors were already eating all kindsof things. They guarded their precious possessions closely. I was still hungry.Suddenly, I stopped. The view ahead seemed like a fairy tale. A large SS Kantinabuilding was split wide open by a bomb. Every floor was loaded with different victuals.A room full of bread; another one of cheese; still another of sausages. There were shelvesloaded with margarine, boxes of conserved food, noodles, candles, jars of preserves,wines... The picture was the ultimate in surrealism.“And to think” I said to myself bitterly, “All this was so near us all the time.”Exhausted and hardly moving, I joined forces with a smart little peasant boy, whohappened to be from Gazomia, a little village near Piotrkow, Poland. We found twoRemembrance of Things Past / 299blankets and, little by little, gathered all the necessary food. Pulling the blankets, wewent a little outside the camp and settled in a hole created by a heavy bomb explosion.We covered the top of the hole with some wood and earth for camouflage. We were justin time: the SS returned from the municipal bunkers and rounded up the rest of thesurvivors who had not hidden. They were taken away to Dora. Those captured were togo through the deadly journey to Bergen-Belsen.April 11,1945. The day was ending and already the shadows of twilight cast a redtint on the naked, battered brick walls of the ruins. We crawled out from our hole andwere standing with a few of the inmates from other bunkers near the main entrance ofthe camp. And then, all of a sudden, a convoy of jeeps, command cars and Red Crossambulances appeared in the dark.This was the first image of our liberation!—^The olive-drab shadows with spottedcapes and helmets embellished with leaves and branches, moving cautiously from thevehicles, submachine guns in one hand, grenades in the other. They appeared stalwart,unafraid.The GTs became aware of our presence. They saw the multitude of skeletons, agigantic scene of death. One of them, apparently the commanding officer, gave ordersrapidly to all the others.The language sounded heavenly. There was a distinctive timbre of voice full ofauthority but also full of concern and compassion. A voice that could never be forgot-ten. ..The army interpreter briefed us. In a matter of hours, all the survivors were carriedby stretcher to an American field hospital and tended gently with magnificent devotionin order to bring us back to life.“I made a vow as I stood there at Nordhausen, face to face with the survivors ofdeath, that as long as I live, I will fight for peace, for the rights of mankind and againstany form of hate, bias and prejudice..These words of Governor Carey, as he spoke, suddenly became very special to me.So, Mr.Govemor. You and your fellow soldiers had come at the risk of your lives,into an unknown country, for the sake of unknown people, bringing us the most preciousthing in the world: the gift of freedom.Today, I finally know your name.Ben GiladiNew BulletinYideleBen GiladiYidele was four months old when, on October 13,1942, the suspense in the Ghettoof Piotrkow reached its climax. The next morning, at about 2 a.m., Ukrainian squads,the Einsatz Kommando, and the Polish Blue Police took up positions around the ghetto.His father, with the other men of his family, was already in the barracks of the Bugajfactory. They were among the so-called ‘‘legal” Jews who worked with the Germans.His mother, along with other women and children, went into hiding. As the people weredriven out of their houses toward their last journey to Treblinka, a group of about 50souls lay in wait in a bunker—an attic in a house located on Rynek Trybunalski 10. Thebaby Yidele, resting securely in his mother’s arms, was among them.The dreadful days went by. Outside, men, women and children were hunted down.Cellars and attics were searched; shots came from everywhere. The people in the bunkercould only wait and pray. Sarah Henechowicz, Yidele’s mother, had a little “primus”warmer and was able to prepare food for her infant. The action lasted eight days. On theninth day, the shooting outside subsided. Now, another ear-piercing sound was heard;it was the cry of the baby. Yidele was hungry. There was no more milk. Sarah cradledhim in her arms but to no avail. The child cried on and on.The elders of the hiding place had a hushed discussion. They decided to silence thebaby by strangulation in order to save the other souls. Sarah, alerted by her cousin Szeina,wouldn’t let the child out of her arms. The fierce crying became a whimper; the babywas totally exhausted.Rynek Trybunalski. Arrow indicates the house where Yidele andhis family were hidden300Yidele / 301Outside, the meticulous bunker search was ragingon. The Germans were able to uncover one bunker afteranother by a perfidious method. Yoyne, of the “JudischeOrdnungsdienst,” would approach the cellars and atticsand shout in Yiddish that the coast was clear, that he hadcome to help with food and water. Many Jews foolishlyresponded. Once a bunker was located, the horrible fateof the hidden was sealed.At the end of the second week the bunker on Rynekwas uncovered. The people were taken away to thebasement on Garncarska, later to be sent to thesynagogue, Tomaszow and Treblinka. As the captiveswere passing Starowarszawska, Sarah spotted SymcheDovid, her husband, standing inside the little ghettobehind the barbed wire. With one swift movement, shethrew the baby into his father’s arms. Symche Dovid,clutching the boy quickly, vanished from sight and intothe entrance of the Chaml Orners building. The SS escort didn’t notice the incident butthe Jewish Police inside did. They ran after Dovid in hot pursuit.The father reached the attic. There he pushed Yidele deep into some heaps of loosestraw. Then he quickly ran downstairs just in time to avoid his oppressors. The policelooked everywhere. With their long clubs they sifted through the straw. The child didn’tutter a cry. Somehow, they didn’t find him. Late that night, the father secretly broughtYidele down from the attic to his living quarters. The baby was safe, so far.There was also a nine-year-old girl in the bunker. She was Yidele’s relative and hername was Gutka. She and her mother Szeina were taken away with all the others to thetemporary jail in the cellar of Flattau’s house. She was in a less fortunate position thanYidele. She already understood what was going on. She saw a little stray dog runningand said to a Polish Blue Policeman, “How I envy this little dog, he at least has hisfreedom.” Then she asked the man, “Do you have children? Why do you take me? 1didn’t do anything bad.” And then she asked her mother, “Does it hurt when you areshot? If it does not hurt too much then let them shoot us so that we can get out of thisagony.”Mother and daughter were taken to the synagogue the next day. A few hours beforethe deportation to Treblinka, they escaf)ed. It was a one-in-a-thousand chance. For ahuge sum of money, a policeman let them out through a narrow back window. Fromthere they were on their own. They ran from house to house; all were empty now. Theirbiggest obstacle was crossing the cruelly lit, heavily patrolled streets. Painfully theycrossed Jerozolimska, sneaked through Zamkowa, Pereca and, gasping, made it to thebarbed-wire fence of the little ghetto. With the guards at the other end, they somehowcrawled under the barbed wire. Shots followed but they were lucky. In the next fewminutes, breathless and full of scratches, they knocked on the door of their husband andfather’s room—^the room where Yidele was.Hearing the knock, Symche Dovid said, “This could only be my cousin Szeina, sheYidele in Finlandshortly after the war.302 / A TALE OF ONE CITYis a bom survivor.” Gutka tearfully fell into her father’s arms. One of the first things thatSzeina did was to give Yidele a bath. But their troubles were not yet over. They werestill considered illegal and had to stay in hiding.After the deportation, only 2,000 “legal” Jews remained in the little Ghetto. Theyworked for the Germans. The Judenrat, the Jewish Police and their families alsoremained. Some of the people who were spared worked at the “Befehlstelle,” cleaningout the houses. Hundreds were still illegal and in hiding.Yidele was kept hidden most of the time. He was tended to by his father, grandfather,and uncles, who worked alternate shifts. Szeina and her daughter spent hours in a cellarfull of rats or in a closet. Once, during an “Action,” a searching policeman actually feltGutka’s shoe as she was standing in the closet.During November and December 1942, a new wave of “Actions” swept the ghetto.All the illegals were rounded up, among them Szeina and Gutka. More than 500 wereamassed in the synagogue, where they were subjected to atrocious treatment. They weredeprived of food, water and sanitary facilities. Barbarous scenes occurred inside andoutside, where the oppressors took children and burned them alive; soon after the illegalswere taken to nearby Rakow woods and shot. In the last moments, Szeina and Gutkawere saved by their relatives and returned to the little Ghetto.Yidele was spared this time. His father literally put him in his huge breast pocketand went to work with the baby. From then on, during the dangerous actions, he usedthis method of protection. How he managed to persevere and keep the child is inex-plicable.After the Rakow action, Szeina and Gutka became “legal” and started to work at the“Befehlstelle.” As the only woman in the decimated family, Szeina took a large part intaking care of Yidele.In July 1943 Piotrkow was officially declared “ Judenrein.” With the liquidation ofthe small Ghetto, the remaining people were divided into three groups. One group wassent to Blizin, the second was sent to Kara and Hortensia glass factory, and the thirdgroup, among them Yidele and his family, were taken to the Bugaj wood factory, nowcalled Di-Fi.During the time spent at Bugaj, Yidele began to walk, but with difficulty, he wasthe baby in the camp and everybody loved him. Luckily, being the only two-year-oldamong the workers,he was somehow accepted by Dietrich and Fisher, the camp fuhrers.Yidele was growing fast. He was constantly roaming around the barracks and searchingfor food. He loved meat. When, on rare occasions, the camp kitchen rationed a meagerportion of this precious nourishment, Yidele was delirious and greeted Szeina and theothers coming from work in his strange baby talk, shouting, “Mama taish—Mama taish,”which in his language meant “meat.”Symche Dovid, his father, and two brothers worked the afternoon shift and tendedto the boy in the morning. Szeina worked the first shift and, as the woman, did her bestto feed and wash the child upon returning from work. Understandably, the harsh life ofBugaj deprived the child of decent, constant care and he was on his own for many hours.A little angelic, sometimes dirty, face with lively brown eyes shrewdly appraised thecruel outside world. Many times he had to make a judgement as an adult would.male / 303In November of 1944, as the Russian Army advanced into Poland, the last Jews ofPiotrkow were deported. Some were sent to Czestochowa and the rest, including Yidele,were sent to Buchenwald Concentration Camp. In Buchenwald the child was taken awayfrom his father. Symche Dovid was frantic and feared the worst. One day he was in sucha low state of mind that he disobeyed the guard’s orders and was killed on the spot.Meanwhile, Yidele was taken to Barrack no. 63, where the red-headed Gustav, a JewishCommunist from France, was the “Blokalteste.” This barrack contained only children,who were treated better by the mostly political camp inmates.Yidele, being the youngest, became the pet of all the Kapos and other leading campfigures who were longing for their own children. He quickly learned the Germanlanguage and became the youngest inmate in Buchenwald’s history.In the early spring of 1945, Yidele and some other youngsters were sent to the deathcamps in Bergen-Belsen. There the women caretakers were also taken with Yidele’schildish charms and took him under their care. The conditions at Bergen-Belsen werehorrible. The typhoid epidemic was rampant and Yidele became acutely ill. Only bysheer luck did he survive.In April 1945 the British Army liberated Bergen-Belsen. Yidele, the Holocaustsurvivor, was not even three years old.Szeina and her daughter were also deported to Bergen-Belsen from Ravensbruck.After all the struggles and immense suffering, liberation finally came. They found YidelePOLSKA RZECZPOSPOLITA LUDOWAWojc..odztwoURZAO STANU CYWILNEGO wPlP  Odpis skrdcony aktu urodzeniaI. Nazv.isko HOfl.OolVOWiC^    —2. Tmi? (imiona) I.40.1....J..O.S.i..?... •‘tt.  —3. Data urodzenia4. Miejscc urodzcniaP.ijQli.EltQM-     5. Imit i nazwisko rodowe Symuoha Uawjd jl^BnocllOWl^6. Imi? i nazwisko rodowe Sura--Fl?y-00-tHa-*-IJZt.nilfllclQiJ(matki)C V. .j' \ daui'l ■ 'n. -y- ■Fniwiadeza i»« iao6noU puajitMto - /«70 ,1942/6t trricia akto urodieol* Nr   —' 'KnKVWNIKr-.VMhmSnJlTAWrivdu StciAu Crwan«0«DO K-d I. tBwa,ifn tarn.The birth certificate ofYidele obtained justrecently. Amazingly, fourmonths before deportationsthe Polish municipality stillrecorded the only birth inthe ghetto.304 / A TALE OF ONE CITYin the Kinderheim, tended by English nurses. The boy greeted them happily; he calledSzeina ‘"Mama” and asked them to stay with him. This was impossible. Szeina tried tocarry the boy away but was caught and sternly reprimanded by the authorities. Thechild’s father’s cousin was not a close enough relation. Yidele was sent to Sweden foradoption. A few weeks later, his real Uncles Morris and Wolf Henechowicz arrived atBergen-Belsen, but the boy was already in Scandinavia.Years passed. Szeina, her husband Jacob, and Gutka settled in Israel in a Moshavcalled Gan Hashomron. In 1951 there was an addition to their family—I married Gutka.In 1952 our daughter Iris was bom.In Gan Hashomron there was an Olim group from Finland. We heard from themabout Yidele. He had been adopted by a Jewish attorney who lived in Finland. We weretold that Mr. and Mrs. Maslovat, his present parents, simply adored the child. We wroteto the Maslovat family and their response was prompt, with a picture of Yidele enclosed.A few weeks later Mr. Maslovat, a refined, elegant gentleman, paid us a visit. He spokeof the boy with great love and compassion. He promised to bring Yidele with him onhis next visit. But this never came to pass. Szeina constantly spoke about the boy andher wish was to meet him again.His uncles, Morris and Wolf, settled in Toronto,. Morris became a wealthy manufac-turer and traveled extensively. He established contact with the Finnish family and visitedYidele in the sixties at a college in London. Yidele, we heard, has become an engineer,married and is now a father. He is 38 years old. To the best of our knowledge, he nowresides with his family somewhere in North Canada. We have tried to obtain his addressbut to no avail. Szeina is now 81 years old. She still talks about Yidele with greatcompassion. Her greatest wish is to see him.The subject is indeed touching. Time is short and I am compelled to do something—anything—in order to fulfill the wish of an elder, gracious lady.I do hope that one day Yidele will pay us a visit. I imagine this encounter will befascinating and rewarding. He probably doesn’t remember his father, Auntie Szeina orthe others in his family. His roots are somewhere in Finland. He probably doesn’tremember a time and place, not too long ago, when there was nothing around but misery,death and destruction. He probably has heard of, but doesn’t recall, the brutal andsenseless murders of little children who used to laugh and sing and could have been hisplaymates.Yidele, a child of the Holocaust, lives with memories inherited from others who doremember the most horrible time of man’s bestiality to man. The inherited memoriescould not be anything other than real to him; he had to grow up with them. What stigmahave they left? That’s a burning question.I do know that I cannot forget the past and that he must not forget it and that ourchildren shall be reminded.Yidele, wherever you are: Please bear in mind that somewhere there are people thatremember you, love you and would like to meet you.Tidele I 305Straight From the HeartNot until a while ago did I receive Yidele’s address from his uncle, MorrisHenechowicz of Toronto. The address was a secluded place somewhere in BritishColumbia. I forwarded the Bulletin with an explanatory letter to that address and waited.It started the way almost everything starts these days—with a phone call. It wasYidele at the other end; the moment was rather touching. His diction was British, refinedand distinctive. Our conversation was brief and filled with emotion. Guta told him thatSzeina was seriously ill and asked him to visit us soon. His response was positive andhumane: “I will see what I can do,” he said. “First I will write you about my life, myfamily and myself.” A few days later the letter came. The following are some excerpts:“Dear friends:“I thank you greatly for your letter and the enclosed bulletin. Inreading, so many different emotions went through me, anythingfrom shock to amazement to horror, to puzzlement; but more thananything, I was moved by the help I received from total strangersand relatives who enabled me to survive those first horrible years.Thank you. I will be able to thank you in person, as 1 will bearriving at JFK airport on May 31, 1982.“In the meantime, I will tell you some of the things that havehappened to me since 1945. I remember very little of my earlychildhood. I was adopted in 1946 by a couple who lived inHelsinki, Finland. Sam was a lawyer and Minna a housewife. Ibelieve I had TB in those days and was under excellent medicalcare. I started at the Jewish school in 1948.1 thought of myself asan average child who broke the usual number of windows and gotinto the usual mischief. I knew that I was adopted and it botheredme, although I never really discussed it. I was never told of mypast. In 1956, we all agreed that I would go to England for thesummer to learn English. I was good in science and mathematicsand decided to continue studies in engineering. I was graduatedfrom London University in 1964.“After studies, I had returned to Finland for about a year to domy compulsory army service. I moved to Canada in 1966 and forthe first eight months, I stayed in Toronto and got to know Willie,Morris, and their families. They certainly made my change to anew country and culture a lot easier. My company transferred meto Edmonton, I met Maria and we married in 1967. Our daughterCarrina was bom in 1969 and our son Dana in 1971.“Up till 1976,1 worked as an engineer in computers. We wanteda different lifestyle and therefore left Edmonton looking for sucha thing. A life where we could grow our own food, do our own306 / A TALE OF ONE CITYbuilding, and all in all, be more responsible for our lives. We wereextremely lucky and found what we both considered to be closeto paradise. The next town to us (4,000 population) is 5 miles fromus. Our community has perhaps 300 people spread over 5-6square miles. We have a good garden, fruit trees, and somelivestock. I make pottery, Maria is a weaver. In addition, both ofus have commitments in the various clubs and organizationswhere we live. Our day usually starts at 7:30 a.m. and ends at 11:00p.m. without a break for coffee. But we enjoy it and do not lockour doors and we know our neighbors.‘^As you see, I have a relatively full life but one that I am by andlarge very happy with. I will go into more details when I see you.Looking forward to meeting you.YoursYidele”We waited for Yidele at the airport. Our daughter Iris was with us, sharing theanticipation and excitement. When he emerged from the plane, we greeted each otherwarmly. From the first moment, the spark of understanding was apparent.At our home, the meeting with Szeina was indeed touching. Yidele understood alittle Yiddish but could not speak. Somehow, they both communicated very nicely. Thefirst evening was devoted to memories and photographs. We told him about his parentsand his turbulent childhood; he told us about his young years in Finland, his family andhis present life.Yidele came to us from a small, secluded place but his knowledge of the world wasuniversal. Any subject discussed—art, history, science, music, ecology, etc.—wastackled impressively by his systematic mind.In the daytime he explored New York; he knew more about the Big Apple than anative New Yorker. To join him on a tour of the city was a pleasure. In the MetropolitanMuseum one could enjoy his guidance on how to look at a painting by a great master.When we visited the galleries or even Macy’s pottery department, one could see what afine artist he really was. His sensitive hands could feel every irregularity or unnecessarythickness in the pottery displayed. He explained the secrets of pottery making. We couldnow compare some pieces on display with the artcraft he gave us as a gift. The objectshe created were thin, beautifully shaped and of high quality.One day we went to a Broadway matinee. The show we saw was “Amadeus.” It wasan excellent show, enjoyable in anyone’s company. With Yidele, however, it was anexperience. He understood and felt the story better than an average theater-goer would.His knowledge of Mozart was amazing. He actually predicted which musical motifwould be used, whether it was “The Magic Rute,” “Requiem” or a famous concerto.In our backyard Yidele introduced me to the wonders of nature. He showed me howto trim a bush, how to prune a tree, and how to tend the grass prop)erly. Every plant inthe garden was familiar to him. The greenery shown to me through his eyes now had acertain new dimension.Yidele / 307Evenings were mostly devoted to the past. Our conversation revolved around whathappened in the ghetto and the chronology of events. His determination to learn as muchas possible was intense.There were also precious moments when our grandsons, Jason and Evan, aged tenand seven, listened to the stories of another child’s (Yidele’s) heartbreaking experiences,while clinging to Yidele and putting their heads on his lap with the utmost confidenceand admiration.On Sunday, we took our guest to the Association’s meeting. There he met manyPiotrkower who knew his parents. The image of the cherished past emerged untarnishedby the years.On the last evening, we all sat watching the Tony Awards on TV. Yidele was relaxedand hummed practically every Broadway hit song that came along. Then he suddenlysaid, “Thank you for this truly magnificent experience. 1 came to New York looking forfamily, but I feel that 1 leave having also found friends. Friends that are caring, warmand affectionate and have their historical roots in the same place as mine. Thank youagain.”For us these words were an expression of extreme value and they gave us a feelingof immense gratification.When the time came to say good-bye, we too felt we were parting with a very goodfriend and not with a p)erson that we had met only a few days before. Seconds later, whenYidele was on his way to the plane, the world already seemed duller. Our last wave andglance came straight from the heart.New BulletinYidele at the age of 13in Finland.Julius Maslovat(Yidele) andSzeina Flatto inNew York duringhis first visit in1982.The GatheringReflections and ObservationsWashington D.C 1983Alex Rosenblum—New York(Second Generation)I still don’t know exactly why I chose to attend the Gathering. Perhaps I’ll neverknow. Nevertheless, the Gathering was exciting, spiritually uplifting, and full of sad andjoyous moments. The following is a recounting of some of these moments.During the second day, I was attending a seminar involving the Second Generation.A young woman and man sat down near me and began a conversation with the personnext to me. During their conversation, the young woman and man stated that they werebrother and sister, living in Louisville, Kentucky, and that their father was a survivor.When asked from which town their father came, the young woman replied, “It’s a smalltown in Poland, you never heard of it, called Piotrkow.”My heart skipped a beat. I quickly introduced myself and we excitedlydiscussed our backgrounds. Soon Janet and Ben introduced me to their father,Abe Jakubowicz, and I, in turn, introduced him to the numerous Piotrkowerattending the Gathering.What made the moment so special was the feeling of affinity that we immediatelyfelt for each other. Although we were total strangers, our common background andheritage transcended our differences. We were the children of the survivors of Piotrkow,and, as such, a bond was immediately formed.At this seminar there were at least 400 members of the Second Generation. Theseminar had just begun when someone entered and informed the audience that a doctorwas urgently needed in another room. Immediately, several people rose and hurriedlyleft the room. I couldn’t help but think that here, at the seminar attended by sons anddaughters of Jews who endured the worst moment in history, were probably enoughdoctors to staff a large, modern hospital.At the dedication at the Capitol, I stood next to a very old woman from Germany.On the podium: among the distinguished guests with President Reagan and the First Lady aretwo of our Piotrkower—Rabbi Israel Lau and Cantor Isaac Goodfriend.308The Gathering / 309Rabbi Lau with Jack and Mira Bimbaum of Boston.She seemed to enjoy the fact that near her was a group of young people. Suddenly sheinterrupted them.“Is anyone here a doctor?” she asked in a serious voice. A concerned young manimmediately stepped forward and offered assistance.“Will you please take my picture?” she asked pleasantly and handed him a camerawithout waiting for an answer.The doctor seemed more confused than annoyed. He began to scold her when theold woman, with a twinkle in her eye, asked him “Wouldn’t you rather take my picturethan treat me in an emergency?”He gladly took several photographs.There were numerous emotional reunions of old friends and distant relatives. Peoplewalked aimlessly around with large signs asking the whereabouts of long-lost relatives.A reporter from Virginia told me of the bittersweet reunion of a couple married beforethe War. Both survived, believed the other dead, and remarried and had children. Theyfound each other on Tuesday, April 11, 1983.The people were captivated by Rabbi Israel Lau. As a child, he survived BergenBelsen and was not chief rabbi of Natanya and an international figure. Wherever theRabbi went, he was surrounded by people who wanted to talk to him, hear his words orjust shake his hand. On Tuesday, about 18 or so Piotrkower had gathered to take somephotographs. On our invitation, the Rabbi stopped by to say hello and to pose with usfor pictures. The crowds followed us for pictures. The crowds followed him to our smallgroup. I asked someone to take some photographs quickly. When I stopped posing andlooked around, our small group of 18 Piotrkower was lost in a crowd of about 50 people,who were posing with Rabbi Lau.I was very disapp)ointed by the fact that not one of the survivors chose to speak inYiddish. They all spoke of passing on the legacy to the second generation; yet, thfey allspoke in English. Sam Gejdenson, 33-year-old Congressman from Connecticut and the310 / A TALE OF ONE CITYson of survivors, addressed the 8,000 people gathered at the Capitol on Wednesday. Inbeautiful, flawless Yiddish he spoke of his background and his pleasure at being involvedin the Gathering. The audience loved his speech.Benjamin Meed:“Soon, we—^the witnesses—^will all be gone. . . Our sons anddaughters will carry forward our legacy of pride, of heroism, ofan obligation to keep the memory alive, and to warn the worldagain and again—don’t let this happen again.”STATEMENT OF PURPOSE PIOTRKOW TRYBUNALSKIRELIEF ASSOCIATIONTHE SECOND GENERATIONAs the heirs of the six million Jews and twenty thousand Jews ofPiotrkow who died during the Holocaust, and as the sons anddaughters of those who survived its horrors, we pledge to forgingour future by remembering our past.The second generation com-mitted to the oneness of the Jewish people, to the solidarity withIsrael,to the fundamental principles of universal freedom, justice,democracy and equality. Our central goals are to perpetuate theauthentic memory of the Holocaust and prevent its recurrence, toperpetuate our common background, to strengthen and preserveour spiritual, ideological and cultural heritage, to fight all manifes-tations of anti-Semitism, and other forms of racial, ethnic orreligious hatred, and to raise our collective voices on behalf of allhuman beings, Jews and non-Jews alike, who suffer from dis-crimination, persecution and oppression anywhere in the world.Together with our parents, we shall perpetuate the memory ofthe Holocaust and Piotrkow and we shall ensure that no similarcataclysm will ever again be allowed to befall mankind. That is afundamental purpose of our being.New BulletinThe Unsung Heroes.. .for the land is mine; for ye are strangers and sojourners withme. And in all the land of your possession ye shall grant aredemption for the land.The word of God is given to Moses in LeviticusIn the wake of the awful pogroms and persecutions of Jews at the turn of the 19thcentury, the Jewish People of the Pale groped desperately for an answer. This was thetime when in many comers of ghettos and shtetlach, a new voice was heard from peoplewho called themselves “Hovevey Zion.”Their motto; “Beth Yakov Lechu Venelekh,” which in transliteration became“Bilu,” guided the first settlers to the Promised Land. They grew in leaps and bounds.In the Sharon they founded Petach Tikva. In the Galilee they founded Rosh Pina. InSamaria they founded Zichron Yakov. And soon, all over the Ishuv, the amazing postscalled Kibbutzim started to sprout.After World War I, Zionist youth movements started to flourish in Poland. HashomerThe unsung Heroes of Ein Hachoresh. From the left: Menucha Reuveni (Rubinstein),Szulim Reuveni, Varad Zviri (Konstantynowski), Regina Ben Yakov (Jakubowicz),Lea Kaminer (Weintreter), Lea Amrami (Zygmuntowicz) and Zeev Amrami.(Hazorini Bedimah—Berinah Ikceru)!311312 / A TALE OF ONE CITYHatzair and Gordonia, Freihait, Hanoar Hatzioni and Betar. Also in Piotrkow, scores ofyoung people found their new world in the “Kens, the Isbas and Locals.” They learned;they sang of Zion; they danced the Hora; they dreamt of Canaan.From the Bnei Midbar, Ankorim, and Kwirim through the Tzofim and Bogrim, somereached the hard and demanding life on Hachshara. After all this, the ultimate rewardwas a British certificate of immigration to Palestine.No bed of roses was waiting for them there. They found hard labor and malaria, thedesert sun and scarce food. “Homa Umigdal” they called the era. In the midst of night,they would move up to a post and build a watchtower and a stockade in order to beprotected from Arab bullets. Then, painfully, they started to build a life within. Abeautiful song, “Two Letters,” originated in those time. “A1 niar lavan,” it begins... Thesnow-white letter from the terribly sick mother in the Galuth calling her son home; theother letter, a grey sheet of paper from the Halutz, who, with tears in his eyes, refusesto abandon his dream and will not return.The time has come to pay tribute and honor the Halutzim of Piotrkow, co-foundersof Israel, for their devotion and their sacrifice. They are now respected senior membersin the following Kibbutzim though, (alas!, some are no longer among us): SalekHorowicz* and Franka Konstantynowska in Kibbutz Messiloth; Abram Milsztein andItshak Grossberg* in Bin Shemer; Cvi and Sara Zygmuntowicz, Yehoshua and HankaZigelman,* and Shlomo Bogdanski* in Negba; Regina Jakubowicz, Vered Konstan-tynowski, Leah Weintreter, Leah Zygmuntowicz and Shalom Rubinstein in BinHachoresh; Itka Kaminska in Beth Zera; Shmuel Sherman in Lehavot Habashan; ShlomoMajzner* and Badana Katzenelson in Maaleh Hachamishah; Andzia Brem in KibbutzGalon.There are many others. It would be so good to mention their names. So, Dear Friends!We salute you and wish you health and happiness for many years to come!*DeceasedNew Bulletin—Ben GiladiA LETTER FROM THE UNSUNG HEROESIN KIBBUTZ EIN HACHORESHDear Ben:We all left Piotrkow when you were a little boy. . . We all arereally glad to be contacted and that you found time to write thesewords about the times of Halutziut and Hityashvut.We do sent our warmest “Drishat Shalom” to all our landsleiteverywhere...Lea Zygmuntowicz AmramiMy name now is Varad Zviri (Konstantynowski). I am a widowwith 3 children and 7 grandchildren. We came here in 1932 withThe Unsung Heroes / 313Aliah B. The first Piotrkower came in 1929. Our first base was inHedera. When we went on Hityashvut, we were living in metal(tin) huts... The first house of 2 stories was built for our children.The structure was called the house of safety. The grave malariaepidemic proved a horrible experience. It took us more than a yearto recuperate. Our Kibbutz grew and developed during the years—where there was a desert, houses are standing and gardens are nowblooming.We all enjoyed the Bulletin very much. It brought so manymemories. . . We came here as youngsters; now we are all 78plus... We still work part-time for our beloved Kibbutz...Varad Zviri (Konstantynowski)Report From IsraelThe Annual Memorial and the Unveiling of theScroll of Immortalization at Yad Vashem in JerusalemMoshe Ish-HorowicZy Tel AvivOn November 17, 1985 (4th Kislev 5746), an assembly of about 400 survivors ofPiotrkow Trybunalski, and vicinity gathered from all over Israel at Yad Vashem. Theytook part in a most touching and dignified Annual Remembrance Day, combined withthe Unveiling of the unique Scroll of Immortalization of the names of our Martyrs whoperished in the Holocaust.Amidst mourning and silence, Mrs. Henia Grinberg unveiled the Scroll of Parchmentplaced in a special niche in the Hall of Names. Rabbi Israel Meir Lau read out hisintroduction inscribed in the Scroll. A children’s choir opened and concluded this firstpart of the program.The annual Remembrance ceremony for our Martyrs followed under the chairman-ship of Mr. Moshe Ish-Horowicz. At the dais were also seated Mrs. Henia Grinberg, Dr.I. Arad of Yad Vashem and—for the first time together at our Hazkarah, the twodistinguished brothers. Rabbi I. M. Lau, the chief Rabbi of Netanya, and Mr. NaftaliLavie, Director General of UJA in Israel and former Ambassador from Israel to NewRabbi Lau dedicates the MegilaGuta and Ben Giladi at Megilat Piotrkow.314Report From Israel / 315York: both prominent sons of the last Chief Rabbi of Piotrkow, the late Moshe HayimLau.The Hall was filled beyond capacity. In solemnity and sorrow, the Chairmanwelcomed the Assembly and Mrs. Grinberg began the dignified and emotionalceremony. Six candles were lit by members of the Second Generation in memory of theSix Million Martyrs of the Holocaust, and a roll of Honor was called for our townsmenwho had died in Israel and abroad during the last year. After a minute’s silence in theirmemory. Dr. Arad and Rabbi Lau addressed the meeting.The impressive day was concluded in the Tent of Remembrance of Yad Vashem. Aguard of honor stood by the symbolic location of Treblinka and Auschwitz. The flamewas kindled and, after the service and El Mole Rachamim, the Kaddish intoned by RabbiLau echoed in the ears and souls of the assembled.Never before have the words of the Hatikvah rung more true and full of promisethan at the end of this inspiring Day. This Remembrance Tribute did honor to theAssembly, the Society and, most of all, to our Holy Martyrs, to whose Memory it wasdedicated.NeW BulletinRoman Mogilanski (Abram Mogilaner) Z.L.Dr, Michael Lubliner—Los AngelesIt is heart breaking, as well as a cruel andbizarre irony of fate, that Roman Mogilanski, theinitiator and planner of this anthology, its editorand fund-raiser, was not privileged to see it pub-lished or to leaf through its pages, tenderly andproudly. His sudden and unexpcted passingcaught him in the midst of the hard work ofcompleting this anthology. He went through all itsbirth pangs: the laborious screening of materialsand the painstaking search for new, authenticdocuments pertaining to the ghettos of Polandduring the blackest years in Jewish history—fromthe end of 1939 through 1944. He establishedcontacts with reliable institutions, at home andabroad; he sought out highly placed dignitaries,and, with his personal charm, managed to obtainvaluable papers and records. His initial successeswere accompanied by setbacks and disappoin-ments. Yet, in spite of all obstacles, he went onwith his work boldly and arduously, weatheringall impediments, and even finding eminentscholars to contribute to the anthology.Roman addressed himself to the “walking documents,” the survivors, upon whomit is incumbent to perpetuate the memory of our martyrs by setting up proper monuments,not only of marble and stone, but written ones. “Righteous men need no tombstones, fortheir words in themselves are their memorial (Jerusalem Talmud, Shekalim, 2,5). Onemust not tarry with the realization of this project, because our walk is slowing down.Let us not forget that “life (the life we know) has never given us a round-trip ticket...”Roman became more eager to speed it up, noticing that the passing of time diminishesthe memory of tragic experiences and that the once vociferous condemnation and theunparalleled atrocities by their nefarious Nazi perpetrators were subsiding. (This wasbefore “holocaust” and “survivor” had become household words in the United States.)His idea of refreshing our memory was to introduce us to the cataclysmic andgrueling trials of the ghettos of Poland, whose Jews—the heart and soul of the world’sJewry—^were crammed, sadistically tortured and tormented. Needless to say, theseghettos were designed as stepping stations to the death camps and mass extermination,which took place as the “civilized” world stood by undisturbed.Roman Mogilanski(1913-1982)316Roman MogiUmski (Abram Mogilaner) ZX. I 317Roman reasoned that the retelling of these stories, accompanied by heartrending facts,would be a stimulus for recalling what happened to our people during the Holocaust, keepingus alert and sensitive to any attempt to infringe upon our rights or weaken the state of Israel,whose vigorous and independent existence is the surest guarantee against the repetition ofa holocaust, wherever and in whatever guise it may occur.We are the nation of Yizkor, which has survived and outlived all those who haveendeavored to destroy us, and this only by remembering, looking back and clingingtenaciously to the past. It is possible to glimpse life, according to Kierkegaard, only whenone looks backwards, but to live it requires a forward look.We have been commanded to remember two events that happened during theformative years of our nationhood. The first is the Exodus from Egypt, which beganwith slave-labor and culminated with the casting of male Hebrew infants into the Nile.The second is the unprovoked attack by the Amalekites on the Israelites—who had justtaken their first breath of freedom after centuries of bondage—in which only the feebleand defenseless were attacked.While the punishment of Egypt was mitigated by the prohibition against hating them(because, after all, we had been guests in their land for many years—see Deuteronomy23.8), there is no letup in the ongoing war against Amalek, “from generation togeneration.” We are commanded to blot out any trace of Amalekism (sec Exodus17.14-16, Deuteronomy 25.17-19) as if it were an infestation of poisonous germs.The requirement to maintain the memory in writing, besides retelling it, may haveserved Roman, consciously or intuitively, as a pattern for his project. Himself a ghettoand concentration-camp survivor, hardly recovered from torture and misery, Romanenlisted in the dedicated army that pledged to fight Amalekism in any form and to keepthe memory of the Holocaust alive by harnessing his energy and his journalistic skill.Upon arriving in New York he immediately became active as secretary of the Polish-Jewish Qub and as co-editor of Nasza Trybuna (published by the veteran journalistJacob Appenszlak, who before the war had been editor-in-chief of the distinguishedPolish-Jewish Warsaw daily, Nasz Przeglad). Later, he was elected president of theAssociation of the Nazi Victims of Piotrkow Trybunalski (where he had been born andraised, graduated from the Hebrew Gimnazjum, and had begun his journalistic andaccounting careers). He held this position for twelve years, and at the same time editedthe Association’s Bulletin, so popular among the Landsleii of Piotrkow all over theworld; all this in addition to his professional work as a financial expert employe inimportant position by the U.S. Research and Development Corporation and the City olNew York. ,In the last years of his life Roman devoted all his efforts to the publication of thGhetto Anthology, which his sudden demise impeded. His cherished family hisbeloved wife Musia and their gifted sons, B. Marc Mogil and Roy Brian Moplanskimade all possible efforts for its publication. Fortunately, they found the nght man forthis challenging job: Benjamin Grey, an attorney and civic leader in Los Angeles j^ohas been a leader in organizations of Holocaust survivors from ‘hf"- ‘"ception U^naccepting the family’s offer he almost single-handedly accomplished his mission,despite many restrictions.318 / A TALE OF ONE CITYMay the Ghetto Anthology be a solace to his family and a monument to our dearRomek, a proud Jew, a devoted Zionist and a lover of Israel, who had, ever since firstsettling in New York, been haunted by the dream of a written memorial to our martyrs,and who had come so close to fulfilling it.New BulletinA Salute to the People of PiotrkowDr. Michael Lubliner of Los Angeles, a gentleman and a scholar in the true senseof the word, sent us his essay to the publication of the Ghetto Anthology, a project ofthe people of Piotrkow initiated in tribute to the sacred memory of those who perished.The essay, is a moving testimonial for the late Roman Mogilanski, the main initiator,arranger and fund raiser for this project, who sadly, did not have the privilege to see itfinished.According to the article, the publication becomes a reality now and we all welcomethis volume as one more link in the sacred chain of remembrance.Although the Anthology is being published by people that we do not know, we feelproud and satisfied that the Herculean labors of Roman Mogilanski and the works ofour own people were not in vain; that despite obstacles and difficulties, the dream willfinally come true.In his credo “Why an Anthology?” (Bulletin No. 48), Roman wrote: . The veryfirst link in the chain or our common tragedy was the Jewish town of PiotrkowTrybunalski... Our Anthology will give a prime emphasis to this ghetto prototype inour hometown...”We greet the birth of the book with acclaim. Roman Mogilanski worked on thisp'oject boldly and arduously. We do thank attorney Benjamin Grey, a Jewish leader inLos Angeles for his devotion in accomplishing the mission. But if not for the People ofPiotrkow, the true sponsors, supporters, aides and main contributors to the project, therewould not be a Ghetto Anthology.So, my dear Piotrkow friends!Just ponder a moment and please... TAKE A BOW!*Dr. Lubliner passed away in 1988Ben GiladiNew Bulletin, No, 14 -1986Megilat PiotrkowShayek Pudlowski-Tel AvivThe Piotrkow “landsleit” in Israel may be justly proud of their glorious “kehila,”which once contained communal institutions and colorful political parties withprominent leaders in the pulsating community life of the city.Piotrkow was especially known for its book publishers, who were instrumental inmaking the name Piotrkow known throughout the world. In all Jewish settlements,Yiddish books with the inscription “Piotrkow” helped to perpetuate the severed Jewishcommunity and created glory for her as well.The Zionist organizations in our city, which in time sent part of its youth toEretz-Israel, have also rooted here and today are represented in almost all the kibbutzimthroughout the country, as well as in vital government positions in the land.The ArchivesAmong the most important of their accomplishments must certainly be that thePiotrkower in Israel have an archive of their city, collected over a period of decades byour longtime communal leader, Jacob Maltz, z"l. He guarded every detail related to ourcity with his life.Following his death, the Piotrkower Committee decided to place the archive inexperienced hands, so that all our city’s historic materials should be properly catalogued.Because of the efforts of Mrs. H. Grynberg, who for a number of years has been theChairp)erson of our Farband, we succeeded in contacting the famous Holocaust re-searcher at the Tel-Aviv University, Dr. Yoel Raba, and he was willing to organize andrestore the archive of our city.Dr. Raba and his assistants worked for many months erecting yet another monumentto the memory of our perished Piotrkow community. Because of his self-sacrifice anddevotion to this holy mission. Dr. Raba was successful in overcoming many difficultiesand created an archive of which we can be Justly proud.Thus, we express our gratitude to Dr. Raba for his personal interest in our archiveand for his special efforts in exhibiting a number of documents from our archive for thevisitors of the University, under the heading of “The Kehila That Once Was And IsNo Longer.” The exhibit is open daily to all visitors and is located in the foyer of the“Holocaust Era Research” Building of the Tel- Aviv University.It is important to indicate that our archive is registered with the annual “Catalogueof Official National Archives,” which is published annually and in which we arementioned.319320 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe MegilaAmong the most important goals of the Piotrkow Organization in Israel is tomemorialize the murdered martyrs of the Hitler era. Therefore, every form of perpetua-tion is a great achievement. Thus, for instance, in Netanya there is a Torah Institutenamed “Ohel Moshe” (Moshe’s tent) for our last Piotrkow Rov, Harav Moshe ChaimLau, z"l. As we all know, he was the father of Harav Israel Lau, Sh’lit”a, who is theChief Rabbi of Netanya, and his brother Lavie, who, for numerous years, was a consulin Washington.Upon the initiative of several active “landsleit,” headed by their chairperson, Mrs.H. Grynberg, as well as by M. Ish-Horowitz and Prashker, and after many attempts, theyfinally succeeded in convincing the “Yad Vashem” leadership to allow a place for the“Megila” containing the names of murdered martyrs of Piotrkow.For some time now, there has been in the “Heychal Hasheymot” (Tent of the Names)in “Yad Vashem” a Megila in the shape of a Sefer-Torah, in which a scribe has writtenthe names of all the Piotrkower Jews who perished in the ghetto and in the camps duringthe Hitler Era.It is certainly no coincidence that our City of Piotrkow feels privileged to be able toperpetuate its Martyrs for future generations in a Megila for which survivors throughoutthe world have sent names. It appears that tragic destiny chose the Piotrkower Jews tobe the first in Europe to be entrapped in a ghetto, which was enforced by the Germansin fall of 1939. This date is engraved on the memorial plaque located on the wall in “YadVashem.” It is beneath the Megila-Sefer, visible only through a protective glass coverwhich protects this sacred monument.Thus, a small group of “landsleit” sit and, in their free time, copy all the holy lettersand names which are received so as to transfer them at a later date to the sacred Megilaof those who perished. They are continually updated by an experienced scribe, whoimmortalizes the Martyrs in the Tora-K’tav (the written Torah), which will remain aneternal reminder.The “Irgun Yotseyi Piotrkow” (the organization of those from Piotrkow) in Israelis now making preparations to summon a world gathering of all its “landsleit” to honorthis monument located in the “Heychal Hasheymot” of the “Yad Vashem.”This is only a part of the activities engaged in by the Piotrkower in Israel, who devotethemselves with deep respect and pride to their monumental task.HeidimNotes From PiotrkowJakub Rener—ParisI came from Paris to Piotrkow in 1988 just in time to attend the popular sciencesession commemorating the 46th tragic anniversary of the liquidation of the Ghetto ofPiotrkow. The sponsors of the event were The Pax Christian Society, the Jewish HistoryInstitute of Warsaw and a number of other distinguished organizations. Among otherspresent were delegations of various Polish groups such as ABOWID, Armia Krajowa,Armia Ludowa and others. Also present were the Righteous Gentiles of Piotrkow, peoplewho saved our Jewish brethren from the hands of the Nazis, Maria Spiewak, DanutaTrybus, Wieslawa Chynowska and Adam Ratajczak, the son of the late WiktorRatajczak.The keynote speaker, Dr. Zygmunt Hoffman of the Jewish History Institute, outlinedin his speech the history or Piotrkow Jewry from early times until the very end. Tlie onlyPiotrkower survivors present were Roman Hipszer and myself. After the session we allwent by bus to the Jewish Cemetery. Commemorative wreaths were laid on the gravesof the Martyrs of Rakow andof the“Purim Action.” We also unveiled the newly restoredmonument of the Heroes of “Bund,” who perished in Auschwitz for their undergroundactivities.Over the next two days, I roamed the streets where the Yiddish language had oncebeen dominant. I walked through the town, from one end to the other. From theSPRAWIEDUWYSWIATAPiotrkow, November 3,1988—Jakub Rener from Paris is greetedby Dr. Zygmunt Hoffman from theWarsaw Jewish History Institute atthe science session. The Polish sign(in translation) says: “The righteousamong the nations of the world, intribute to the saviors present at theceremonies.321322 / A TALE OF ONE CITYSzczekanica to the Bugaj, from the Jewish Cemetery to the Stacja Towarowa atBujnowska Street. I came to Jerozolimska Street No. 33, where we used to live, justopposite the windows of the Hashomer Hatzair movement site, and I went inside ourapartment. I passed the Starowarshawska, once Yidngass, and came to GarncarskaNo. 1/3, where the premises of the Bund organization had been located. Here was whereI had spent my youth. I was a member of the Skif Youth and the Morgensztern sportsection of the “Bund” party. Here the Szlamowicz family—my Aunt and Uncle withtheir five children—used to live. Not one of them survived.How many memories came back to me during these walks? Despite the bitingpoverty, these were the dearest years of our lives. In the evening I strolled through thecentral Slowackiego Street. Everything was so deserted and gloomy. There were no morevigorous Jewish youngsters around. All was so quiet, as if in mourning. Here I came tothe Bernardynski Garden, with its memories of the evenings spent here, our fights withthe Endecja, the Polish Fascists, and anti-Semitic friction. When the Endecja wanted tothrow us out of the garden, we resisted. We fought them bravely. The Polish Socialistgroups of the P.P. S. and the TUR gave us a helping hand, especially the three brothersof the Palac family. The eldest of them perished in Auschwitz.The confrontations with the Endecja were a prelude to the atrocious events of years1939—1945, the tragic years of the HolocaustNew BulletinThe Chief Rabbi of Poland embraces the last Jew of Piotrkow at a ceremony in Lodz, in 1990.THE DESTRUCTION OFTHE JEWISH COMMUNITYOFPIOTRKO WBY THE NAZISDURING WORLD WAR III. DISASTERII. EXTERMINATIONIII. RESISTANCEBy Dr. Joseph Kermish, IsraelTranslated by P. Wollman, U.S.A.Edited by Hassia Ben Harari and Joseph Goldberg, Israel323I. DISASTERThe town of Piotrkow was heavily bombed at 8:30 inthe morning on Saturday, September 2nd, 1939, the dayfollowing the outbreak of the war. Himdreds of bombswere dropped on the city, and Romek Zaks, who was killedat once at Slowacki Street (Kaliska)‘, was the first Jewishvictim. Lolek Epstein was also killed on the same day.A second heavy bombing took place the next day,Sunday, beginning at 10:00 o’clock in the morning, andcaused many casualties. About one hundred explosive andincendiary bombs were dropped during the day, destroyinga number of public buildings such as the city hall, policeheadquarters, the state bank, Bank Polski, and the postoffice, as well as the city water system.^ Numerous Jewishhomes were set on fire as well, but a large number ofJews managed to escape to Sulejow (Silev), near the PilicaRiver, 15 km. from Piotrkow in the direction of Lublin.The city itself became an empty shell, but the mainroads became congested with thousands of refugees loadedwith whatever little possessions they had managed tohurriedly take with them. These refugees were trying toreach the shelter of the woods in the belief that theywould be safe there from the German air raids. Even whilemany streamed from the city, others, from outside, wereturning towards it.’The Jews who sought protection in Sulejow werebitterly disappointed, for that town was heavily bombedon the afternoon of September 4th. Several squadrons ofGerman bombers attacked it twice with explosive andincendiary bombs. The small houses collapsed in flames,burning to death those unfortunate people who didn’tsucceed in escaping. Those who escaped the bombing ofthe town were strafed by the planes as they fled. Amongthe thousands killed were over 1,000 Jews and the deadlay spread out on the streets.After the Germans occupied Sulejow, the survivingJews buried their dead in two mass graves. Individualgraves were accorded only to those, such as the Dayan ofPiotrkow, Rabbi Jacob Glazer, his daughter and grandchild,who were found by their relatives. Some Piotrkow families,for instance the Goldblum family, were completely annihi-lated in Sulejow.^Tuesday, September 5th, at 4 o’clock in the afternoon,the Germans entered Piotrkow and conquered the cityafter two hours of street fighting. The same day, theyshot twenty Jews, among them Rabbi Yechiel Meir From-nitski, Reb Eliezer Blumstein, and Reichman.The next day, September 6th, the Germans set fireto the whole Jewish quarter, which encompassed the squareof Jerozolimska, Wspolna, Warszawska (Jews’ Street) andZamkowa Streets. Jews trying to escape from the burninghouses were shot on the spot. The only ones saved werethose who managed to run, unnoticed, over a narrow“Dead Lane”, officially Wspolna Street, to the HenochHorn house, which had a gate at Zamkowa 13. Epstein,the painter, was fatally wounded while trying to escape.An hour later, after the fire ceased, the Germans enteredthe house at Zamkowa 13, took out six Jews, orderedthem to run and shot them. Five of the Jews died instantlyand one, Reb Bunem Lebel, was wounded and diedlater.’The streets of the city were covered with bodies,many of which lay there for several days. Volunteerbrigades of workers and artisans were quickly organizedby Jewish “Askanim” (public functionaries) to removethe corpses to the cemetery.In light of the German atrocities, the Jews still hiddenin their homes were panic stricken. They soon noticed thatthe Germans were primarily interested in their property.Individually or in groups, the Germans invaded the Jewishcommunity and stole everything on which they could laytheir hands, such as clothes, linens, furs, carpets, valuablebooks, etc.The doors to the homes of rich Jews never shut; nosooner did one group of looters leave than another ap-peared, guided by the local Folksdeutsche or by membersof the Polish underworld. Often, they came to Jewishstores with trucks and took away all the merchandise.Thus, the stores of Ziskind and Meir Frenkel were emptied.A roomful of merchandise belonging to a Jew of Katowitzwas confiscated at Szewska 8, and a large sum of moneywas taken from Reb Motel Michelson under pretense thatit was counterfeit. All the possessions of Baruch Zilbershatzand of many others were taken. On Shabbat Tshuva, Sep-tember 16th, almost everything was stolen from Mrs. BailaRaichman’s hardware store on the Platz Trybimalski, fromYitzhak Aron Sochatchewski’s grocery store on Farnastreet, and from a number of smaller stores. On the eveof Yom Kippur, the confiscation of furniture, clothingand pillows from the Jews was begun.The Germans often invited the Poles on the streets toparticipate in the robberies, after which they fired bulletsinto the air in order to give the impression that they weredriving away the Polish “thieves”. These scenes werephotographed in order to create the impression that th^rGermans were protecting Jewish property from Polishlooters.*A decree was issued on the eve of Rosh Hashana thatshops must be kept open every day of the week exceptSunday and that whoever did not comply would bepunished as a saboteur. Jews were forbidden to be outsidetheir homes after 5:00 p. m. and Getzel Frenkel, aged 27,was shot to death for coming home five minutes late.^324Jews, old people included, were kidnapped and sentto forced labor camps where they were tortured or beaten,often to the point of unconsciousness. These kidnappingstook place during the days preceeding Rosh Hashana (Mon-day, Tuesday and Wednesday, September 11, 12 and 13)as well as on the holiday itself. Jewish men hid themselvesin cellars, attics and other places.The Germans shut up whole houses in the Judengasse,Platz Trybunalski, Pilsudski Street and in other smallerstreets in their search for men to work in the forced laborcamps. In the course of the searches, many things werestolen from the Jews. Those who were found were brutallybeaten, especially religious Jews who were discovered withprayer shawls (talis-koton) or wearing skull caps (kipot).Their beards were torn off, together with the skin. Mez-zuzot were cut down and torn and phylacteries (tefillin)and holy books were torn up and burned. The remainingJews thereupon were forced to abandon their traditionalapparal, to cut off their beards and to hide the tefillin andholy books. The Germans ordered the Jews to wash floorsand windows with talessim and shrouds (tachrichim), andto use pages of the Talmud and other sacred books for thepurpose.®Jews caught for hard labor were sent to one ofseveral places. Those who were lucky were sent to militarybakeries where they often received a loaf of bread afterwork. The work of loading and unloading wagons wasonerous, but the fate of Jews sent to work with the“Black” (SS Precinct) in the “Casino” or in the LandratSchool at 3rd of May Avenue was indeed pitiful. Theobject of the work there was torture, rather than produc-tion. Jews were forced, for instance, to do “Gymnastics”, atwhich time they were beaten and exposed to all kinds ofhumiliations. While this was taking place, hundred of Poleswatched, laughing and enjoying the sight of the tormentedJews. Labor conditions were somewhat better, however,at German Headquarters in the Railway Workers’ House,called “Pekin”, at Pieratska Street.’ Captured girls, especial-ly well-dressed ones, were also sent to do housework inhouses and hospitals.’”One affliction suffered by the Jews during the earlydays under the new regime was their being chased awayor beaten as they queued for food together with othercitizens. Any opposition on the part of the Jews resultedin their being shot.” During the Holy Days of RoshHashana, as Jews gathered to pray hurriedly in the syna-gogues, in the “Shtiblech” or in private homes, otheroppressions were inflicted upon them. Several Germanofficers entered the synagogue at the end of Mussaf,causing confusion among the worshipping Jews whoescaped hurriedly. Twenty-nine worshipers were takenfrom the Amshinower Shtibel. on Farna Street, beatenbrutally and taken to prison. Among those arrested werethe Rabbi of Ushiakow ; Yitzhak Aron Sochatchewski, lay-leader of the congregation ; Baruch Asher Nudelman, Deanof the Beth-Yosef” Yeshiva ; Moshe Chaim Zalmanowitzand Reb Peretz Praschker, head of the Talmud Tora.The news of this event spread rapidly over the city,causing great fright, consternation and anxiety.’* After longand terrible torture, the 20 arrested Jews were forciblyshaven and then sent to a concentration camp in Germany.Reb Peretz Praschker died on the way to the camp andsome of the others returned four weeks later withoutshoes and in rags.’^There were no worshippers in the synagogue on thesecond day of Rosh Hashanah. On the day following RoshHashanah, the Germans searched the premises of Juden-gasse 13 (Staro-Warshawska) and found the StrykowerShtibel, whose two Torah scrolls were lorn up and burned.Reb Motel Michelson’s home at 13 Garncarska Street wassearched that day as well and a complete set of the Talmud(Vilner Shas) found there was torn up and thrown outof the window. Two Torah scrolls from the prayer house“Chessed Shel Emeth”, located in the same yard, weretrampled on and desecrated.The demolition of synagogues and prayer houses wasbegun several days later. Two days before Yom Kippur,officers and troops entered the shut synagogue, broke upthe furnishings and completely destroyed the beautifullyornamented Eastern wall. They broke down the artisticHoly Ark which was built into the wall, tore up thefloors and broke up the pulpit, chests, lamps, etc. Thesynagogue’s Torah scrolls, many of them valuable antiques,were partially torn up. All the scrolls, both torn and intact,were then put out on the square in front of the synagogue.The Beth Hamidrash was subjected to similar destruc-tion. Desecrated and cut Torah scrolls, l)cnchcs, stands andparts of the demolished Holy Ark and pulpit were put outin the square in front of the synagogue. Almost all thebooks, among them rare old first editions which had beenpresented to the Beth Hamidrash 200 years earlier by thewealthy Rabbi of Piotrkow, Rabbi Natan Ncta Piotrkower,were torn up.German guards were set at the square to prevent theJews from rescuing the .scrolls which lay for a long time,exposed to the autumn rains.All the silver ritual objects in the synagogue were con-fiscated with the exception of the silver objects of Lipnicin Upper Silesia, which had been transferred to Piotrkowthe day before the outbreak of the war for security reason*.These were hidden in the cellar of Dobroezynnose and werekept there until 1942.'^The Germans squeezed several thousand prisoners-of-war, among them many Jews, into the synagogue and theBeth Hamidrash on the eve of Yom Kippur. Jews wereseized and set to cleaning the synagogue and the BethHamidrash which had become defiled with human excre-ment since the prisoners had no other place where they325were able to take care of their needs. For the cleaningwork, they were given talessim, Torah scroll covers, cur-tains of the Holy Ark (parochets) and “kittles”.On Yom Kippur, the Jews were searched for talessim,Torah scrolls, tefillim and holy books. There was no morepublic worship, and those who prayed individually did soas the Marranos had done in Spain hundreds of yearsearlier. Jews were caught for 24-hour work stints on YomKippur and forced (some of them in prayer shawls) toload barrels of gasoline. The Jews had to pass a row ofvicious guards, armed with truncheons and bars, who beatthem ruthlessly. Many of the Jews did not survive theseblows,** On Yom Kippur, a group of Jews were accused ofbuying eggs, butter, etc, from the peasants and werearrested, beaten and made to endure other terrible indig-nities.**The Germans ordered long deep pits to be dug at theend of the cemetery, and a large toilet was erected therefor the thousands of prisoners. A great number of tomb-stones, which had been dug out before the war due tothe initiative of the ‘Two”, were removed from the graves.These tombstones (many of them decorated with thePolish Eagle and other designs) were used to form asidewalk running from the synagogue to the toilet andcrossing the whole cemetery. One night, a few days afterSuccoth, the toilet was removed by unknown individuals.For this, 22 Jews were arrested as hostages on the follow-ing day and a fine of 20,000 zloty and numerous articles offood such as coffee, tea and cocoa, was imposed on theJewish community. After paying the fine, the communityerected a new toilet on its own accoimt, in the yard of theJewish hospital which bordered the cemetery,*^The synagogue and Beit Hamidrash were finally emp-tied of prisoners at the beginning of November and theguard was taken away from the square where the remnantsof the Torah scrolls and other religious articles had beenlying. The Jews imediately mobilized themselves to savethe scrolls, while the Poles carried off the benches, tablesand the remnants of the Holy Arks of the synagogue andBeth Hamidrash to be used as firewood. The synagogueand the Beth Hamidrash remained empty, but were shutby the Germans. Thei^indow and door frames, floorboardsand whatever books still remained in the Beth Hamidrashwere taken away by the Poles to be used as fuel, and onlythe four walls were left. Little by little, the Jews rescuedthe Torah scrolls and books from the square and broughtthem to the cemetery where they were hidden in the tents(ohel) of the Rabbis.**In October, the Wehrmacht (German military forces)gave the rule over the city to a civil administration headedby a commissar, Oberburgermeister Hans Drexel. Twoweeks later, a Jewish Community Council (Judenrat) wasappointed. It was headed by the “Bund” leader ZalmanTenenberg, former instructor of “Ort” and pre-war chair-man of the Jewish community, member of the city counciland chairman of the professional unions. In the 24-memberJudenrat, the majority were members of the “Bund” orof other socialist groups, as had been the case in the pre-war community council.Besides the Chairman, Tenenberg, and the Treasurer,Zalman Statchewski (formerly a member of the MunicipalCouncil), other “Bund” leaders in the Judenrat were ;Leon Kimmelman, Maurice Meirowitz and Shmuel Zeiten,former city and Jewish community councilmen : YeshayaWeingarten, former member of the Jewish communitycouncil; Yitzhak Samsonowitz, former head of the Depart-ment of Culture and Education in the Municipality ; Tan-chum Freund, former head of the Students’ AdvisoryCouncil of Ort, and Moshe Sternfeld, The representativesof the General Zionists were : Michael Hertz, Berish Bitsh,Abraham Eli Rosenthal and Joseph Berish Rosenblum, TheAguda representatives were Motel Michelson, BaruchZilbershatz, Fishel Lubliner and Moshe Nordman. Theright wing of Poalei Zion was represented by Simcha DavidBlachman, and the left wing by Shimshon Gomolinski.Shmuel Eliahu Ziegelman represented the Socialist Art-isans’ Union and Abraham Samelson represented theArtisans’ Union. Finally, Shimon Warshawski was repre-sentative of all the non-affilated Jews.The Secretary-General of the Judenrat was Samsono-witz and the Treasurer was Statchewski. Other departmentheads were as follows : Marcus Litmanowitz (General De-partment) ; S. Blachman (Finance Department) ; F. Lub-liner (Supply) ; Abraham Weishof (Technical Depart-ment) ; Pinchas Nissenson (Economic Department) ;M. Sternfeld (Social Investigation and Welfare), who waslater arrested and replaced by M. Nordman ; Dr. Jacobo-witz (Medical and Sanitary Department) ; Ziegelman (La-bor Director) ; Poznanski (Registration) ; Simon Stein(Housing Department) ; J. B. Rosenblum and Bunem Ka-minski (Funeral Department) ; Judge Borenstein (Law andLegal Advice) ; Engineer Lipe Hirsch Broide (Commerceand Trade) and Bitsch (Post, Telephone and Telegraph).Together with the members of the Jewish Police whichwas set up in Spring 1941, about 500 people worked inthe Jewish community.*’The Jewish Police Service (Ordnungs-Dienst) washeaded by the lawyer Stanislaw Zilberstein, and was res-ponsible for matters of supply and health. Its function wasto supervise the regular bathing of the inhabitants as wellas to see to it that those unwilling to work, as requestedby the Labor Department, were forced to cooperate. Theirfirst operation was to arrange for gardens in the Jewishquarter. A year after it began its activities, the PoliceService of Piotrkow was reorganized. It was then composedof 43 members divided into three groups. In cohnectionwith this reorganization and its expanded functions, theService received special hats and arm badges. The Judenratwas very strict about the behaviour of the Jewish police-men, at least at the beginning of its functioning.^326The heads of all the parties sat in the Jewish Councilof Piotrkow. These men had been the elected represent-atives of the community in the pre-war period. The JewishCouncil, during the first period of the occupation, deve-loped real social work services. It did its best to satisfythe needs of the population within the scope of its possi-bilities. The fact must be considered that Jewish life duringthe occupation was concentrated within the framework ofthe community which took care of supply, housing prob-lems, taxes, social work, etc.^‘An Emigration Committee operated from December8th, 1939, first at 27 Pilsudski Street and afterwards inthe public school building at 23 Pilsudski Street. ThisCommittee issued a special communique on December 26,1940, announcing that the registration of emigrants toSoviet Russia would be continued and that the date ofdeparture of the first emigrant trains would be announcedpublicly.The Emigration Committee functioned with the per-mission of the German authorities who sent special formsto the Jewish Council to be filled by prop)osed emigrantswho designated themselves “Ukranian citizens”. The pro-jected exchange with Russia of “Ukranian citizens” againstcitizens of German origin residing in Russia ended in afiasco, for the Russians saw through the German decep-tions. It was, ■ nevertheless, possible to smuggle Jews ofPiotrkow over the border into Russia and many Jews,including whole families with children, made the attempt.The fugitives were exposed to many dangers before reach-ing Russian border cities, Malkinya, Biala Podlaska andothers, and many of them perished on the way. Some ofthem returned, ragged and barefooted. It must be notedthat some of those who came back did so even though theyhad already crossed the border.Besides the emigration to the Soviet Union, the Com-mittee probed the possibilities of Jewish emigration toother European countries and overseas, establishing contacsfor the purpose with Hias and with shipping companiessuch as Adriatica, Francopol and Norddeutescher Lloyd. TheCommittee also mediated between residents of Piotrkowand their relatives abroad. According to correspondencefrom Piotrkow published in the official Jewish newspaperof occupied Poland, “Gazeta Zydowska”, No. 19, of Sep-tember 24, 1940, a few Jewish families emigrated priorto the prohibition of Jewish emigration from Poland. Emi-gration of Jews was officially prohibited in October 1940,by the Hauptreichs-Sicherheits-Amt (the Chief SecurityOffice of the Reich) in Berlin as it was felt that theemigration of Polish Jews had great influence on the “spi-ritual renaissance of North American Jewry”.The Committee also dealt with the search for missingpersons and relatives during the war, making contacts forthe purpose with other Jewish communities in Poland andabroad. Lists of all persons who left Piotrkow after Sep-tember 4, 1939, were prepared. As a result of the workdone by the Committee, financial aid from several countriesreached Piotrkow during a certain period.” It is not knownwhen the Committee ended its activities.An order to erect a ghetto in Piotrkow (for the firsttime officially called a “Ghetto”) was issued on October8, 1939, by the city commissar, Oberburgermcister HansDrexel. This was the first ghetto in the occupied areasof Poland. In accordance with this order, a registration ofthe Jewish population was to be ready by October 20th.A special appeal of the Judenrat on October 28th requestedthe Jewish population to cover the expenses of erectingthe ghetto and to move into it no later than October 31,1939, in conformance with the order received from Drexel.Initially, the order did not include those Jews who hadspecial permission to remain outside the ghetto until aspecial date. At the same time, landlords and tenants wererequested not to interfere with the moving of the Jewishpopulation to the localities set aside for them by thecommunity.Sign-posts were set up at the exit of the ghetto aboutDecember 1939, bearing a white skull on a blue back-ground (40x60 cms. in size). The ghetto as yet had nofences or guards and these signs were, for the time being,the only announcement of its existence. They caused, how-ever, considerable anxiety among the Jews.”Simultaneously with the erection of the jx>sts on theghetto borders, the Jewish Council issued orders on De-cember 20, 1939, that all Jews stil living outside theghetto or having busines.ses there must move into theghetto at once. This request included those who had ob-tained temporary or permanent permits to live outside theghetto as well as those who applied to the authorities forpermission to live outside. The (x)uncil warned that theGerman authorities would impose severe punishment onanyone transgressing the above orders.The Jews who hadto leave their dwellings in the rest of the city in order tomove into the ghetto were allowed to take only theirpillows and blankets with them. Thus, with one stroke,the 600 jews who had to leave their homes became pau-pers. Tho.se Christians who lived in the area of the ghettohad to move out.^'The area of the ghetto included the following streets :ferozolimska Nos. 1-19, 19a, 20-42, 44, 70, 72, 76, 84, 86,90-93, 96-97, 97a, 99, 101, 105, 138, 140, 142, 144, 146,148, 150. 153-159; Mala Nos. 1-7 ; Krzywa Nos. 1-20,22, 24, 26, 28 ; Spatzerowa Nos. 7-10 ; Handlowa Nos.3-5; Rzemieshlnitza Nos. 1-8, 10-12, 14, 18, 19, 21, 23,27, 28, 33 ; Litewska Nos. 1-3, 6-15, 17-20, 22, 24, 26 ;Platz Litewski Nos. 1-14 ; Odjclna Nos. 2-14, 18, 20, 22,24, 26, 28, 30, 32 ; Wicyska Nos. 1-10, 12-16, 17, 19, 21 ;Pilsudski Nos. 1-33; Zamkowa Nos. 1-5, 16, 19, 24;Garntsarska Nos. 1-13, 16, 24, 26, 28 ; Peretz Nos, 2-14,11, 17 ; Leonarda Nos. 1-15, 20 ; Staro-Warshawska Nos.1-35 ; Zamurowa Nos. 1-16 ; Farna Nos. 1-8 ; Platz Tsar-327nietski Nos. 2-10 ; Lazienna Mokra Nos. 1-6 ; KonarskaNos. 1-4 ; Rynek Tribunalski Nos. 1-12 ; Rwanska Nos.1- 5 ; Ritserska Nos. 5-10 ; Sheratzka Nos. 1-10 ; ShewskaNos. 1-10 ; Platz Niepodlegloschi Nos. 2-7 ; Nadrowa Nos.2- 6 ; and Wspolna Nos. 1, 6, 8.^^Characteristically, the ghetto borders were complicatedand ran in a crooked line. They were determined in manycases with the help of bribes from landlords who fearedthat the houses they owned would fall outside the ghettoboundaries. These landlords raised a collection among them-selves in order to bribe the authorities concerned to setthe borders in a manner favorable to them. There wereeven houses which were “islands” apart from the ghetto,yet considered part of it.^The only Jews outside the ghetto were old Dr. Shan-tser who had been an apostate for 60 years, Jacob Witorsh,who was a Turkish citizen, and an Egyptian named Kam.These people were only briefly permitted to be exceptions;during the “Action” they were transferred to the ghettoand from there to Treblinka.^®In accordance with the orders of City CommissarDrexel of December 1, 1939, Jews were permitted outsidetheir homes in the ghetto only between the hours of 8:00a.m. — 5:00 p.m. and they were allowed to be outsidethe ghetto only between 11:00 a.m. — 1:00 p.m. Theorder of October 5, 1939, restricted the Jews to theirhomes except between 10:00 a. m.. — 1:00 p. m. and 3.00p.m. — 4:00p.m. as punishment for purchasing food,which was regarded as an act of sabotage.They were permitted to walk in some streets forlonger hours than in others, and were not permitted theuse of the main streets at all. There were other streetswhere they were allowed to walk only on the road andwere punished if they used the sidewalks. Even in part ofPilsudski Street (since the invasion of Russia known alsoas Ostland Street), which was within the ghetto borders,they were forbidden to walk on one sidewalk. Signs wereput up reading, “Jews are forbidden to use the sidewalk”.The Jews used the few hours during which they werepermitted to be outside the ghetto to take walks aroundthe city or to take the short train ride to Przyglow andWlodzimierzow where they could stroll in the surroundingwoods. Those who transgressed the restrictive orders werethreatened with dire punishment under martial law forsabotage, punishment which was actually carried out.^ Af-ter the “sperrstunde” (curfew time), a dead silence fellon the ghetto as all the inhabitants sat in dread andwondered what events the coming night would bring.^As time went on, the decrees, prohibitions and limit-ations increased in number and severity. According to thedecree of Governor-General Frank for the occupied pro-vinces of Poland, dated November 23, 1939, the localdecree of December 12, 1939 and the decrees of the cityand district of Piotrkow of December 23, 1939, all Jewsover the age of ten were required to wear a white badgesewed on to their right sleeves. The badge had to be atleast 10 cm. wide, embellished with a blue Magen DavidI cm. wide and 8 cm. long. Those who failed to complywith the order would be punished with six months impri-sonment and required to pay a large fine.The local despots, it should be noted, did not wait fororders to be given by the central authorities with regardto the Jews, but issued even severer restrictions on theirown initiative. For example, the “Kreishauptman” (districtcaptain). Buss of Piotrkow, on November 27th, orderedall Jews over the age of six to wear a yellow badge 10 cm.in width on their right arms.^^The city commissar, Oberburgermeister Drexel, on De-cember 1, ordered all persons who had even one Jewishparent, and even converted Jews, to wear on their rightforearms a yellow badge bearing the inscription “Jude”.Anyone found without such a badge from December 3rdon would be court-martialed.Similarly, all Jewish stores had to affix a white signwith a blue Magen David to their premises in order to“protect the non-Jewish population from the Jews.” Eventhe droshkes (hacks) in the ghetto (of which only 10 re-mained by the summer of 1940) had to bear a MagenDavidThe decrees which aimed to legally expropriate Jewishproperty ruled that no Jew was to be allowed-to possessmore than 2,000 zloty or any gold or jewelry, nor was hepermitted to earn more than 5,000 zloty per month. Jewswere prohibited from working in heavy industry or inpublic or governmental institutions ; they were not allowedto bake bread for Aryans nor to engage in trade withthem. They were neither permitted to heal Aryan patientsnor to be treated by Aryan physicians. Furthermore, Jewswere not allowed to leave the city without a permit nor toride on a trainAn ever greater calamity was the request for frequent“contributions” by the local authorities, on their owninitiative or, more frequently, on the orders of theGovernor-General. The first “contribution” amounted to25.000 zloty, another was for 15,000 zloty and a third foj350.000 zloty, and there were also contributions in kind.The Ringelblum Archive contains the written order fora contribution of 350,000 zloty, within a few hours. OnNovember 29th, the Commissar of the Piotrkow city dis-trict presented the Jewish Council with the followingdecree : “In accordance with the order of Herr Governor-General (Hans Frank) of the occupied territories inPoland, you are requested to deliver 350,000 zloty to myoffice by 11:00 a. m. today. If this request is not compliedwith, punitive measures will be taken as ordered by theGovernor-General.’ ’It is needless to go into detail on the difficultiesinvolved in raising such a large sum in a few hours. Manywealthy and middle-class Jews has escaped from the town,but the sum had to be paid somehow. During one of the328periods during which a sum of money had to be raised,three hostages were held and were beaten so mercilesslythat one of them, Leib Desseau, died.^On October 29, 1939, the Jewish G)uncil, in com-pliance with a local decree of the German authorities whichwas issued in the “Ordinances of the City and District ofPiotrkow” (No. 3, October 26, 1939), requested allJewish producers and merchants of textiles and leathergoods, as well as shoemakers, to deliver an inventory oftheir goods to the city commissar.^*The German authorities, at the end of November1939, ordered all Jews to bring their merchandise to theJewish Council. Part of the textiles confiscated by theGermans was returned to the Jewish Council for storage,on the pretext that it was for the use of the Jewish popu-lation.^ On March 4th, 1940, the chairman of the JewishCouncil announced that all property owners over the age of21 had until March 10th to register all their property withthe Council offices, located at Garntsarska 7.”The German, Ronig, took over the administration ofthe expropriated Jewish houses which were located outsidethe ghetto. Jews also worked in this office. The Germansalso appointed commissars, among others, to be in chargeof Jewish firms and stores. Important Jewish firms thusdirected included the Piotrkower Manufacturing Co., theWarshawianka Mill, the Renoma Mill, the P. GoldblumMill, the Phofenix Glass Works, the Spirit Rectificationplant, the Wola Krzysztoporska farm and chemical factory,the Panel Plywood factory, Patzanowski and son, andJoseph Goldfried’s vinegar factory.^®At the beginning of the occupation, the relationsbetween the Germans and the Jews depended to a largeextent on the Jewish Council, that is to say, the largerthe bribes that could be paid to the Germans, the moreagreeable the relations. The Council, therefore, operated akind of business which enabled them to satisfy the needsof the Germans for furniture, Persian carpets, furs, paint-ings, diamonds, etc. They were often ordered to furnish,within a few hours, an apartment for one of Hitler’s digni-taries. An undated appeal to the community, found in theRingelblum Archive, requests the Jewish population tovoluntarily declare, in order to avoid requisitions, whatfurniture they possessed for the apartments which were tobe occupied by German military personnel.®’At times, the chairman of the Jewish Council suc-ceeded in easing the restrictions by bribery. Many Jewish“transgressions” were dispelled in the warehouse of thecommunity, where all the goods delivered by Jewish mer-chants were stored. This merchandise was not officially forsale, but the Gestapo, police and other officials constantly“bought” from the storage place. The best Jewish tailorsand shoemakers were overrun with work orders for theGermans and their families. Many Jews were thus savedfrom imprisonment or death for minor transgressions withthe help of the community warehouse and the lewishcraftsmen.**A report by Commander-in-Chief Ost, dated February1940, states that two sergeants of Battery 182/3 in Piot-rkow on February 18. 1940. captured two Jewish girls,Miss Machmanowitz, aged 18, and Miss Satanowska, aged17, and forced them at gunpoint to the Jewish cemeterywhere they raped them.**Even before the law of compulsory labor, whichforced Jews aged 14 to 60 to work as slave laborers, wasissued the Jews were exploited for hard tasks. They wereordered to carry out such work as street-cleaning, laborin German military units, in city buildings, etc. Germansoldiers, Gestapo men, railway clerks and “Selbstschutt”members would enter Jewish houses, search them andcapture Jewish men, forcing them to compulsory work. Thepoint of this indignation was often not because the workhad to be done, but merely to humiliate them in thecruelest possible manner.*^ Through its employment office,the community regularly delivered a quota of Jewishworkers. Jews who were unwilling to work had to pay aweekly fee for each work day they missed. The JewishCouncil was known to have made a payment, in February1940, of 25 zloty per day for 28 work days to 1,000 com-pulsory workers.*' Some Germans, however, were unwillingto take on workers from the employment office, and con-tinued to capture Jews for work details, claiming that thecapturing of Jews gave them pleasure.**A decree from the city commissar was delivered tothe Jewish Council at the end of November 1939, orderingthem to deliver 1,000 workers daily under police escort,beginning on December 2, for the urgent task of erectingbarracks on the rear square of the synagogue and onLitewska Street. The barracks, 40 meters long and 28meters wide, had to be completed by December 10 andwere to serve as lodging for the masses of displaced Jewswho were expected to arrive in Piotrkow.At the request of City (xjmmissar Drexcl, the JewishCouncil had to deliver exact registration lists of Jewishinhabitants, according to their addresses, during the firsttwo days of December. Lindner, a German architect, wasput in charge of the work of building the barracks and theGerman police detailed to the job were under the commandof Schwapert. The Municipality’s technical office super-vised the technical execution of the work.On December 6th, Drexcl ordered the community todeliver immediately all materials needed to erect thebarracks and to supply material for the restoration of themilitary barracks (at Curie Skladowska Street) and forthe inside equipment (barrack bunk beds) of the synagogue(Jerozolimska Street) and of the Jewish Gymnasium(Peretz Street). In addition to sqpplying the workers andthe material, the community also jiad to “satisfy the claimsof the third parties.”*'329In order to arrange for covering the huge expensesinvolved in building the barracks, a meeting was arrangedfor the trustees of wealthy Jewish firms at which it wasdecided that administered firms belonging to the Jewswould make a one-time donation for the benefit of thecommunity. The Piotrkower Manufacturing Co. gave 10,000zloty, the Warshawianka Mill gave 4,000 zloty, the RenomaMill 2,000 zloty, the Phoenix Glass Works 4,000 zloty,the Spirit Rectification plant 1,000 zloty, and the PanelPl3rwood factory 1,000 zloty ; in all, 22,000 zloty werecollected.^As related by the late Jacob Kurtz, the barracks atLitewska Street remained uncompleted and the second setof barracks were used by the German artillery. However,the bunks erected in the synagogue and the Beth Hamid-rash as well as in the Gymnasium served the masses ofrefugees and deported persons who were driven into theghetto at Piotrkow.During the first days of construction of the barracks,the Jewish forced laborers were cruelly beaten and tor-tured while carrying loads of boards and planks too heavyto bear. The Community had supplied carts for transport-ing the wood from Zilberstein’s sawmill, 3 km, outside thecity, but the German insisted that the wood be carriedby the workers themselves. Avoidance of this forced labourwas considered sabotage and was punishable by death.Monday, December 4th, 1939, was a dreadful day.The Jews were ordered to run from the sawmill with heavybeams on their backs, Jews unable to do so were bayonet-ted. The cries and laments of wives, mothers and childrenwho were gathered in the Community building rose to theskies. Immediate steps were taken to put an end to thisawful state of affairs, and after a few days the crueltystopped.^’In January of 1940, all men aged 12 to 45 were regis-tered for improvement work in the two nearby swampvillages, Mileyow and Witow, which were under the admi-nistration of the trustees. Brigades of Jewish youth arriveddaily to dig canals and trenches, removing tons of earth.The work was difficult and exhausting and the laborersworked up to their knees in water all day long. Many ofthem suffered from rheumatism and lumbago as a result,or contracted pneumonia or tuberculosis. They were forcedto work naked and barefooted in winter under the harshestof conditions, without sufficient nourishment. Upon return-ing home, many of them fell sick and died.^ The workerswere supplied by the Jewish employment office which wasmanaged, except for a brief period, by Shraga (Felix)Poznanski until the great “Action”.Between March 14—19, a special registration for com-pulsory labor was carried out, of men born between 1914and 1923.^® These men were also ordered to register inthe office of the Community (23 Pilsudski Street) onMarch 28th, and to declare their income for the year 1939.A short time later, 900 laborers aged 16—40 weresent to the notorious Lublin camps — Chechanow, Plazow,Belzetz and Dzikow, There, close to the border, they dugprotective trenches and dungeons, under terrible living andworking conditions. The workers were transported 15—25km. to their place of work daily, and were treated terribly.The people in Belzetz died of hunger and filth ; laborersin Chechanow (under the command of the S, S, officerDolf) slept on the ground of a ruined house winter andsummer and received a daily food ration consisting of 200gr. of black bread and a watery soup. Camp prisoners fromPiotrkow received food parcels from their families by wayof the Jewish Council. A few days before Rosh Hashanah1940, a delegation from the Jewish Council visited theprisoners in the Lublin camps and distributed clothes, foodand money among them. This help was made possiblethanks to Mr. Haber and Mr. Spiegel of Lublin, friends ofRabbi M. Ch. Lau of Piotrkow. It did little to alleviate thehardships of the camp prisoners, a number of whom suf-fered from tuberculosis. Their weight dropped to 30 kg.More than 60 prisoners were shot in the course of thework, but some of the young men succeeded in escapingand crossing the Russian border. The Rabbi of Piotrkowmade an appeal for the prisoners before Kol Nidrei onYom Kippur eve in all the houses of worship, for the headof each household to contribute 10 zloty plus 1 zloty foreach member of the family.With the completion of the fortifications at theRussian-German border at the end of 1940, the campswere dissolved. The functionaries of the community inPiotrkow organized the repatriation of the camp prisoners.Those who carried out the rescue behaved heroically,especially Mr. Gomberg of Lodz, who exposed himself tofrequent danger in the process. He died in Buchenwaldshortly before the liberation, of a contagious lung diseasecaught while saving the lives of other prisonersDuring the summer of 1940, about 1,200 Jewsworked near Piotrkow, doing river-control work undervery difficult conditions. Many of them contracted rheuma-tism.^^ About 300 camp prisoners worked in Witow fromApril 1940 at control-work on the Lucianza River, underthe supervision of the “Boleslaw Gombinski” firm. Thecamp in Witow was liquidated in December 1941. The 265camp prisoners of Chechanow worked together with theWolborz prisoners, controlling the Wolburka River, underthe direction of the E. Yaglinski firm. Many of the workersran away from the unbearable working and sanitary con-ditions. The German authorities forced the Jewish Councilto use the German Police to catch the escaped campprisoners.Some of the people occupied themselves with work-ing small gardens on the Rynek Trybunalski and PlatzTsarnetski. This work was supervised by Jacob Kurtz, aPalestinian, on the instructions of German BurgermeisterBuss.^^ The gardens were instituted due to the efforts of330the Jewish Q)uncil to employ a greater number of Jewishworkers (about 1000) in the vicinity of Piotrkow,^A number of local firms, the “Kara” glass works,“Hortensia”, “Phoenix”, the “Petrikauer Holzwerke”(wood factory), Dietrich and Fischer (over the Bugaj),‘‘Ostbahn”, ‘Kreisgenossenschaft”, etc., began to employlews in 1941 (about a year before the great “Aussiedlung”Action) but young workers were given priority.The Jews employed in the glass works learned newoccupations, but the work itself was very hard. About1100 Jews worked in the Kara Glass Works as firemen,breakers, can-blowers, glass-blowers, etc. They also loadedsoda, coal and other materials. A great many of the afflic-tions of the Jews working in “Kara” were due to themanagers, Fogel, Papielowski and Mrozinski, and to themany foremen, German and Polish, who mistreated theJews at every opportunity. A giant glass-cistern had to bebuilt and a huge deep pit dug for the purpose. The Jewshad to dig the masses of earth from the pit while foremen,armed with sticks, stood by, hurrying the workers. Thisexcavation lasted a year and in the summer of 1943, a newcistern was begun, as well as other building work. Besidesdigging, the Jewish workers had to carry bricks and stones.A group of very young boys worked at the HortensiaGlass Works (the director was Christman ; the generalmanager, Kutschhammer ; and the personnel manager, Her-ford, who was assisted by three Poles, Woidala, Slomka andKubara). The work of these boys was to run with glasses,saucers, petrol-flasks, bottles, wine-glasses and other pro-ducts. Another group of youngsters unloaded wagons orcarried bricks and white-wash for the bricklayers. Workat “Hortensia” was not easy, but the conditions were muchbetter than at “Kara”.The workers of the “Petrikauer Holzwerke, Dietrichund Fischer” were recognized as a “productive element”.This factory was installed at the site of a textile factory,‘Piotrkower Manufacture”, on the Bugaj, which had be-longed to Max Zilberstein of Lodz, and which was carriedoff by the Germans. The “Zegwerke”, large mechanicalwood-working shops equipped with machinery which hadbeen confiscated from Jewish joineries, produced woodenitems mainly for the German military authorities — bar-racks, tents, plywood and wooden blocks which were usedas heating material for generators. The plant employed qua-lified carpenters as well as apprentices. In all, about 1,000Jews and 700 Poles worked in the factory, not only atjoinery but also at manual work. Paul Erich Dietrich andFischer, German owners of the factory, were known to besadistic individuals who mistreated the Jewish workers, es-pecially at the time of the extermination action in theGhetto.The Jews managed to smuggle food into the factorywith the help of firemen, for the beet soups and moldybread they got to eat there were not enough on which tosubsist. The workshops organized in the “Ort” building bythe Jewish Council must also be mentioned. Hundred ofskilled craftsmen worked in a series of workshops concen-trated there.^'As a result of the forced resettlement of Jews, theghetto became increasingly crowded with the influx ofrefugees from Gniezno, Tuszyn, Lodz, Pabianiiz, the Poz-nan and Plotsk districts and other areas. The jews fromGniezno arrived by passenger train. The city commissarinformed the Community on February 5. 1940, that manytransports of thousands of refugees would shortly arrive aspart of the “Umsiedlung” (resettlement). The Communitywas to take care of the refugees and provide them withshelter. The Jews from Gniezno were settled in the neigh-borhood of “Maccabee” and on the Platz Tsarnictski(“Judenplatz” ) where bunks were quickly set up for them.Most of the new arrivals were middle-class jews, industrial-ists, merchants, landlords, doctors, engineers, officials andcompany owners. These families were housed in the ghettolike chickens in coops, each family receiving one tiny ai-bide, narrow and so low that one could not stand uprightin them.The Jews of Tuszyn came to Piotrkow in far worsefashion. One cold winter night when the temperaturewas minus 20‘’C., all the Jews were exj>cllcd from theirhomes. Many children froze to death during this resettle-ment. These Jews were housed in the meat market. At thesame time, Piotrkow Jews whose houses had been burntsettled in the prayer houses (shtiblech) of Gcr, Alexander,Radomsk, Krimelow, Skiernievitz and in Fishcl Alexan-drowitz’ Beth Hamidrash.The refugees from Lodz were mainly doctors, lawyers,engineers and manufacturers who were first kept for afew days in the Radogoszcz Prison near Lodz.** Theyarrived in Piotrkow during the winter of 1940 in masses,threadbare and barefooted. Even the l>clongings they hadcarried on their backs were confiscated during the trip.Many babies died on tbe way from the freezing cold. Anumber of Jews also arrived from Warsaw before theclosing of the Warsaw Ghetto, most of them refugees fromLodz who had previously escaped to Warsaw.At the end of the winter of 1940, a large transportarrived from the Poznan and Plotsk districts. The trans-port consisted of over 3,000 Jews, and shtKkcd the Jewsof Piotrkow who had never before faced the problem ofresettlement on these dimensions. These Jews had beenexpelled during the night and were given only 15 minutesto get ready. Among them were some fortunate familieswho had succeeded in taking some objects of value withthem and were later able to use them as their only sourceof income. In the spring of 1941, about 300 refugees fromSkierniewitz and about 700 from Drabin and Sherptzarrived in Piotrkow,”Before the outbreak of the war, the total populationof Piotrkow was approximately 50,000, of whom about15,000 were Jews, The Ghetto’s population grew rapidly331with the influx of refugees and numbered 14,100 on June1, 1940, including 3,625 refugees, according to the officialfigures of the Jewish Coimcil which was interested inminimizing the numbers for various reasons. On April 1,1942, official figures listed 16,469 inhabitants, 8,141 ofthem refugees (mainly from the districts of Poznan, Dra-bin, Sherpts, Lodz and Skiemiewitz, as well as from Ka-lish, Wielun, Sheradz, Suleyow, Serotsk and a number ofvillages in Pomorze such as Naklo, Shubin and Bydgoszch).The number was actually much higher than the officialfigures and reached about 20,000 persons. According to thelate J. Kurtz, the ghetto contained 13,800 permanent in-habitants in 1942. These inhabitants were officially regis-tered according to the rules and carried Jewish passports,“Kenkarten” (yellow booklets in German and Polish,containing a photograph of the owner and bearing a blueMagen David on the first page). Bearers of these cardswere given bread cards and other rationed products allottedto Jews. There were also 4,000 “strangers” who had con-firmations from the Jewish Gjuncil, but were not entitledto bread cards or other rations. In addition, about 2,000Jews were not registered at all for various reasons. Theyhad found themselves hiding places where they secretedthemselves in times of danger,^The refugees were settled by the Housing Departmentof the Jewish Q)uncil in the synagogue and on the balco-nies of the synagogue, in the prayer-houses, and in otherpublic buildings such as the gymnasium of “Maccabee”,Those who could afford it, found accommodation in privatehouses, and there was not a Jewish house which did nottake in some of the refugees. Some of the Jews wereresettled in Przyglow in houses which were quite unlivable.Regardless of the great overcrowding, the Community wasprepared to take over 1,000 refugees from Krakow in thesummer of 1940.^The ghetto contained 182 houses comprising 4,178rooms. On the average, there were four persons to a roomalthough often as many as eight lived in a room,^ Thestreets of the ghetto were always crowded, especially dur-ing the summer months. The Rynek Trybunalski and thePlatz Tsarnietski (“Judenplatz” ), where the Jews gatheredto discuss the day’s events, was constantly teeming.*'The Jewish Council of the Community provided thehordes of refugees with food. The most public-minded andmost intelligent of the Jews worked for the Jewish Counciland they had an influence on the social life of the ghetto.Other relief organizations were set up, but their possibili-ties were limited. Many of the Piotrkow Jews volunteeredto help the unfortunate refugees and took children oradults home, where they shared their own beds withthem.“The Department of Social Welfare became intenslyactive, giving permanent support where needed as wellas emergency help to the wayfarers in Piotrkow and pro-viding the poor with food and clothing. They organizeda dental clinic and a pharmacy. A special committee ofthe Jewish Council collected clothes for the resettled anda nursery was set up in a rented room. The clinic suppliedmedical care and also ran a kitchen, distributing 180portions of milk a day and canned goods. There was alsoa special children’s clinic which was very active (it evenhad sun-lamps),*^The local population became poorer and poorer. Workopportunities and earnings of hundreds of Jewish workerswere reduced to a minimum, and economic enterprises wentbankrupt as a result of the restrictions on Jewish trade.Lawyers, engineers, officials and other members of the freeprofessions were unemployed.**The only source of income for many of the inhabit-ants was from the sale of personal belongings. As timewent on, the number of people who had to be fed by theCommunity became greater. A social welfare kitchen wasorganized by a number of public-spirited women (the wifeof Rabbi Moshe Chaim Lau organized the kitchen with thecooperation of Mrs, Henia Greenberg, wife of the doctor ;Malvina Tenenbaum, sister of Dr. Z, Tenenbaum, and Mrs.Bunem Kaminski) and distributed over 1,000 hot mealsdaily during the period it functioned.*^Two kitchens distributed soup during the summerof 1940, one kitchen for children under the age of 14 andthe other for adults. The kitchens were for the refugeesand served 600 persons. There was also a kitchen for the“intelligentsia” which distributed free meals for certainpersons who were incognito,**The Social Welfare Department wanted to increasethe number of meals to 1,200 daily for adults and 1,000for children. However, the problem of supplies proved tobe a hindrance to the scheme. It was impossible to buymore food or more coal, and utensils and space for settingup additional kitchens were also lacking.The situation was so difficult, even for the wealthiersectors of the population, that any proper social work onthe level of what had been done before the war, wasimpossible. The war damage, the contributions and requi-sitions, the building of barracks, the reconstruction of thebath house (as part of a de-lousing station) and other ex-penditures which were financed by the Community, impo-verished the permanent tax-payers,*^There was a small minority of Jews who managed tohave a good time, even in the ghetto. This group consistedmainly of highly skilled craftsmen, tailors, shoemakers andthe like, who worked for the Germans. They were notrestricted in their movements outside the ghetto, and couldtrade on the black market. This group spent its eveningsin its own exclusive circles or in the cafes of Rama andJurkiewitz, playing billiards and poker while scores ofother Jews, especially the refugees, were dying for lackof bread. During the hunger days, more than 30 deathswere registered daily. Most of the refugees from the Poz-nan transport camp died, one by one.**332The newly established Jewish Social Welfare DistrictCommittee appealed to the Jewish population, at thebeginning of the summer of 1941, to pledge a regularmonthly contribution for feeding poor children.*’ As thepoverty of the population increased, children begging inthe streets became a common sight and the work of thesoup-kitchens operated by the Social Welfare Committeeincreased greatly. The kitchens distributed 2,100 mealsdaily during the summer of 1941, while the special kitchenfor the “intelligentsia” (including a number of OrthodoxJews) distributed 550 meals a day. The children’s kitchendistributed 450 meals a day for children aged 5-12. Inaddition, the orphanage provided for 72 children.The Mother-and-Child Clinic of the Social WelfareCommittee provided medical care for 200 children, dis-tributing a daily milk ration for children aged 1 to 3. Dueto the initiative of the Clinic, the Jewish Council orderedcompulsory small-pox vaccinations for children. Injectionsagainst measles were also given to children who were 9months old in 1941 as well as to all children who hadnever been immunized.That the condition of the Jews in other towns of theprovince of Piotrkow was no better was brought out inthe protocol of the Conference of Judenrat representativesof the district, which took place in Piotrkow on January19, 1941, and was presided over by Tenenberg, chairmanof the Jewish Council of the entire province. In additionto the representatives of the Piotrkow Jewish Council(Chairman Tenenberg, Vice-chairman Simon Warshawski,Samsonowitz, Director of the Organizational Department,and Mrs. Goldberg, Head of the District Department) thefollowing heads of other town councils participated in theconference : S. Glogowski of Przyglow-Wlodzimierzow ;H. Weintraub of Suleyow ; Rosenblatt of Wolborz ; Shein-farber of Kaminsk ; Kenigstein of Wola Krzysztoporskaand Carmiel of Rozprza (to which belonged the twovillages of Porzniewitze and Niechcice).The situation in Suleyow, Przyglow, Kaminsk andWola Krzysztoporska was very difficult. The Jewish popul-ation of Przyglow had consisted of only nine familiesbefore the war, though many others spent their summervacations there. Now some 500 refugees were domiciled inthe empty villas. This tiny community, to which JosephGoldstein was sent in May 1941 as a special emissary toorganize help, had no means of its own and a number ofpeople died of starvation as a result of the situation. Ac-companying hunger, a typhus epidemic spread in the villageand took its toll among the Jews. The Piotrkow com-munity did all it could to ease the situation, but even so,many of those who had survived the epidemic died ofstarvation.The situation was just as bad in Wolborz. Thiscommunity was forced to put up a bath-house on shortnotice at a cost of 5,000 zloty, by order of Dr. Brashkow-ski, the district physician. Bread and potatoes were lackingin the winter, and 75% of the community perished. TheJews of Kaminsk were also starved, though some foodwas bought for them with contributions from the privateresources of members of the Jewish Council.The only help the Piotrkow committee of the JewishWelfare Department was able to provide for the province,was to give a small allotment of potatoes (30% of 30tons) which was distributed by the Radom Jewish Wel-fare Department) to the most afflicted towns, Suleyow,Przyglow, Kaminsk and Wola Krzysztoporska.’’Even Jews who had formerly lived from agriculturein the small villages suftcrcd from hunger. In Gieski, forexample, some of its 20 families had lived from vegetablefarming, while the rest had been officials or workers onthe Niechcice farm. The Germans fired all the jewsemployed on the Niechice farm and confiscated the smallholdings of the Jews in Gieski. These Jews thereafterlived in poverty, together with five refugee families, untilthey were all expelled to Rozprza. Together with the Jewsof Rozprza, they were later transferred to Piotrkow onthe eve of the great Action.”By the beginning of 1941, epidemics began to spreadin Piotrkow as a result of the shcKking housing situationand the bad sanitary conditions (the ghetto was onlypartly equipped with sewage and drainage systems). Thefirst sporadic cases of contagious disease were partiallyisolated, with one doctor and two nurses in’charge of eachward.A large number of patients attended the out-patientclinic which was located first in the "Dohroczynnosch”yard and was later moved to the area of the Communityoffices. All the Jewish doctors of Piotrkow, including thosewho came from other places during the war, served in theout-patient clinic which was headed by Dr. Leon Wein-zieher and included the following : Dr. M. A. Greenberg,Dr. Leon Glatter, Dr. Sigmund Tenenbaum, Dr. MauriceBrahms, Dr. Rattner from Poznan, Dr. Ziegler, Dr. Jaco-bowitz who had been born in Piotrkow but had practisedin Belchatow and in Lodz, Dr. Basior, Dr. Sigmund Green-span, his wife, Dr. Bra.ss-Grecnspan, Dr. Ncumark, andDr. Rosenberg. The dental clinic was staffed by Drs. Rosen-berg, Broide and Mila Weinziehcr. Three registered nurses,Rosa Israelowitz, Maria Migus and Guta Cederbaum,worked in the clinic in addition to Jacob Abramowitz,medical assistant. The pharmacy of the clinic was managedby Musia Litmanowitz-Magilaner.The beloved Dr. Rattner worked with exceptionaldevotion to the sick and the poor. He was later takenaway to Treblinka together with his fellow-Jcws.The clinic issued hundreds of chits entitling the sickto special food rations ( V2 lb. sugar and 1 lb. of flour orbarley). The clerks of the clinic frequently forged thesignature of the doctors in order to obtain more food forthe poor, who were entitled “the sick”. The doctorsworked under difficult conditions in the out-patient clinic333as they lacked necessary equipment and instruments whichhad been confiscated by the Germans at the beginning ofthe invasion.”As the population of the ghetto increased and theovercrowding became worse, the diseases became epidemic.Epidemics of painful skin irritations which were verydifficult to localize spread, particularly in the bunk roomsof the synagogue and “Maccabee”. Tuberculosis took aterrible toll and in 1941 a typhus epidemic claimed over1,000 victims.”Some doctors did not report the cases of typhus. TheJewish Council called a conference of all the doctors, sani-tary personnel and representatives of the professionals. Atthe conference it was decided to make an all-out attackon the epidemic. Sanitary cadres were set up whose job itwas to see to the hygiene and cleanliness in the ghetto,to find the hidden nests of typhus cases and to transferthe relatives of the sick to other accommodations. Theserelatives were put up in the building of the former JewishHigh School but these precautions failed because of theovercrowding there. The disease was transferred even morewidely by those persons who were able to escape fromthese isolation wards, carrying the disease.The newly formed Sanitary Committee, headed byDr. Jacobowitz, introduced compulsory baths and disin-fection of clothing every three weeks for the inhabitantsof each house. The Sanitary Committee consisted of 60men including office personnel, the distinfection staff andthe “sanitary police”. When hats were distributed to thesanitary policemen, they looked just like the regular Jewishpolicemen. During the “Action” and afterwards, some ofthe sanitary police, wearing hats with blue badges, carriedout the same functions as the ordinary policemen and thusearned for themselves bitter notoriety.”At the beginning of 1942, the sanitary police carriedout some successful operations. Sanitary delegates of thehouse committees were re-organized in January. In orderto improve the deplorable situation which existed in wholesections of the ghetto, a one-time cleaning operation wasundertaken. The streets, yards, garbage cans and toiletswere thoroughly cleaned with the help of workers sentfrom the employment office of the community and truckswhich they managed to obtain from the Compulsory Ad-ministration of Jewish Property. The tenants themselveshad to clean their own yards, staircases and entrance hallsand those who did not do the work themselves had to payworkers to do it for them. The operation, conducted by theheads of the quarters and their assistants with the helpof the housing committee and the sanitary services, wasa great success.The typhus epidemic was finally beaten. Fewer peoplewere sent to the isolation house, and homes containingtyphus cases were disinfected and isolated. Only a fewcases remained in the whole ghetto.”The absence of a hospital for contagious diseases wasstrongly felt during the epidemics (the existing departmentwas tiny). The Jewish hospital had been occupied at thebeginning of the war and integrated into the general hos-pital. Jewish patients were therefore treated in the munici-pal hospital and the cost of treatment was borne by theSocial Department of the Community. A separate 50-bedJewish hospital for contagious diseases was created at thebeginning of 1942 in the building of the Jewish HighSchool.”Although the Jews of Piotrkow were restricted andoppressed, their situation was comparatively good comparedwith that of the Jews in other large cities of the occupiedareas in the first years of German rule. The situation im-proved in Piotrkow in the summer of 1940 when the citycommissar, the notorious Drexel, was transferred to JCielce,Drexel was succeeded by a new city commissar. Buss, whoextorted money and other valuables from the Jews, butwho was less oppressive than his predecessor.The Jewish Council took advantage of what littleautonomy was granted it and managed to increase its foodreserves to a large extent. The Supply Department boughtas much food as it could, in addition to the officialrations, even taking a proportion of the rations of the soup-kitchen with the consent of the German authorities. Acertain quantity of coal was also obtained by the JewishCouncil for the inhabitants.”The Jewish Council became a kind of informationcenter concerning the position of the Jews in the occupiedareas of Poland, This was due, to a great extent, to thefact that Piotrkow was located on the border betweenOccupied Poland and the areas of the West, includingLodz, which had been annexed to Germany. It should benoted here that the Piorkow lawyer, Yitzhak Bogdanski,president of the Belchatow Judenrat, earned the reputationof being an honest and devoted leader who did all in hispower to help people.”On Saturday, July 5, 1941, Chairman Tenenberg anda group of “Bund” members of the Jewish Council weresuddenly put under arrest, after it was discovered that theywere cooperating with the underground movement. Thesearrests came as a result of the detention of a woman liaisonofficer of the Polish Socialist Party (P.P.S.) who wastraveling on the Warsaw-Katowitz train carrying a suitcasecontaining confidential Jewish literature. After enduringinhuman tortures, the woman disclosed that the sender ofthe suitcase was Tanchum Freund. Tenenberg’s aide, Yechi-el Krzak, broke down during the investigations and dis-closed the names of many persons.Among those arrested by the Gestapo were manyprominent persons and members of the Jewish Council,such as Jacob Berliner, the popular “Bund’ ’ member in theghetto who gave himself up to the Gestapo out of loyaltyto his comrades ; Zalman Statshewski ; T. Freund and hiswife ; Abraham Weishof, former alderman and leader of334the community ; Moshe Adler, former community func-tionary and city councilman ; Maurice Meirowitz, YeshayaWeingarten, Shmuel Seiten and Yechiel Fish. Later, MosheSternfeld and Yitzhak Saner, one of the most active mem-bers of the “Bund” in Piotrkow, were also arrested. Atthe same time, Esther Wolfstein-Bogdanski, an active“Bund” member, was arested and sent to the women’scamp in Ravensbruch where Mrs. Freund was already in-carcerated. Poalei Zion members Blachman and S. Gomu-linski were arrested as well, as was S. A. Ziegelman,representative of the Socialist Union of Artisans. A mem-ber of Poalei Agudat Israel was also arrested. The arrestswere not limited to Piotrkow. In Tomashow Mazowietzki,the Gestapo arrested the “Bund” functionary, Kosherowski,and “Bund” members Mr. and Mrs. Blum.The investigation lasted ten weeks, and the arrestedwere cruelly tortured during that time. All interventionwas fruitless. On September 13, eleven of those arrestedwere sent to the concentration camp at Ausschwitz andthree (Gomulinski, Blachman and Ziegelman) were setfree. A few days after the deportation to Ausschwitz, te-legrams were received by their families informing them ofthe deaths, due to illness, of the deportees.*®After this fiasco which shook and dejected the mourn-ing Jews of Piotrkow, a series of investigations were begunin the ghetto, while forced contributions and furtherarrests burdened and depressed the life of the ghetto Jews.This change in the relations between the German autho-rities and the Jews was without any doubt another step inthe program leading towards the extermination of the Jews,which quickened after the outbreak of the German-Sovietwar.After the first series of arrests, the chairmanship ofthe Jewish Council was taken over by former Vice-chair-man Simon Warshawski, owner of a mill. He chose hisassociates on the Council, among them Yitzhak Feiner asVice-chairman, the Teitelbaum brothers-in-law, Broide ofLodz and others. One of his most faithful associates wasDr. Jacobowitz.®' The presiding members of the Councilin 1942 (in addition to the Chairman and Vice-chairman)were the lawyer S. Silverstein, M. Hertz, M. Nordman,P. Lubliner and Abraham Samelson. Another of the 17members of the Council was Judge Borenstein who wasappointed Secretary-General of the Executive Council.*^A strong and lasting rivalry in the Council sprang up be-tween Warshawski and Feiner. Feiner was shot in thesmall ghetto after the first Action.**At the end of 1941, the Germans passed an edictprohibiting the Jews from leaving the ghetto. A decreewas issued by the governor of the Radom District on De-cember 11, 1941, referring to a similar decree of GovernorFrank’s, dated October 15, which threatened anyone leav-ing the Ghetto with the death penalty. Poles who gaveaid or succour to the Jews faced the same penalty. Onthe basis of this decree, the Germans began closing theopen ghettos. A special decree issued by the Piotrkowdistrict captain at the beginning of March ordered theclosing of the ghetto as of April 1. 1942. As of that date,the ghetto was hermetically sealed ; no Jew was hence-forth allowed to leave the ghetto and no Christian wasallowed to enter it.**Before this date, the ghetto boundaries were consi-derably narrowed. A special commission of the Municipa-lity dealt with the distribution of apartments for lewsand Christians, but in actuality, bril>ery and influentx? werethe deciding factors, hor a time, before the March 31deadline, apartments were traded between Jews and non-Jews. Those non-Jews who owned fine apartments andstores in the ghetto tried to have their proj>crty set out-side the ghetto. The jews successfully countered theseattempts by means of bribes, from which City CommissarBuss became wealthy. In place of the 200 Polish housesuperintendents, Jewish superintendents were appointedby a special Jewish Qualification Commission.*'The Police Department of Piotrkow put up specialposters announcing that jews and Jewish children wereforbidden to leave the ghetto : “It is forbidden to buy.sell or trade. Those transgressing this decree will he shotwithout trial.”**It was not only the German police who saw to it thatthe new decree was executed ; C'aptain Steigermann, thedistrict repre.sentative, also enforced the “law” and sawto it that the poor women and children who endangeredtheir lives to bring in potatoes from the “Aryan” side werechased off.*’The requisition of furs in the middle of winter (lateDecember 1941 and early January 1942) was a heavy blowto the inhabitants of the ghetto. The I^otrkow police atfirst requested the delivery of the coats together with theirfurs, but after great efforts and the use of “protection”,they consented to take only the furs. Nevertheless, manypersons became sick as a result of the confiscation of theirwarm apparal. Other clothes were also requisitioned undercover of the fur requisition decree. The authorities evenordered furs to be taken off people in the middle of thestreet during the last few days before the deadline of thedecree.**Arrests and executions became a daily occurrence dur-ing this phase of the extermination program. Every day,the residents of Pilsudski Street heard the bitter cries andlamentations of those Jews who were being transported inthe notorious police coach, hands bound and blindfolded,from the prison to the execution place in the Rakow fo-rest   for the crime of crossing the ghetto border, forbuying food and frequently for no reason at all. Thosearrested included children, women and old people."’Some of the most horrifying experiencc.s the inhabit-ants of the ghetto had to suffer were the frequent visitsof S. S. policeman Williams with his big dog. Williamsvisited the ghetto together with his Jewish friend. Yona335Levy. On the command of his master, the dog tore piecesof flesh from the bodies of people, especially children.Williams himself, who first, appeared in the ghetto in1941, occupied himself with attacking Jews in their homesand beating them until the blood ran. Wiliams’ dog soterrified the children that when they heard, “Willy withthe dog”, they hid in panic in attics and cellars and couldonly be taken from their hiding-places by forceAnother source of terror for the Jewish populationwere the two police officers, Kleter and Beier, both fromBreslau. Kleter would beat Jews daily and even shoot themwithout any reason whatsoever. He once shot a boy atwork because he unintentionally broke a glass. He also shotY. A. Sochatchewski, the merchant, who was running overthe Judengasse to bring food to the people hiding in thebunkers in his house.®^Leonarchik (“Fatty”), the Polish policeman from thePoznan area, also behaved sadistically towards the Jews,frequently searching and attacking them. He was killedby partisan fighters in 1944.®^Beginning in 1941, the Gestapo Chief, Putchala, com-mitted many murders himself. He shot two elderly Jewsand a 14-year old boy in the cemetery. In 1942, he sentmany Jews to their deaths in Ausschwitz for such “sins”as making horror propaganda : Moshe Kenigstein ; Flatau ;Michael Hertz, the well-known Zionist functionary (whosedaughter, Ania, was executed in the Rakow forest) ; Gold-blum ; Moshe Sternfeld, the community official; LolekCohen (for being discovered with a song about Hitlerand Stalin) ; Glogowski, the president of the PrzyglowCommunity and his secretary. Putchala arrested, in placeof well-known Communists who had long ago disappearedfrom Piotrkow, Jews possessing identical names (JosephLefkowitz and Zemel, the religious teacher) as well asmerchants, the “bourgeois”. All of these were deportedto Ausschwitz and shot within a few days. Their relativesreceived, as a souvenir, an announcement of their deathstogether with a numbered suitcase containing the posses-sions of those murdered.”In addition to being oppressed by the Nazis, the Jewssuffered from the Jewish policemen and from informers,both local and from other cities and villages.” Some ofthe Jewish policemen were guilty of heavy sins againsttheir fellow Jews.” The Jewish Police consisted of 50 menbefore the “Action”. These Tadeks, Saleks, Janeks, andMareks, it is to be regretted, stained the honor of theghetto’s population during its dreadful period.”SOURCES1 Jacob Kurtz, Memoirs (Yiddish), Typewritten, 2 vols.; Dr.Sigmund Tenenbaum, Memoirs (Polish).2 Shmuel Eliahu Ziegelman, “The History of the Piotrkow Juden-rat,” Collection of Testimonies, Yad Vashem Archive ; RabbiSimon Huberband, War Chron., Manuscript of the RingelblumArchive ; Thaddeus Nowakowski, “The Piotrkower September1939” (Polish), “Gazeta Ziemi Piotrkowskiej,” No. 21, Septem-ber 17—23, 1958.3 Maria Migus, “In the Underground during the Occupation” ;Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Abraham Tushiner, “HistoricalQuestionnaire”, Yad Vashem Archive, Munich Collection No.1667/338.4 Huberband, op. cit. ; Migus, op, cit. ; Ziegelman, op, cit.;Testimony of Esther Kaminska-Hipsher, Yad Vashem Archive;Testimony of David Rosenstein, Destruction Archive of IWO,5 Huberband, op. cit,6 Huberband, op. cit.; Testimony of Abraham Goldberg, takenMay 8, 1940, in the office of the United Aid Committee forPolish Jews in Tel Aviv, mimeographed. Compare : Book ofHorrors, Documents, Testimonies and Reports of the JewishHolacaust in World War II, Sect. I, edited by B. Mintz andJ. Klausner, Jerusalem, published by Reuben Maas, 1945, p,118 ; Ziegelman, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.7 Huberband, op. cit. ; Goldberg, op, cit.8 Huberband, op, cit.9 Ibid.10 Ibid.11 Migus, op. cit. ; Dr. Tenebaum, op. ch.12 Huberband, op cit.13 Rabbi Simon Huberband, “The Destruction of Synagogues, BateiMidrash and Cemeteries”, Ringelblum Archive. Comp. “Reportof the Religious Jewish Congregation in Piotrkow” writtenDecember 18, 1945 ; also Goldberg, op. cit.14 Huberband, op. cit.; Shamash (Sexton) Mordechai Mendelsucceeded in hiding the holy articles of the Beit Hamidrashin time.15 “Report of the Religious Jewish Congregation in Piotrkow”,op. cit. Comp. Hersh Biezuner, “Historical Questionnaire”, YadVashem Archive, Munich Collection, No. 2144/55.16 Kurtz, op. cit.17 Huberband, op. cit.18 Ibid.19 The list of members of the Jewish Council was compiled frommemory by Ziegelman, op, cit.20 Letters from Ziegelman, op. cit. ; “Gazeta Zydowska”, No, 6(9.8.41), No. 53 (2.7.41); Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.21 Letters from S. A. Ziegelman to J. Maltz ; also Kurtz,, op. cit.22 Announcement of the “Emigration Committee” of December26, 1939, “Gazeta Zydowska”, No. 19 (9.24.40) ; Kurtz, op. cit.23 Decree of Hans Drexel printed in Wiadomosci Piotrkowskie”No, 5 (10.8.39) ; Census of the Jewish Social Self-help ofMay 1942; “Gazeta Zydowska”, No. 3 (30.7.40); Migus, op.cit.; Kurtz, op. cit. ; Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.; YehoshuaGreenbaum, Testimony, Destruction Archive, IWO. As knownfrom German sources, the project organizer of the Piotrkowghetto was the lawyer, Walesinski.24 Notice from the Jewish Council, December 20, 1939 (German,Polish) ; Announcement of the Jewish Council (Polish), Jan-uary r2, 1940, Ringelblum Archive, No. 1/340, 1/1199.25 Greenbaum, op. cit.; Moshe Kimmelman, Speech delivered ata Yizkor meeting of the Piotrkow Landsmanschaft in Montreal.26 Decree of Drexel, op. cit. ; J. Greenbaum, “Historical Ques-tionnaire”, Yad Vashem Archive, Munich Collection, No. 1915/434; Thaddeus Nowakowski, “On the,History of the Piot-rkow Ghetto” (Polish) ; Gazeta Ziemi Piotrkowskiej, No. 51-52 (13.12.59, 1.6.60).27 Kurtz, op .cit. ; Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.; Rast, “HistoricalQuestionnaire”, Yad Vashem Archive, Munich Collection, No.2144/502.28 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.29 Order of City Commissar Drexel, Ringelblum Archive, No.1/1199 ; Order of Drexel of October 5, “Wiadomosci Piotrkow-skie” No. 5 ; Kurtz, op. cit. (In summer, the hours duringwhich it was permitted to be out in the streets were prolonged.)33630 Dr. Tenenberg, op. cit. ; Goldberg, op. cit.31 “Anordnung der Stadt und Landkreis Petrikau”, No. 7, ofDecember 1939, p. 9.32 Kurtz, op. cit.33 Tushiner, op. cit. ; Migus, op. cit. ; Kimmelman, op. cit. ;Greenbaum, “Historical Questionnaire”, op. cit. ; Ben-Giladi,“Piotrkow Youth Under the Whip of the Swastika” (Polish).34 Manuscript in Ringelblum Archive, No. 1197; Rabbi Huberbandwrites about a contribution of 50,000 zloty, Kurtz about 75,000zloty, while Greenbaum speaks of further contributions : Oc-tober 1 — 10,000 zloty, ten days later, 150,000 zloty. Accordingto Dr. Tenenbaum, Drexel imposed a contribution of 500,000zloty on the Jewish population, which was paid within threedays. In his above-mentioned testimonial, Goldberg reported onfurther contributions: 20,000 zloty, then 500 sacks of flour, 100sacks of sugar, 12,000 eggs and 300 kg. of butter. The next con-tribution was 25,000 zloty and the one after that 35,000. How-ever, Naphtali Lau, who carried the sack of money of the firstcontribution for his father. Rabbi Lau, the morning after YomKippur, to Drexel in his office in the courthouse, recalls thatthe sum was 25,000 zloty. Drexel shouted that he had demanded25,000 marks (50,000 zloty), but the rabbi explained to himthat he had understood zloty. He also told him that the citywas empty and that it had hardly been possible to collect thissum, which had been gathered during the appeal before “KolNidrei”. Drexel ordered the money to be poured out on hisdesk, and when he saw the high amount of small change, hedidn’t even count it. He opened a drawer of his desk, andslid the money into it, throwing the empty sack into NaphtaliLau’s hands.35 Obwieszczenie Gminy Wyznaniowei Zyd do wszystkich wytwo-cow i sprzedawcow towarow' tekstylnych, skory, towarowskorzanych szewcow itp. 29.10.39, Ringelblum Archive, No.I, 340.’5 Greenbaum, op. cit. ; Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.37 In this announcement, the Jewish Council referred to the Go-vernor-General’s order of 24.1.40 and to the local “Ordnungs-blatt” No. 3, 1940.38 Files of the U. S. (Jewish Social Walfare) No. T/278 in theArchive of the Jewish Historical Institute in Warsaw, Manu-script of Ringelblum Archive No. 1197; Tenenbaum, op. cit.;Kurtz, op. cit. ; Greenbaum, op. cit.39 Ringelblum Archive, No. 1199 1/340. Comp. Tenenbaum, op. cit40 Kurtz, op. cit. ; Greenbaum, op. cit. ; Tenenbaum, op. cit. ;A. Winter, “Destruction of Piotrkow”.41 Yad Vashem Archive, Acts of “Oberbafehlshaber (Commanderin-chief) Ost”.42 Kurtz, op. cit. ; Greenbaum, op. cit.43 Migus, op. cit.: A. Rutlowski, 'Hitler s Labor Camps in theRadom District” ; Bulletin of the Jewish Historical Inst. (Po-lish), No. 17-18, January—June 1956, p. 108.44 Kurtz, op. cit.45 Decree of City Commissar Drexel of December 1, 1939, Manu-script of Ringelblum Archive, No. 1,199; Huberband, op. cit.;Kurtz, op. cit.46 Protocol of March 11, 1940, signed by the “Selbstschutz-Reichsfuehrer” (his signature is illegible; his S. S. rank is“Hauptstrumfuehrer”), Archive of the Jewish Historical Inst.,J. S. Files, T 278.47 Order of Drexel, sec above ; also Huberband, op. cit. ; Kurtz,op. cit.48 Ben-Giladi, op. cit. ; S. Poznanski, testimony, Yad VashemArchive ; comp, also Report of the Congregation, op. cit.49 Anounceraent of the Jewish Council of the Community, March15, 1940.50 “Gazeta Zydowska” No. 19 (24.9.40) ; Zvi Diamond, testimony,5152535455565758596061626364656667686970717273747576Yad Vashem Archiw, Munich Collection, No. 2175/1947. In histestimony (Destruction Archive of IWO), Joseph Ftecmanstates that he was deported with a grcMip of 500 young menfrom Piotrkow to Belzetz. CYmip. also Ycchiel Kotkowski.Underground Work in Piotrkow” ; Ben-Giladi, op. cit. ; Reportof the Congregation, op. cit. ; Kurtz estimated the numberdeptirted to the Lublin camps at 800, Winter at 700, but thealxivc tnentioned exchange of letters from Piotrkow (printedin the official Jewish organ of Occupied Poland, of September24, 1940) speaks of 900 prisoners. See also Kutkowski, op. cit.,p. 112 ; sec also observations of Naphtali Lau.Winter, op. cit.Rutkowski, op. cit.Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.Rutkowski, op. cit.Ben-Giladi, op. cit. ; Kotkowski, op. cit. ; Zelman, op. cit. ;Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.Files of the J. S., op cit. ; Hulserband, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.Migus, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit. ; Greenbaum, op. cit. ; Zelman,op. cit,"Cjii/.eta Zydowska ", No. 3 (30.7.40). Census of the JewishSocial SelfHelp of May 1942. 7'hc rcjxirt of this census notonly minimized the actual number of inhabitants during theoccupation but also the Jewish prewar {xipulution. Aa^irdingto the report, the Jewish pre war population consisted of only10,240 persons, while in actuality they were 30% of the totalpopulation of 50,000. liven the “Gazeta Zydowska”, which alaokept quiet about the actual mimliei of inhabitants in theghetto, gave the population figures us 11,217 on September 1,1939. M Greenstein (in his testimony) estimated the |x)pulationat 25,000 in 1942 ; Blachman at 30,0(K).'Gazeta Zydowska”, op. cit. ; also No. 7 {14.8.40) ; Dr, Tenen-baum, op. cit. Blachman, op. cit. ; Za'lman, op, cit.(iensus of the Jewish Social Self Hel|>, op cit. ; Dr. Tenenbaum,op. cit.Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.Migus, op. cit. ; Blachman, op. cit.“(jazeta Zydowska”, No. 7 (14.8.40) ; No. 11 (28.8,40).Rosenblum Manuscript, Ringelblum Archive, No. 1197.Dr. 'renenbaum, op, cit.; observations of Naphtali Lau.'Ciazeta Zydowska”, No. 3 ( 30.7.40).Rosenblum Manuscripts, op. cit.Report of the Congregation, op. c't. , Dr. renenbaum, op. cit. ;Ziegelman, op. cit. ; Blachman, op. cit. ; Migus, op. cit. ; J. G«-lili (Glogowski), "The Story of a Hero,” “From the DarkDays, ” “Thirteen among Many” ; Moshc Niechtchitski, Testi-mony, Yad Vashem Archive.“(iazeta Zydowska”, No. 53 (2.7.41).“Gazeta Zydowska”, No. 53 (2.7.41).Files of ]. S. No. 278 (Archive of the Jewish Historical Tn«t.in Warsaw) ; “Gazx-ta Zydowska”. No. 10 (24.8,40) and No. 44(3.6.41 ) ; comp. Kurtz, op. cit.Letter from J. Maltz to Yad Vashem of Dec. 29, 1947, con-cerning Gieski.“Gazeta Zydowska”, No 3 (30,7.40); Migus. op. at,; Dr.raum, op. cit, - •xnsus of May 1942 ; (ireenbaum, op. cit. ; Stashcwski,t • On April 1. 1942. seventeen typhus case* wered It is undcrsttKxj that in addition, there were manymreported cases (J.S. C-ensus. op. cit.) According to the<,f ,hc Omgregation. 80% of the typhus ca*c. died,a Zydowska” No. 19 (24.9.40) ; Migus, op. cit. ; KurtzZiegelman. op. cit. The Disinfection I3etail included\/ I wmrwtl IKurtz, op, cit.33777 “Gazeta Zydowska” No. 11 (28.8.40), Census of J. S. of May1942 ; Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Greenbaum, op. cit.; It ischaracteristic that, before the “Aussiedlung” (deportation todeath camps) of the ghetto’s population, the inscription on theJewish Hospital, “Donated by Mr. and Mrs. Marcus Braun”was removed.78 Kurtz, op. cit.; Migus, op. cit.; Hela (Hannah) Ginsburg-Stashewski, Testimony, Yad Vashem archive.79 Zeev Blachman, “A Rare Thing”. During the April 1942“Action” in Belchatow, Bogdanski tried to escape with hisfamily in order to avoid fulfilling the orders of the Gestapo.Unfortunately, he was captured together with his wife and herwhole family, brought to the Radogoszcz Prison, and all ofthem were put to death there.80 M. Migus, “The First Arrest” ; Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.;Greenbaum, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.; Report of the Congrega-tion, op. cit.; see also Poznanski, op. cit.; Yitzhak Samsonowitzand Leon Kimmelman managed to avoid arrest by fleeing toWarsaw, while Abraham Weiser and Yankel escaped to Tchen-stochow, as did David and Hershel Nissenholz. S. A. Ziegelman,“The Arrest of the Piotrkow Judenrat”.81 Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Ziegelman, op. cit. It is quite true thatWarshawski felt an obligation to the wives of the JewishCouncil members who had been put to death in Ausschwitz(comp, the chapters, “The Final Extermination”, “Actions”and “Aussiedlungen”).82 Kurtz, op. cit,83 Migus, op. cit.; Poznanski, op. cit.84 Census of J. S. of May 1942, op. cit.; Tushiner, op. cit.; Dr.Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; A. Rutlowski, “Martyrology, Battle andDoom of the Jewish Population in the Radom District”, Bul-letin (Polish) of the Jewish Historical Inst., No. 15-16, July—December, 1955, pp. 84-85.85 Kurtz, op. cit.86 Rutlowski, op. cit.87 Kurtz, op. cit.88 Report of the Congregation, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.89 Z. W. Blachman, “The Resistance of the 42 in Rakow” ; Migus,op. cit. ; Moshe Zelman, Testimony.90 Migus, op. cit. ; Kotkowski, op. cit ; statement of YehezkielShidlowski ; Zelman, op. cit.91 Zelman, op. cit.; Paula Arluck, “Historical Questionnaire”,Yad Vashem Archive, Munich Collection ; David Rosenstein,Testimony, Destruction Archive of IWO, reports that Kleterpersonally shot a large number of Jews.92 Dr, Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.93 Kurtz, op. cit.94 Statements of Yehezkiel Shidlowski, Moshe Horowitz andFishel Neuberg.95 Galili (Glogowski), op. ch.; Shraga Poznanski, Memoirs, YadVashem Archive ; comp. Arluck, op. cit. ; and observations ofZeev Blachman.96 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.; Galili (Glogowski), op. cit.; Blach-man, op. cit. ; Niechtzitski, op. cit.11. EXTERMINATION^AUSSIEDLUNG” and “ACTIONS”)The first news about the systematic annihilation ofJewish areas of settlement reached the ghetto in the springof 1942 by way of the refugees who had escaped theLublin and Sieradz “Actions”, Although the Lublin re-fugees did not known how much of the Jewish populationof their city had been exterminated (they only broughtwith them a little information about the liquidation of theLublin ghetto and about the concentration of members ofthe working classes in Maidanek) the refugees from Sieradzand other places which had been incorporated into theReich (like Kladowa) brought exact details of the masskillings in Chelmno,^ While the “Aussiedlung” Actionswere taking place in Lublin, Krakow, Lwow, Tarnow andWarsaw, the inhabitants of the Piotrkow ghetto streamed,en masse, to the Community building to get informationabout the fate of the victims of the “liquidation”.^The telephone of the Piotrkow Community was con-stantly in contact with Warsaw, particularly during the“Action” there (July 22 to September 13, 1942). Duringthe course of this long “Action”, a great unrest seized thePiotrkow Jews as they gradually became aware of thetragic truth about Treblinka, The sudden “Action” inRadom, capital city of the district, on August 15, 1942,also created great panicSome of the people continued to live under the il-lusion that what had happened in Warsaw and other citieswould not happen in PiotrkowThe Jewish Council, how-ever, had information from reliable private sources thatthe Gestapo was preparing a list of the Jewish populationfor special purposes,^ The Council made efforts to providemore work by creating new workshops, including the set-ting up of a large clothing workshop, close to the borderof the ghetto, which made various articles of clothing forthe Germans,Carpentry workshops were set up as well as a linenfactory (260 men and women worked at 53 sewingmachines), a hosiery workshop, a fur workshop (the onlyone for which the Germans supplied the materials) anda shoe factory. The Community began an earnest hunt forwork orders from the Germans in the belief that thepeople might be protected from an “Aussiedlung” by be-coming a working ghetto, like Lodz,The shops tried to employ mainly women, as it wasdeemed more suitable for the men to work in Germanwork places. In point of fact, it was mainly those whohad good connections with the community heads whoreceived work in the shops, while the really skilled workerswere not employed,^ The number of positions in the BugajHortensia and Kara factories was limited.^The Gestapo began its preparations for the “Aussied-lung” at the beginning of September 1942, with the crea-tion of a small ghetto. The block of houses beginning withStaro-Warshawska and Garntsarska Streets was fenced inwith barbed wire.® Reder’s house at Jerozolimska 12 wasdesignated for the use of the Jewish Council, the sanitarypolice and the Jewish police force. All the other workingpeople were assigned 12 houses on the right side of Staro-Warshawska (numbers 3—25).’ It was rumored that only3,000 “productive” Jews would remain on this street, outof a total of 25,000 Jews.’® During the days precedingRosh Hashana, the Germans began to fence in, withbarbed wire IVz meters high, the so-called “small ghetto338block”. This was actually a square, its east side boundedby Jerozolimska, its west side by the Fary Church, its southside by Garntsarska Street and its north by Staro-War-shawska. The only exits remaining from the ghetto werefrom the Fary Church and Jerozolimska."During the Holy Days of 1942, a deep depressioncame over the inhabitants of the ghetto. All the housesof worship were overflowing as Jews prayed for the des-truction of the evil nation. The news that the Tchensto-chow ghetto had been surrounded by an “ExterminationCommando” and that an “Action” had started there,reached Piotrkow at the end of Yom Kippur and deeplyshocked the Jews. Not long afterwards, a number of youngmen from Tchenstochow, who had escaped from Treblinka,arrived in Piotrkow (they were naturally very careful thatthe Gestapo should know nothing of their existence).An eye-witness relates that the Jews of Piotrkowforesaw the coming destruction clearly. They had to beginpreparing ways of meeting the calamity, the older genera-tion by repentence and prayer, and some of the others byescaping to the “Aryan” side or by building bunkers."People sold everything possible. Many Christians gladlytook away Jewish goods, “to hide” or as gifts. The maindesire was for food articles." A number of girls arrangedweddings with Jewish policemen in order to save them-selves from the “Aussiedlung”. For parents who could notensure their children against the coming calamity, theirdespair and helplessness was overwhelming. An eye-witnesswrites, “I first experienced the unbelievable power of loveof parents for their children in the ghetto during thosedays.”All the Jews from the neighboring cities and villages,Gorshkowitz, Suleyow, Rosprza, Wola Krzysztoporska,Srotsk, Wolborz and others, were driven into the Piotrkowghetto on the eve of the “Action”." Thus, the ghetto con-tained about 25,000 Jews.As the date of the “Action” approached, the tensiongrew from day to day, especially with the arrival of Jewswho had escaped the “Aussiedlung” in Radom. The situ-ation became hopeless, and the depressed and apatheticJews simply didn’t have the power to organize any meansof self-defence.This situation had been created by the refined tacticsof the Germans in preparing for the “Action , based onthe idea that after the victims had been ‘ prepared overa long period of time, by hunger, terror, demoralizationand complete isolation from the outside world, they wouldlet the Germans do whatever they wished with them,without resistance. Nevertheless, the Jews of Piotrkowsought means to avoid the destruction, at least by passiveresistance.Certain people hid themselves in the hospital and evenunderwent operations there, in the hope that they wouldsurvive the “Action” in this way. However, during the“Action”, the Germans did not spare these Jews. Theywere taken out of their beds to the “Samclplatz” (gather-ing place for those to be deported) or else were shotinstantly. Sick people who could not rise from their bedswere generally shot on the spot during the course of the“Action”.The first Ukranians and “Shaulisis” (sliarpshootcrs),who claimed victims even before the start of the "Action”,appeared in Piotrkow. A shoemaker at the corner of Jero-zolimska and Staro-Warshawska was robbed of his goodsby a Ukranian and then shot by him."In the second week of October, they started to putthe workers of Bugaj and of the city into barracks." Twodays before the "Action”, a living area was prepared inths Hortensia factory for the workers who were lockedin there. Heartbreaking farewell scenes took plac'c in theevening among the families of the 600 workers of theHortensia and Kara factories." Dietrich and Fischer, theowners of Bugaj, promised to take care of and protect thewives or children of the Jewish workers, but these wivesand children were deported during the “Action”."The tension reached its climax on October 1 )th. Onthe night of October 13 14, 1942, ( 3rd Marcheshvnn,5703), the tragic news was spread that the “Action” wasto begin on the following day. At 2:00 a. m., the Ukran-ians, together with the “navy-hlue” police, surrounded theghetto. In those critical hours, a number of people com-mitted suicide ; for instance. Ash, a refugee from Lodz,hanged himself. Dr. Leon Clatter tried to kill himself bygiving himself a morphine injection, but he was saved ;likewise, Mr. and Mrs. Adam Shpielfogcl, property-ownersfrom Wola Krzysztoporska, tried to poison themselves withluminal, but did not succeed and were attached to the“transport” the next day. The sought-after iwison, cyanide,was not to be found in the ghetto, since so many peoplewanted it. Many of the Jews hid thcm.sclvc8 in thebunkers.In the dark hours before dawn, the first shots wereheard in the ghetto, which was surrounded by the S, S.and the police. The Jewish police were ordered, early inthe morning, to drive everyone out of their houses forthe roll-call in the gathering place. No one was allowed toremain at home. Bands uf Ukranians patrolled the ghettoand drove everyone out to the selection area on Jerozo-limska, opposite the Jewish hospital, where the remainsof the Franciscan barracks, which had been burnt down in1939 during the war, still were left.The first victims were taken from the block of streetsbetween Garntsarska and Staro-Warshawska. The Jewishpolice, under the command of the lawyer, S. Zilbcrstcin,participated in the “Action”, accompanying the deporteesto the place of assembly." Those assembled on the squarewere arranged in four rows : workers, craftsmen, officials,doctors, etc. The men in charge of the “Action”, amongthem Burgermeister Buss, stood in the middle of theThe Gestapo divided the people into two columns. The339right column was led into the “block”, there to wait fora future selection (these were mainly workers in Germanfirms who carried “good” worker-cards stamped with aswastika), while the left column was destined for thetdeportation to Treblinka. Thus, many families were brokenup: children were torn away from their mothers and wivesfrom their husbands. The cries and screams of the child-ren were silenced by the Germans with a kick from theirboots or blows from their whips. Often, parents or childrenwho were qualified for the “right” column went over tothe other group in order to go to their deaths togetherwith their families. The children from the orphanage at27, Pilsudski Street, were deported together with theorphanage staff. Four Jewish women who had just givenbirth at the Holy Ghost Hospital were deported, togetherwith their new-born infants.^The Ukranians walked between the rows of assembledJews, emptying their pockets of everything they found,in the presence of the Gestapo.^* The “Action” lasted eightdays and was completed on Wednesday, October 21st.^Five thousand Jews were deported to Treblinka every otherday, squeezed into fully packed freight-cars, 150 people ineach.^ Before the Jews entered the cars, they were orderedto remove their good clothing and shoes by the Germans.^'*“The deportation was managed,” writes Jacob Kurtz,“like a wood transport and not like the transport of humanbeings. On one day the load was prepared, and on thenext the cars were loaded and the train sent away.”From Suleyow and Przyglow, the people were drivendirectly into the freight-cars. Old, sick or weakened peoplewere shot on the spot and dead bodies were spread outover the whole route.^ In all, over 20,000 Jews weredeported, including many from other places. About 1,000Jews were shot during the deportation, most of them theold or sick.The first three transports consisted of Jews who hadno special work-cards. When people were lacking to com-plete the quota for the last transport of Marcheshvan, theowners of the “best” cards were taken from the block,among them members of the Jewish Council (except,understandably, the chairman and his aides, Feiner, Teitel-baum, Braude and others). Rabbi Moshe Chaim Lau, JudgeBorenstein and many others were also deported on the lasttrain.^Rabbi Lau, the last rabbi in Piotrkow, gave a fierysermon just before he was deported, on “Kiddush Ha-shem”, the sanctification of the Holy Name (religiousmartyrdom of Jews). A witness of the scene later relatedthat he spoke with as much pathos and enthusiasm as heused to do in the good old days, from the pulpit of thesynagogue. “Better a living death than a dead life,” saidthe Rabbi, “and every one who is killed as a Jew isa saint.” He called upon the Jews “to fulfill the will ofGod with joy.” He succeeded in raising their spirits andexhalting them, although each of them knew that thesewere the last hours of hisRabbi Lau, former rabbi of Preshow in Slovakia, re-fused to acquiesce to the wishes of his students and friendsto go to Preshow where they had made arrangements forhim, before the “Action”, as he did not want to abandonhis congregation.One act of passive resistance is worth mentioninghere. During the “Action”, the old religious baker, Ye-huda Leib Russak (the Kalisher baker) was lying in bed,wrapped in tallis and tefillim, when the Ukranians enteredhis apartment on October 20th and ordered him to go tothe selection area. He answered them that he would notleave his paralyzed wife, and both were immediatelyshot.^*^^The 900 workers of Bugaj were kept hidden in thefactory shelter under very difficult conditions during the“Action”. On a certain day, a selection was made in thebig hall of the factory, in the presence of the Gestapo.Dietrich, one of the partners, carried out the selectionhimself. Those selected for the left side were sent, togetherwith the other deportees, to Treblinka.^^Even the Jewish workers in the glass factories exper-ienced deadly terror during the “Action”. Rumors werespread, at first, that the Gestapo was going to allow 500workers to remain out of the 983 presently employed in_the two factories. These rumors remained unconfirmed.However, a demand was made to deliver 83 workers. Thefactory management succeeded in reducing the number to33, most of them young men, who were delivered intothe hands of the murderers.The Jewish workers in the factories saw for them-selves the destruction created in the ghetto during the8-day “Action”. The second and third trains passed veryclose to the glass factories at noon. The Jewish workerswaited for the transports, and as the trains moved slowlyby, heartbreaking scenes took place. The screams andtears even touched the hearts of the Christian spectators,who shed tears. The fourth transport passed in the evening,during a heavy rain ; however, the Jewish workers waitedfor the train. Nothing could be seen, but horrible screamswere heard. Many farewell letters were thrown from thefreight cars, and were collected by Christian children whodelivered them to the Jewish workers.After the end of the “Action”, about 2,000 “legal”Jews remained in Piotrkow (among them a large numberwho had escaped or been expelled frdm other towns andvillages) who were working in German factories, as wellas policemen and community officials, together with theirfamilies. There were also some privileged workers whowere employed by the “Befehlstelle” (German EconomicManagement). Many Jews were employed, under the super-vision of the police, emptying all the Jewish houses outsidethe block and sorting the confiscated goods prior to ship-ping them to Germany.340To the number of “legals” remaining must be addedall those who had hidden themselves away before the de-portations. After the “Action”, the “legals” were jammedinto the block. Posts were set up with barbed wire onthem, encompassing the whole block which was guardedby the Ukranians. Traffic within the block took place, notthrough the streets, but through holes in the walls betweenthe yards.Ukranian policemen visited the block during the firstnights and, at gun-point, robbed money and valuables fromthe Jews. The inhabitants of the fenced block were takendaily, under police supervision, to the work places near the“Ost Bahnhof”, to Hortensia, Kara and Phoenix glass fac-tories, to the Bugaj workshops and to the “Samelstelle”(collection place) where the remaining possessions andbelongings of the deported Jews were gathered.^®Besides those employed in the factories and work-shops, the small ghetto also contained non-employed “il-legals” who came out of their hiding places after the“Action”, as well as others who returned from the Polishside because they couldn’t adjust themselves there.^’ These“illegals”, most of them young men, would steal into theblock during the night and were often shot while tryingto go through the barbed wire. Within a short time, thenumber of inhabitants of the block grew to 4,000. TheGerman authorities got wind of it and ordered that notmore than 2,,000 workers were to be allowed in the block.Not long after the great “Action”, a children’s “Ac-tion” took place. The Gestapo ordered all the children inthe block to be given over. When Mrs. Markowitz refusedto give up her nursing baby, the assassins cut off herbreast and took her away, together with her baby. Afterthis “Action”, only a few well-hidden children wereleft.""Each survivor in the ghetto was like a limb withouta body. One had lost his parents, another his wife andchildren and yet another his brothers and sisters. Housingconditions were terrible, with about 20 persons in eachroom in the block The collaborators among the Jewscontinued their dirty work of finding hidden persons, bring-ing them into the cellar of the Jewish Police and thengathering them into the synagogue.^^ In this m nner, 150“illegals” were one day assembled, sent to TomashowMazowietski and from there transported to Treblinka.^^Hundreds of people suffered this fate, among them Emma-nuel Steinberg who was found together with 12 otherpersons in their place of concealment.^A series of “Actions” against the “illegals” tookplace in November-December 1942. They were gatheredinto the empty synagogue in large groups and brought tothe Rakow forest where they were executed. On 11 Kislev5703, a group of 100, most of them elderly people, whohad been found during the course of the previous fewweeks, were taken out to the forest and shot. The youngerpeople in this group, among them the Rabbi of Radoshitzand his family, had been taken out of the synagogue beforethe execution and brought to the block.” Those sentencedto death were severely oppressed during their stay in thesynagogue. The Nazis amused themselves at the expenseof the victims by shooting at them through the windows.**In November 25th. Simon Warshawski appealed, bymeans of posters, to all the “illegals” to come out andregister in order to become legalized. In re.sponse to theappeal, most of those hidden in the bunkers left them andregistered, but on November 30th, an “Action” was begunagainst all the newly-registered “illegals” (the so-calledDecember “Action”), who were arrested at the gatheringplace on the Judengasse and brought to the synagogue.The first night was horrible. The Ukranians sur-rounded the building and shot into the synagogue. Amongthe wounded were the wife and child of Mordcchai HershBrauner who were shot in front of the synagogue the nextmorning. New-born babies were burnt in front of the syna-gogue. An eye-witness, Richard Chentzinski, later describedthe macabre spectacle. A group of Ukranians, headed byOberleutnant Lukner, took eight children out of the syna-gogue and burnt them in basins on a bonfire in front ofthe synagogue.’’ The shooting and rohlx;ry lasted for a fewdays.”Conditions in the synagogue were terrible. The jxjoplcwere crowded together, without light, without food andwithout water, and the crying of childrcti and old |>coplefilled the air. They had to relieve themselves whereverthey happened to be."'Only a few individuals were taken out of the syna-gogue. At first, skilled workers .such as carficntcrs, watch-makers, etc. were released. Later on, others were releasedon the basis of lists supplied by the managers of factoriesand workshops. Actually, a barter was taking place withthose held in the synagogue. People were released in ex-change for others, who couldn’t afford to ransom them-selves.'*® There were, on the other hand, instances ofheroism and sacrifice. For instance, Yeshayahu and TovaWeinstock gave them.sclves up and entered the synagogueto change places with their children and thus save theirlives at the price of their own. Mrs. Moshc Nicchtzitskirefused to be ransomed because she did not want to leaveher three children behind and she finally remained in thesynagogue with them.^'Some people tried to escape from the synagogue. Thedaughter of Benjamin Liebeskind was the first to make theattempt. She jumped out of a window, fell into the handsof the Ukranians and was shot. The brother-in-law of BelaGreenblatt-Geliebter managed to get out of a second storywindow and stole into the ghetto. There, he took out alarge sum of money which he had hidden previously, andsucceeded in ransoming his wife and child with it.^* Mrs.Regina Silver, who had succeeded in jumping out of asecond story window and escaping to the block, was dis-covered, however, and brought back to the synagogue,341Moshe Wohlreich, who had previously escaped from Treb-linka, could not escape his fate. He was discovered hidingin the block and was handed over to the GermansOn Saturday, December 19th, at 9:30 a. m., 42 men,including Hersh Gomulinski who had still managed tosurvive, were taken out of the synagogue, and led alongthe Wolborz road. The Gestapo was waiting for them therewith a truck and tools. They were given spades and shovels,led into the Rakow forest and ordered to dig five longditches. The Jews, who worked under the strict sur-veillance of S. S. men William and Pudel, had decided thatif the Nazis tried to shoot them, they would kill them andrun away. At 3:30, an enforcement of Germans and Uk-ranians, led by Oberleutnant Lukner, arrived on the spot.The Jews refused to obey the command to take off theirclothes. Some of them attacked the enemy and a few ofthem managed to escape. All the rest were shot.^That night, the Jews in the synagogue were takenout in groups of 50 and led to the Rakow forest. As theyleft the synagogue (where the people already knew aboutthe newly-dug graves), some of them tried to escape. TheGermans opened fire and many were killed and left lyingnear the synagogue. The Jews marched to Rakow throughthe darkness, weeping, reciting psalms and saying the“Shema Israel” as they went to their own funerals.*^ 560Jews were shot in the Rakow forest that night Thosewho were only wounded were buried, together with thedead, in the mass graves. A tale is told of a certain “Sa-neh”, a former abattoir worker, who pulled himself outfrom among the corpses and, half-naked (before they wereshot, everyone had to strip naked), reached the home ofa pre-war acquaintance of his, the dog-catcher (“Hitzel”),who was a “Volks Deutsch”. This dog-catcher, notwith-standing his previous friendship, gave him over to theGermans. (After the liberation of Piotrkow, the dog-catcherwas brought to trial.)There were other instances of people who managedto get out of the mass graves. The Piotrkow historian,Thaddeus Nowakowski, relates that after one of these massexecutions in the Rakow forest, one Jew managed to crawlout from under the mountain of corpses and ran wildlythrough the streets, bloody and half-naked. When hereached the neighbourhood of the hospital, he was caughtby the gendarmes who shot him on the spot. These werenot the only such cases.The Germans prepared the Purim 1943 “Action”,which was directed against the “intelligentsia”, with a bar-rage of lies and propaganda. A truck full of gendarmesapproached the ghetto. Rumors were spread that theycame in order to “exchange” Jews for German citizenswho lived abroad or in Sharona (Palestine). This hadhappened to Jacob Kurtz and to Rosenthal who had beenexchanged in October 1942 and permitted to leave forPalestine. They stressed that, for the time being, only aquota of 10 people, who must be holders of universitydiplomas, would be permitted to go to Palestine.On that day, there was an unusually great amount ofmovement in the ghetto. The yard of Reder’s house atJerozolimska 12, where the Jewish Council was located,was full of noise and bustle.'*^ Those chosen, among themthe lawyer. Dr. Stanislaw Zilberstein (the police comman-der), and his wife, were told to pack and to wait in theyard at a certain time.'’® They were to be brought firstto Radom. At the fixed time, they were met by the com-mander of the defense police, Oberleutnant Muschala, witha car. They were driven around the city a few times andwhen night fell, they were brought to the Jewish cemeterywhere a deep grave had been dug.^®S. S. officers and gendarmes armed with machine gunsstood at the prepared grave, as did the official Polish repre-sentatives of Piotrkow and the district. After listening tothe Nazi “speeches”, they all began to enjoy themselves and to get drunk. The Jews were ordered to removetheir clothing. Mr. and Mrs. Zilberstein, were the firstto be shot.®° At the same time Dr. Maurice Brahms andhis wife, his 16-year old daughter and his sister-in-law, Mrs.Kogan (widow of Benzion) were killed, as well as theyoung lawyer, Simon Stein and his mother, and Dr. LeonGlatter, the psychiatrist.®’ The Jewish watchman of thecemetery and his wife were also included in the brutalblood-shed in order to complete the “minyan” of tenvictims who were to symbolically redeem the shame of the“Asseret Bnei Haman” (the 10 sons of Haman who werehanged).®^ Similar bloody spectacles were carried out onthe same day, Purim 5703, in other ghettos, in particular,Tschenstochow and Radom.Not long after the Purim slaughter came anotherbloody execution which claimed dozens of victims. Theauthorities had been informed that a group of Jews ofthe block had succeeded in obtaining “Aryan” documentsin preparation for escaping from the ghetto. As a resultof this denunciation, the second mass execution (after thePurim “Action”) took place in the cemetery on April 21,1943.®®The policy of the Nazi authorities, at that time, was tocollect all the remaining selected Jews in occupied ter-ritories into S. S. concentration camps. The small ghettoof Piotrkow was therefore doomed to liquidation.At the beginning of February 1943, 250 people weredeported to the ammunition factory in Skarzysko-Kamienna,which the German firm “Hassag” (Hugo Schneider Ak-tions Gesellschaft) had enlarged. The first transport arrivedon February 10th (5th of Adar I). A month later, 250women were brought as well as a few men (among them,the Rabbi of Radoshitz and his family). The situation of thedeportees was very difficult because, in the course of themany searches to which they were subjected, every worth-while object they possessed had been taken away fromthem. The factory consisted of three sections : section A,the main “Werke”; section B, where the labor conditions342were most difficult ; and section C, whose workers werethe most unfortunate for they worked with Tratil and Pic-rin, materials which colored their skins yellow and des-troyed their internal organs. In the course of time, thesedeportees succeeded in making contact with others fromPiotrkow, with the help of PolesDuring the final liquidation of the small ghetto, theremainder of the selected Jews were divided into threegroups. The first group was sent to various concentrationcamps : Blizin (which produced uniforms for the Germanarmy, and whose inmates suffered from hunger andtyphus), Pionki, Ostrowitz, Starachowitze and Radom. Thesecond group went to the Kara-Hortensia work camp whereseveral hundred workers, including a few dozen women,were interned. The third group (about 1,000 workers)were interned on the Bugaj in the “Holzewerke Di-Fi”(plywood factory) under uncomfortable conditions. Afterthe liquidation, a small group of workers were sent tothe Bugaj, while some of those who remained outside theabove work camps were killed by the Schutz police whohad jurisdiction over them. These “Schutz police” mur-dered dozens of children, whose parents had been sent toBlizin, with hand grenades, in a sadistic and barbaricmannerThe fate of the children who had joined their parentsat Blizin in the first group in June 1943 was no better. InNovember 1943, they were the victims of a special child-ren’s “Action” at that camp. Mordechai Kaminski, theformer sanitary policeman, committed suicide after his twochildren were taken away from him.^On July 1943, Piotrkow was declared “Judenrein”(free of Jews). After the final liquidation of the ghetto,a sign was put up on the railway station reading Petrikauist Judenrein” (Piotrkow is clean of Jews).The greatest number of survivors of Piotrkow wereconcentrated in the “Petrikauer Holzwerke Dietrich undFischer” (on the Bugaj), where Warshawski worked. Alarge number of skilled workers and their assistants workedin the mechanical joinery. Housing conditions were worsethan in the glass factories, but working conditions werebetter. The directors of the firm were interested in keep-ing their factory going in order to avoid active army serviceat the front, so their efforts at productivity and their at-tempts to publicize the importance of their work can wellbe understood. The Jewish workers, however, suffered agreat deal, and despite the big bribes they gave, the direc-tors used to beat them. Fischer’s dog, Ips, often attackedand bit the Jews, while Dietrich once ordered 13 workersshot for coming late to their work shift. These workerswere executed on the factory grounds on Decembei 2,1942, by two gendarmes.The workers in the glass factories (720 Jews, includinga few dozen women and children) were accommodated,after the liquidation of the small ghetto, in a four-storyhouse, plus a few barracks, on the left side of Kara. Thishouse and the barracks were fenced with a high hedgeand with barbed wire. The so-called “Werkeschutz” (work-watch) supervised the block, where ten or more peoplelived in each room. There was about a 300-mctcr walkfrom the block to Kara, and it was a little further to Hor-tensia. Some of the factory managers tried to suck thelast bit of strength from the Jews by giving them the mostexhausting work to do. The Volksdeutsche, Herford, wasone of the most intolerable. Even in 1944. when other,smarter, Germans were improving their behavior towardsthe Jews, he continued to be as oppressive as ever. Thehead Jew in the block was Solomon Gomberg of Lodz. APole, Kutchamer, was director of Hortensia, and he lethimself be influenced to act for the good of the workingJews.“ In September 1941, a transjx>rt of 150 men fromKara was sent to Pionki.*’As the Soviet Army approached the Vistula followingits great summer offensive, a few of the camps in occupiedPoland were liquidated. In July or August of 1944, theinmates of Blizin were evacuated to Ausschwitz. About3,000 people were evacuated and were soc»n afterwardsput through a “selection”. Old people and small childrenwere immediately sent to the gas chaml’jcrs. On January18, 1945, on the eve of the liberation of Ausschwitz, thecamp’s inmates were evacuated to Matthausen and Guzen ;Guzen was liberated on May 5, 1945. Part of those inpri-soned in Birkenau-Ausschwilz were sent to the Lipstadtammunition factory.'’”The jews working in the two glass factories and theBugaj plant were transferred on November 26, 1944.'’’ Atthe Herby train station, the jews to lx: transported weredivided into two sections ; one group was sent to Tsehen-stochow and the other to the concentration camps of Ger-many. The men and boys of the second group were sentto Buchcnwald, while the women and girls went to Ravens*bruck. The group deported to Ravensbriick s|x:nl 4Vi dayson the way. They arrived at their destination on Dcccmlxir2, and the children among them were treated in aninhuman manner there.'’^ One group of women fromRavensbruck was transferred to the Bcrgcn-Bclscn exter-mination camp. On April 15. 1945. Bcrgen-Bclscn andRavensbruck were liberated, and the surviving womenwere sent, due to the intervention of C>)unt Bernadotte,to Sweden. Individual women from Piotrkow survived insome of the other camps, among them Ausschwitz.*^*Upon its arrival in Tschenstochow, the Piotrkowtransport was divided into groups which were sent toWarta (a weapon factory equipjxrd with machines tranS’ferred from Skarzysko). Rakow. Pelcery and T8chcn.sto-chowiarika. According to eye-witnesses, the conditions inthese camps were worse than in Skarszysko. The law of thejungle ruled ; the people, who were under the constantsurveillance of Kapos armed with sticks and whips, losifaith in any other means but their fists as a means ofsurvival. In December, a transport composed mainly of343Piotrkow youths was sent to Germany from Tschenstochow.This transport was sent to Buchenwald and from there tothe Dora concentration camp. The final destination of thetransport was the Nordhausen extermination camp. Thiscamp was heavily bombed on April 3rd and 4th, duringwhich 90% of the prisoners were killed. On the eve ofthe arrival of the Soviet armies, two large transports leftTschenstochow for Buchenwald (January 15th and 16th,1945). They didn’t manage to send out one small groupof workers, among them about 20 Jews from Piotrkow, sothey survived until the arrival of the Soviets on January17th.®^On their arrival in Buchenwald, the people in thetransport found conditions entirely different in this camp,where most of the inmates were political prisoners. Inter-nal management lay, for the most part, in the hands ofCommunist political prisoners under the leadership of Dr.Herzog, former deputy to Parliament. The general situationof the prisoners was therefore somewhat better Childrenand young people were in a special block and got betterfood.“ Among the many Piotrkow Jews who died of hun-ger at Buchenwald were the well-known Dr. Leon Wein-zieher, former director of the Jewish Hospital in Piotrkow(who had been on the Bugaj previously) and Reb Morde-chai Znamirowski, a renowned Talmudic scholar.^aAt that time, a “punishment column” operated amongthe prisoners at Buchenwald, headed by Jewish “Block-captain 66” Gustav. This “punishment column^’ (alsocalled the “revenge column”) carried out death sentencesagainst Jewish collaborators as well as against renegadesof other nationalities. As soon as the Piotrkow contingentarrived in Buchenwald, they were asked by the “punish-ment court” to name those among them who had behavedbadly. Those named were tried ; the death sentence wascarried out against two brothers, Eliahu and AbrahamRosenberg of Sulejow, members of the Jewish Police.^’Only a few Piotrkow Jews who had been transportedto Buchenwald in November were still there on January15th and 16th, when the second group from Piotrkowarrived. Most of them had been sent to Schlieben andPlassberg, to th^ Panzer tank factories. On the 21st ofApril, the inmates of these camps were brought, under themost horrible conditions, to Theresienstadt. Most of themdied on the way, though a few managed to break openthe doors of the freight cars and run away.“ Many peopleof the January transport were sent to the Dora camp whoseadministrators had been recruited from among knownsadistsBuchenwald and its branches were liberated on April11th, and a group of boys from Piotrkow were foundthere, still alive. After the war, they were sent to Franceand from there to Palestine. The Theresienstadt camp wasliberated on May 8th, and there, too, were found someboys from Piotrkow, who had formerly been evacuatedfrom Buchenwald. They were sent to England after theliberation.The greatest number of Piotrkow Jews who survivedthe holacaust were in Bergen-Belsen. Survivors from othercamps came there later.’® After the liberation, about ahundred Jews who had remained hidden gathered togetherin Piotrkow. The liberation, unfortunately, did not put anend to the lawless taking of Jewish lives. One evening,three Jews, Miss Usherowitz, Mrs. Rolnik and a youngman named Maltz were shot to death by Poles. This hap-pened on the same day that Miss Usherowitz had sold herfather’s house for a substantial sum (about 600 zloty).’*A short time after the capitulation of Germany, someof the Jewish survivors from the German camps returnedto Piotrkow. Only a very few returned to their destroyedhomes ; the remainder stayed in German D. P. camps,waiting for the possibility of emigrating to Palestine or toother countries. A group of Piotrkow Jews from the Fehren-wald camp went to Palestine with Aliya B. In 1946, therewere about 400 Piotrkow Jews in the D. P. camps. Up tothe end of that year, about 600 Jews had registered withthe Jewish Committee in Piotrkow, many of them fromother places. Most of the survivors did not remain, butemigrated out of Poland. In December 1948, only 150Jews remained in Piotrkow, most of them physically andmentally broken.”★The destruction of the Jewish community of Piotrkowwas almost complete. One of the oldest Jewish communi-ties in Poland had been destroyed. The small Jewishvillages in the surrounding areas were also demolished,together with Jewish lives, synagogues, Batei Midrash andeven the cemeteries. The great synagogue of Piotrkow,which had been completely renovated before the war bythe painter Willenberg, and the Beit Hamidrash were inruins, lacking floors, doors or windows. The cemetery wasalso completely demolished. The granite or marble tomb-stones had been destroyed, a few thousand others had beenbroken up and used to repair roads, while a few hundredhad previously been removed from the graves so that theGermans were unable to take them away.Hand in hand with the physical destruction of theJews went, almost in every case, the destruction of theirhomes, with the exception of houses which could be usedby the Aryans.’^Except for the cemetery where there are some 18thcentury tombstones, and the great fortress-like synagoguewhich had been erected in 1791 and which was renovatedafter the war by the handful of Jews who were still inPiotrkow, there are no other signs of this historical andfamous Jewish community.’^344SOURCES1 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.2 M. Greenstein, Testimony, Yad Vashem Archive. G)mp. Blach-man, op. cit.3 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.4 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.5 Jacob"TCurtz, Testimony.6 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Blachman, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.7 Sendowski, Hersh, “Destruction of Piotrkow Trybunalski”,Yiddishe Zeitung, No. 43/55 (25.10.46), p. 5.8 Historical Questionnaire, No. 2144/502, Yad Vashem Archive,Munich Collection. Comp. Sendowski, op. cit.9 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.10 Greenstein, Testimony, op. cit.11 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.; Kurtz, op. cit.; Greenstein, Testimony,op. cit.12 Greenstein, Testimony, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit. Those whopossessed Aryan papers travelled to Warsaw, though it wasdifficult to get out of the ghetto. Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.;neighbors built bunkers cooperatively, for instance the Niech-tzitski brothers, the inhabitants of Staro-Warshawska 13, theSieradski, Windheim, Weinrib, Vincentowski, and Weinstockfamilies, built a bunker in which about 100 people hid (MosheNiechtzitski, op. cit.). Dozens of Jews were hidden in a bunkerbehind the grocery of the Dali family (at the corner of PlatzTrybunalski and Lazienna-Mokra Street), but the bunker waslater discovered (Galili, “The Story of a Hero”). A bunker inwhich 18 persons hid, including the wife and child of IsaacBlaustein, was constructed at Staro-Warshawska 8. It wascreated between a double wall and was entered by way of theroof (Ch. Rosenblum-Blaustein, Testimony).13 Sendowski, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.14 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit. Before the “Aus-siedlung” of the Rosprza Jews to Piotrkow, about 20 familieswere expelled from Gieski to Rosprza, among them the 103-year old well-known woman farmer, Mrs. Chaya Friedel Brigel(letter of J. Maltz to Yad Vashem, December 29, 1957).15 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.16 Kotkowski, op. cit.17 Kurtz, op. cit.18 Winter, “Destruction of Piotrkow”.19 M. Greenstein, Testimony. G3mp. Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit. ;A. Winter, op. cit.; also Kotkowski, op. cit.; speech of MosheKimmelman, op. cit.20 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op .cit. ; comp. Ben-Giladi,op. cit. ; Sendowski, op. cit. Upon his arrival in Tel-Aviv,J. Kurtz gave testimony confirming that the “Action” washeaded by Commissar Foig who came to Piotrkow with a groupof six or seven storm-troopers especially for the purpose. Abra-ham Goldschmidt, a Jewish policeman, threw away his policehat and voluntarily entered the freight car which carried hisparents, among others, to Treblinka (Mina Hershkowitz-Wolko-witz, “Destruction of Piotrkow”, “Canada Adler” (CanadianEagle), October, 21, 1956).21 Kurtz, op. cit.22 Ben-Giladi, op. cit.23 Ibid. ; see also Esther Hipsher-Kaminska, Testimony, YadVashem Archive.24 “The Account of the Jewish Congregation in Piotrkow,” DudekLevkowitz, “A Piotrkowan in Treblinka” (Polish), Yad VashemArchive ; comp. Zelman, op. cit.25 Kurtz, op. cit. ; Joseph Freeman, testimony, op. cit. The Jewsfrom Suleyow, Przyglow and Rosprza were also sent with the3rd transport, while those from Gorshkowitz and Kaminsk weresent with the last transport (Sendowski, op. cit.).26 Abraham Tushincr estimated the number of deportee* at22,000, Greenbaum at 17,000 and S. Pudbwski at 24.000. Themost reliable figures, hoMTver, seem to be those of Kurtt whowrites that 20,000 Jeu^s were driven out in the four transports.In his testimony (op. cit.), Kurtz estimated the total numberof deportees at more than 22,000 Jews (Yad Vashem Atehivc,Joseph Pcrclman’s Testimony).26a Greenstein, Testimony, op. cit. In the dark days before the“Action”, the shochet (ritual slaughterer). Rcb Yedid>'*, dis-played great faith and went around the ghetto encouraging thepeople (Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.).26b Greenstein, op. cit. ; Dr. Tenenbaum. op. cit. ; YchezkielRositzki, “Upon the Sanctification of the Holy Name” (Soperished the old Kalisher baker) ; "Memorial Book to our City,Piotrkow Trybunalski, and Vicinity”, contents, p. 21.27 Ben-Giladi, op. cit. ; letter of J. Galili to Yad Vashem, 22.5.58.28 Dr. M. Lublincr, Testimony ; Zelman and Blachman, op. cit.;comp. Kurtz, op. cit. ; also “Historical Questionnaires” ofS. Greenbaum, H. Biezuncr and Abraham Tushincr ; comp,also M. Migus, “The First Arrest” and Ch. Samclson, “TheRevolt Which Was not Carried out”.29 Blachman, Testimony, op. cit.30 Winter, op. cit. ; 2blman, op. cit. ; Arluck, op. cit. ; comp.S. Pudlowski, “The Fate of the Jews in Piotrkow”, “DosNeue Lebcn”, No. 14 (11.12.45). Another version says that2,000 Jews remained officially, among them 160 women andchildren, all of them in barracks or blocks.31 Ben-Giladi, op. cit.32 Kotkowski, op. cit. ; comp. Ben-Giladi, op. cit.33 Blachman, Testimony, op. cit. ; aimp. Ben-Giladi, op. cit.; Dr.Tenenbaum, op. cit. ; Dr. Shantscr and his wife (convert* toChristianity) were transported to Tomashow ; Sendowski,op. cit.34 Declaration of Israel Zigreich.35 Testimonies of Niechtzitski and Blachman, op. cit.36 Winter, op. cit.37 Zeev Blachman, "The Re.sistance of the 42 in Rakow”. Oimp.testimonies of Niechtzitski and of Chaya Rosenblum-Blaustein,Yad Vashem Archive ; Richard Chentzinski, Testimony, YadVashem Archive, Munich Coll. No. 367/287.38 Niechtzitski, Testimony, op. cit. ; comp, testimonies of PaulaBerkowitz, op. cit. ; and Blachman, op .cit. ; also the descrip-tions by Hersh Gomulinski, op. cit. ; and Dr. Tenenbaum,op. cit.39 Blachman, op. cit. ; comp, with the description of Cromuliniki,op. cit., who was taken to the synagogue together with hi«wife and children. Niechtzitski states that Rosenberg, the sani-tary policeman, would lake food to those imprisoned in thesynagogue.40 Niechtzitski, op. cit. ; Zelman, op. cit.41 Berkowitz, op. cit. ; Niechtzitski, op. cit.42 Bela Greenblatt-Geliebtcr, op. cit. ; Niechtzitski, op, cit,; Bcf-kowitz, op. cit.43 Declaration of Moshe Horowitz; Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.;Niechtzitski, op. cit.44 Blachman ,op. cit.; also his testimony. Comp, manuscript ofHersh Gomulinski. Among those saved, besides Hersh Gomu-linski who was wounded in his right arm and lost consciousness,were Yechiel Gomulinski (now in Israel), Weingarten, Holtz(these two were later in the Blizin camp) and Cymberg. Secalso the testimony of H. Gomulinski taken down in the pro-tocol at Munich on November 20, 1946, Yad Vashem Archive,Munich Collection, 608/594; Zelman, op. cit.45 Blachman, op. cit. ; comp. Berkowitz, Testimony, op. cit. ;Among those condemned to be shot were the wife and threechildren of M. Niechtzitski, his youngest brother’s wife (Niceb-345tzitski, testimony) and the parents-in-law of Chaya Rosenblum-Blaustein (Rosenblum-BIaustein, Testimony).46 Pudlowski, op. cit.; comp. Ben-Giladi, op. cit. and Gomulinski,op. cit. Blachman and Rosenblum-BIaustein report that 542persons perished in the December “Action”. The exhumationof the 700 Jews murdered at Rakow was begun two weeksbefore Rosh Hashana 5707 (1946) and continued until HoshanaRaba. Thirty-two German prisoners were brought from thePiotrkow prison, and they opened the pits, exhumed the bonesof the murdered Jews and put them into 10 long chests whichwere than buried at the entrance to the cemetery. The PiotrkowJewish Congregation carried out this holy work which wasdirected by the two Hipsher brothers. Pinchas Hipsher was incharge of the work at the cemetery. He brought over the chestscontaining the bones of the dead and buried them. YeshayaHipsher, a former member of the Chevra Kadisha (JewishBuriel Society) dealt, with great devotion, with the task ofdigging out the bodies. A wall was erected around the mass-grave by A. Horowitz. Hershkowitz-Wolkowitz, op. cit.; comp.“From the Rakow Forest to the Grave of Brothers” in theMemorial Book to Our City, Piotrkow Trybunalski, and Vici-nity, pp. 8-9.47 Lubliner, Testimony, op. cit.; comp. Blachman, Testimony,op. cit.48 Blachman, op. cit.49 Richard Chentzinski, op. cit.50 Testimonies of Lubliner, op. cit., Chentzinski, op. cit, andBlachman, op. cit.51 See also Tushiner, “Historical Questionnaire”. Dr. Brahms’daughter ran away from the grave, but the Gestapo forced herfather to catch her and bring her back. Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.(Another version is that the Gestapo chased her among thetombstones until they caught her.).52 Dr. Lubliner, op. cit.53 Among those shot were: the lawyer, Skolnik; Litrowski;Yungster; Aba Brem; Lena Goldach, the tinsmith, Green-span, and his daughter ; and Papier (of the Litmanowitz fa-mily). Comp memoirs of Shraga Posnanski, op. cit.54 Niechtzitski, op. cit.; comp. Greenbaum, “Historical Question-naire”, op. cit. and Ben-Giladi, op. cit.55 M. Migus, “The First Arrest”, op. cit.; Rosenblum-BIaustein,op. cit.; Blachman, op. cit.; Ben-Giladi, op. cit.; Dr. Tenen-baum, op. cit.; also Tushiner, Historical (Questionnaire, op. cit.Dr. Tenenbaum estimates the number of those who remainedon the Bugaj at 1,700, those who worked in the glass factoriesat 700 and the number of deportees to other camps at 700.Blachman, on the other hand, sets the number of deportees at500. Among those deported to Skarzysko were a large numberof men and a few women who had been working at the“Samelstelle”, gathering up the belongings of the deportedJews ; Blachman, 6p. cit.56 Esther Kaminska-Hipsher, in her testimony, estimated that 40children had been killed in the “Action” at Blyzin. On theother hand, Mrs. Stashewska, whose own little boy was killedin the “Action”, gave the number as 12 in her testimony.57 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.; Zelman, op. cit.; Ben-Giladi, op. cit.;comp. Rosenblum-BIaustein, op. cit. Galili gives a description ofthe execution of the thirteen in his “Thirteen among Many”and in a letter to Yad Vashem (22.5.58). It should be addedthat Dietrich was tried before the criminal court in Hamburgfor his criminal activities in Piotrkow during the war years.Details of Dietrich’s execution were given in the testimoniesof Mordechai Goldhersh, Yechiel Kurnentz and Aaron Hipsherbefore the Tel Aviv District dxjurt on 19.3.56. These witnessesremembered “only a few names of the murdered men” : Kenig-stein, Ziegelman, Blurastein, Abramowitz, Kimmelman andTornberg.58 M. Migus, “The First Arrest”, op. cit.; Kotkowski, op. cit.;Ben-Giladi, op. cit.; Poznanski, op. dt. Zilber and his familywere shot later by Police Clommander Elshner, the formerpastor; Kotkowski, op. cit.; Poznanski, “Memoirs”, op. cit.59 Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.; Joseph Freeman, Testimony, op. cit.60 Blachman, op. cit.; Stashewski, op. cit.; Arluck, op. cit.61 Kotkowski, op. cit. As early as June 1944, one hundred Jews,among them 6 women, were deported from the Bugaj to Tropau(Sudeten). At the end of November, the women were sent toBergen-Belsen, while the men were evacuated to Hamburgwhere they were drowned in the port (Sendowski, op. cit.).62 Rosenblum-BIaustein, op. cit.63 Ben-Giladi, op. cit.64 Ben-Giladi, op. cit.; Niechtzitski, op. cit.; Dr. Tenenbaum,op. cit.; also M. Migus, op. cit.65 Posnanski, Testimony, op. cit.66 Ben-Giladi, op. cit.66a Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.; Greenbaum, “Historical (Question-naire”, op. cit.67 M. Niechtzitski, op. cit.; S. Posnanski, op. cit; Ben-Giladi, op.cit.; comp, also Israel Gutterman, Testimony.68 S. Pudlowski, op. cit.69 Ben-Giladi, op. cit.70 Ibid.71 Niechtzitski, op. cit. M. Niechtzitski. Eliahu Milstein and MosheFeiner were in the group which went to Palestine.72 “Account of the Jewish (Congregation in Piotrkow”, op. cit.S. Greenbaum, in his “Historical (Questionnaire” (op. dt.)estimates the number of survivors at 1,(XX) of which three tofour hundred were camp prisoners while 6(K) had saved them-selves in other ways.73 “Account of the Jewish (Congregation in Piotrkow” op. cit.(Comp, with Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.74. The returned Jews celebrated the inauguration of the recon-structed synagogue on Jerozolimska Street with great festivity.However, the journalist, S. L. Shneiderman, who visited Piot-rkow (“Forward”, February 27, 1958) reported that for thetwo years preceding his visit, the synagogue had not even beenopened for High Holy Day services because there were notenough Jews in the town interested in attending to make a“minyan” (the ten Jews necessary for public religious services),though there were 15 Jewish families in Piotrkow. Unlikesynagogues in other towns and villages which were turned intogranaries or movie theatres, however, the Piotrkow synagogueis regarded as a historical monument, at least for the timebeing.III. RESISTANCEDespite the heavy financial loss which the Jews suf-fered and the heavy contributions they were constantlyforced to make, despite living constantly in a morass ofoppressions and restrictions, they made desperate efforts tomaintain their existence.Economic resistance and perseverance were expressedin the creation of productive working places, in smugglingfood into the ghetto and in establishing contact with the“Aryan” side. Much ingenuity and initiative was requiredto discover channels through which food could be smuggledinto the ghetto, on one hand, and clothes and other goodssmuggled out of the ghetto, on the other. The smugglershad to resort to bribery and other techniques in order toavoid confiscation of the goods.346The Jews sold their last sticks of furniture and what-ever clothing they could spare, for paltry sums, in orderto buy the smuggled overpriced food necessary for theirsurvival. According to the German restrictions, all goodswere considered “confiscated” and the selling of textiles,clothes, leather, shoes and “hidden goods” was punishableby death. Nevertheless, the trade with Polish dealers wenton, even through the ghetto walls. In addition, many ofthe Tuszyn refugees carried on a trade in food products,as they had kept up their contacts with the peasants of theneighboring villages. For a time, the Jews of Piotrkoweven managed to smuggle in food by means of a smallrailway. A lively trade in meat continued, for an evenlonger time, with the town of Kaminsk. The Kaminsk Jewswere in a relatively good position until a number of arrestswere made. Two shochetim (ritual slaughterers) weredeported to Ausschwitz as a result, one of them, YehoshuaLerner, a shochet in Piotrkow.One factor which made smuggling easier was that onlyone side of Pilsudski Street was included in the ghetto.Lively barter went on between the Aryan side and theJews. In addition, Jewish worWs who worked outsidethe ghetto played an important^ole in the exchanges ofgoods and valuables for food.Poor people, in their desire to save themselves andtheir families from starvation, smuggled at night, using theby-roads and bringing home grain from the villages. Therewere hundreds of small mills, the size of coffee grinders,in use in the ghetto, in which flour could be ground,mainly by hand. There were also small baking ovens witha capacity of 4—6 loaves. Small gas ovens which could bedismantled were even improvised for baking bread, buteven so, the illegal bakeries were often caught in operation.The large organized bakeries where the rationed bread wasbaked were much better off, and they were even allowedto bring in firewood. These bakers managed to smuggleflour into the ghetto, under the firewood, paying for itwith hundreds of loaves of bread which they distributedamong Germans of all types, to the Polish police, etc. Inthis way, through bribery and conspiracy, the things neces-sary for survival were brought into the ghetto.Thanks to the efforts of Rabbi Moshe Chaim Lau, theauthorities allowed the Jews to bake matzot for Pesach(5700—5701). Since the quota of flour assigned for thepurpose was very small, the Rabbi turned to his friend.Rabbi Dr. Joseph Carlebach, Chief Rabbi of Hamburg-Altona, as well as to his former students. Rabbi Sheinfeldof Zagreb (Yugoslavia) and Rabbi Dr. Griinwald ofLucerne (Switzerland). Due to their help, a quantity ofmatzot reached the ghetto.Even after the ghetto was sealed off on April 1, 1942,the Jews continued to cross over to the Aryan side tosupply themselves with food, though anyone caught waskilled for the transgression. Children walked the roads tothe surrounding villages to purchase food, though many ofthem were killed in the process. Dozens of Jews, mainlywomen, were caught outside the ghetto every day and wereshot, after a brief trial by the German Sonder-Gcricht(special court). After a time, even this procedure becameunnecessary. Every Gestapo man or German policemanfelt himself entitled to shoot the Jewish “criminals” wIk)dared to leave the ghetto.'Economic resistance was also expressed in producingvarious articles for Christian consumers and in providingthe raw material for their production at a time when theJews were cut off from all supplies. The Jews secretlyproduced leather products, soles and shoes, and even theGermans ordered shoes and boots from them.The tannery of Moshe Niechtzitski and his brothers,in partnership with a “Volksdeutsche” (a German bom inPoland) named Smolinski, was a prospering enterpriseuntil the end of June 1941. The goods they produced weresupplied partially to the Jewish community for its needs,by order of Michael Folman, with the approval of theGermans and indeed on their instructions. The permit wasrevoked by the Germans at the beginning of 1942, but theNiechtzitski brothers succeeded in removing their primitivetools from the tannery in time and transferred them toa cellar on Pilsudski Street where the work continuedillegally. This illegal production continued, bringing ingood profit, until the “Action” when the brothers had tofind themselves official working places to secure themselvesfrom deportation.^Tailoring also flourished in the ghetto. Wool andcotton cloth were brought by various means from Toma-show and Bielsk, some of it even purchased from the“Treuhander” (trustees) of the mills. All kinds of cottoncloth was brought in from Bclchatow. The Jews in theghetto produced linens, underwear and outer clothing aswell as hosiery from both old and new wool and cotton,according to the latest fashions and colors. They also manu-factured furs (from the skins of animals shot in the forestsby the Germans) and made modern furniture, curtains,knitted articles, gold and silver ware, and various artisticitems.Some of the merchants prospered from their secrettrade Much merchandise was brought in from differentcities. Iron goods were brought from Warsaw KonskTschenstochow and Radom ; textiles from Tomashow, Bel-chatow, etc. The merchandise often fell into the hands ofthe German or Polish police but bribery “teught” it backagain. The difficult situation, however, often forced themerchants of textiles, linens, leather, etc., to look for n<^areas of trade ; pastry-shops were opened in many ot trmer places of business.Economic contact was maintained with "Aryan" cus-mers, even when the ghetto was sealed off. J. Kurnrites : "The ghetto is isolated. The Jews are lockedeir 'four cubits', watched day and night and SMreh^. the Gestapo, by the German and the Polish police, by347officers and their assistants, by gendarmes and by secretpolice of all types. They are searched daily, are oftencaught and often shot. Despite all these obstacles, theJews manage to produce everything they need in order tosurvive.”^The Jews in the ghetto proved their perseverance andtalent in the workshops where they had to operate underextraordinary work conditions; the young people whoworked in the Kara and Hortensia glass works quicklylearned new skills. Boys of 15 or 16 working in Hortensia,for example, became expert at blowing and forming bottles,glasses and crystal ware, within a few weeks.'*The workshops established in the pre-“ Action”period (in the former Jewish “Stock Exchange” outsidethe ghetto), in the belief that they would protect thecommunity against deportation, displayed a good deal ofinventiveness in the preparation of materials for production.The tailoring shop was managed by Shmuel Zeiten, a goodcraftsman, the hosiery workshop by Sender Gotthelf andHilke Milstein was secretary of all the workshops. Thecommercial office of the shops was located at Platz Try-bunalski, on the other side of the ghetto. The sewing work-shop, equipped with 53 sewing-machines, employed 260people who produced the material from old cloth, madesheets, pillow cases etc., from it and washed and dyed theirproducts. Thirty Jews worked in the laundry and weavingdepartment.Similarly, the hosiery and hand-knitting workshopsproduced new goods from old materials (hosiery, sweaters,etc.). The shoemakers’ workshop also had to improvise.It would get an order to make slippers for patients, butno raw material, so they made slippers out of dyed rags.^These examples of passive economic resistance expressthe attitude of the Jews to the German restrictions. TheJews simply did their best to elude and sabotage theserestrictions. The authorities found out, for instance, thatnot all the Jews were wearing the required white badgewith a Magen David. The police thereupon arrested thetransgressors and brought them before a special court. Thechairman of the Jewish Council was ordered to warn allthe Jews in his announcement (in Polish and Yiddish) ofJanuary 24, 1940, that severe punishment would be im-posed on all transgressors of this order.^The Jews found ways of getting out of the ghetto atforbidden hours, by taking spades on their shoulders andgoing out, supposedly to work for the Germans. Since somany Jews were really going out to work, this could notbe checked.’ A way of getting around the “Sperstunde”(curfew) was also found. Holes were made in the walls,enabling people to cross from yard to yard and to keep incontact, during the forbidden hours, with their friends andneighbors.®In the winter of 1941—42, while the Germans werepreparing to reduce the si2e of the ghetto and to isolate it,the Jews were doing their best to create small gardens andto plant flowers and greenery, even on the tiniest spots, soas to freshen the air in the teeming ghetto. Thanks to thedevoted work of a group of functionaries, headed by JacobKurtz, a Palestinian, and Russek, an expert gardner, smallgarden beds were set out in the ghetto. In the square atPlatz Zamkowi, in the middle of the ghetto, benches werebrought out and a children’s playground put up in thecenter of the square.®One clear example of economic “sabotage” pertainedto the orders concerning the confiscation of furs. Despitethe severe punishment meted out for not handing over furson time, many Jews risked their lives to sell furs secretlyto the Christians. Others even cut their furs into smallpieces and destroyed them, rather than give them over tothe enemy,*® The slogan was “Aushalten und durchhalten!”(“Hold out and endure !”).Any Jew who wanted to live was compelled to breakthe German “law”. The first death sentences and theexecution of Jews who were caught on the “Aryan” sidetherefore failed to deter other Jews who continued toengage in smuggling. This phenomenon was neither law-lessness nor resignation ; it only proved the powerful vita-lity of the Jews in their will to live. The external appear-ance of the ghetto Jews testified to their inflexible deter-mination to hold out. Not only did the women dressrelatively well, the men continued to shave, cut their hairand to dress neatly, never betraying their inner anxietyconcerning their fate.Other examples of passive resistance included thehiding of Jews by Poles in the city and in surroundingvillages, as well as the passing of Jews as “Aryans”. Thisquestion, however, has to do with the whole relationshipbetween Jews and Poles during the extermination periodand will be dealt with separately.The spirit of passive resistance of the religious Jewsis best characterized by their behavior during the HolyDays of 5703. Despite the feeling of terror in the ghetto(this was on the eve of the “Action”), they wore theirtraditional holiday apparal. Some of them did not hesitateto go through the streets to religious services wrapped intelessim (prayer shawls), and to pray “betsibur” (inpublic) in many places. Three weeks before the “Action”,during Succoth, many Jews even sat in the Succah (taber-nacle built of boards and covered with leafy branches) intraditional fashion.** One group of functionaries (“asko-nim”) carried out a dangerous project during the firstperiod of occupation and succeeded in rescuing a numberof Torah scrolls and 300 holy books from German hands.*’Cultural activities continued, even in the dreadful at-mosphere of the ghetto. Illegal libraries for children andadults operated actively. One such library was discoveredby the Gestapo, but a large bribe succeeded in hushing upthe “sin”.*® Rabbi Moshe Chaim Lau wrote a monumental348work in the ghetto on “Kiddush Hashem”, sanctificationof the Holy Name (referring to the religious martyrdomof Jews). Unfortunately, the manuscript was lost duringthe destruction.There is also data concerning literary creativeness inthe ghetto. Jacob Lieberman wrote a diary in Hebrew, inwhich he quoted verses of Bialik’s “Ir Ha’hariga” (TheCity of Murder”). This diary, too, was never found. LolekCohen wrote poetry on day-to-day topics. During one ofthe searches in the community building, he was discoveredwith a poem on Hitler and Stalin. For this crime, he wasarrested, put to torture and finally deported to Ausschwitz,where he perished.The organization of amateur performances, recitalsand dances was vitally important to the Jews, and theywere always well attended. The drama group, directed byShmuel Eliahu Ziegelman, Herman, and Shmuel Zeiten, waswell-received by the people.’^ These cultural activities inthe midst of terror were of great significance in the psycho-logical self-preservation of the Jews and kept them fromcomplete submission to the “dehumanization” methodsapplied by the Germans towards the ghetto population.An order concerning Jewish schools in occupied Po-land was promulgated on August 31, 1940. According tothis order, the Jewish Councils must, in the future, beresponsible for Jewish education ; they were obligated tofound and keep up a specific number of general schools andthey might, in addition, set up vocational and professionalschools. In actuality, the opening of schools for Jewishchildren depended on the local authorities. In certain citiesand towns, the local authorities permitted the opening ofsuch schools on condition that the Hebrew language betaught in them.At the time the new Jewish Council began function-ing, a school committee was set up which attemped to opena school in the ghetto. However, the governing committeeof the Jewish Council always put off the question, justify-ing its action on the basis of the lack of a suitable placeand the existence of the typhus epidemic. Some of thefunctionaries declared that the grouping of a large numberof children was dangerous.Nevertheless, many school-groups were set up in theghetto. They were shut during the typhus epidemic butwere afterwards reopened and legalized, with the supportof the school committee. There were also many kinder-gartens, each of which generally contained between 7 and8 tots.Secret high school groups (gymnasium and lyceum)were active, and engaged in varied study programs up tothe time of the great “Action”. Three qualified womenteachers, B. Eichner, Hela Rosenblum and Eugenia Ro-zytzka, were in charge of the high school groups. A largerstudy group (within the framework of grammer schoolsubjects) was directed by Natalie Stern who had longtaught at the Berek Yoselewitz school. The teachers heldfrequent conferences on matters connected with teachingunder abnormal conditions. These study groups wouldsometimes meet in the orphanage area. Both the parentsand the teachers displayed great stubbornness and madesacrifices in order to keep their children studying andobtaining an education, even under the existing conditions.’*Due to lack of source material, it is difficult to recon-struct the activities of all the political groups and youthorganizations which operated in the ghetto. The Bundcarried on its ramified activities under the occupation.Members of the illegal Bund council were : Jacob Ber-liner, Zalman Tenenberg, Tanchum Freund, Yitzhak Sam-sonowitz, Maurice Meirowitz and Yeshaya Weingarten.Since Zalman Tenenberg was chairman of the Jewishcommittee, the Bund had strong influence there. McmlKrsof the local Bund council would bring fotVl to people inneed who preferred to suffer hunger rather than stand inline to ask for help. A help-fund for party members andsympathizers was at the disposal of a s{>ccial committee ofthe Bund’s, headed by its treasurer, M. Meirowitz.”Begging children made a mass apiviarance in theghetto (the orphanage was overflowing). After great efforton the part of the above-mentioned committee, the com-munity provided a place (Platz Tsarnetski 1) where thechildren could spend a few hours a day and get a nourish-ing meal. Many children were placed with private families.’*The apartment of Miriam and Tanchum hreund (Ri-tserska 8) was used for party gatherings and meetings, andillegal literature reached their address. Their apartmentwas used to put up liaison officers of the Polish under-ground who came there from the illegal Bund centralcommittee in Warsaw. A number of May 1st celebrationswere organized in 1941 at the homes of party membersM. Migus, Moshe Adler, J. Berliner, T. Freund and others.The secret Bund center for illegal activities was in thehome of Tova Kazanowski-Blumstcin. All the Bund partywork was concentrated in this modest worker’s house,located in the heart of the ghetto (it was hidden in SimonGoldstein’s large yard). Gmfidcntial radio communiques1 illegal publications brought from Warsaw were cx-nged here, and it also served as an address for delegatesm other cities such as Mrs. Itka La/.ar-Mcllman (whos officially a delegate of the “Joint” hut carried outnd missions in Warsaw as well). Kosherowski frommashow Mazowietski, Rachel Pudlowski from Bclchatowj others.”The Bund kept in active contact with its central com-ttee in Warsaw. Tanchum Freund, former member of. community’s board o( directors, was the main l,a.«)nic r since he travelled to Warsaw to the Joint as oftenhe was permitted to do so, on missions for the Jewishuncil. In his capacity as liaison officer of the Bwd inrtrkow, he dealt with all sorts of matters in neighboringies (Suleiow, Belchatow, Tomashov, Gorakowiu, Wolarysztoporska, Przyscha, etc.l. For example, liierature349and money were transferred to Tomashow Mazowietskiwhere the Bund was active and did rescue work with largegroups of people. Close contact was maintained withSulejow through the easier forest-way. After Belchatow wasincorporated into the Reich, contact with that town grad-ually ceased.^Other frequent emissaries to Piotrkow from Warsawincluded Moshe Kaufman and Yankel Tselemanski (“Ches-law’ ’). The latter was registered as an official of thePiotrkow community.^'When the Gestapo accidently tracked down the illegalBund activities in Piotrkow, the Bund central committeein Warsaw received a telephone message from Sulejowabout the tense situation and the arrest of Bund memberswho worked in the community.^ When the other Bundmembers were arrested on July 5, 1941, Tselemanski, whowas also wanted, managed by pure chance to avoid thefate of his comrades.^ After the arrests, contact withWarsaw was maintained, to a limited degree, by the youthof the organization, headed by Lilka Gutkowitz and MotelAppelowitz. The widespread illegal work which had pre-viously been done was no longer possible Before May 1,1942, the Gestapo arrested other Bund members : MosheSternfeld, Yitseh Rener, Velvel Weisser, Berish Rosenbergand two others.^Hashomer Hatsair, which had three sections, was alsoactive. The senior members of the organization were HankaZiegelman, the Aronowitz brothers, Itzhak Cohen, GershonGoldberg, Fela Niechtzitski, Paula Pudlowski, Rachel andMeir Zarnowietski and Ruzshka Gutterman. Two othermembers, Itka Kaminska (now in Israel) and YankelHershlikowitz went to Russia at the beginning of the war.The regular meetings of the organization took place, duringthe war, in the Zarnowietski apartment at Pilsudski 21. InFebruary 1940, Mordechai Anilewitz visited the ghetto andthereafter regular contact was established between the Piot-rkow branch and Warsaw headquarters. Jacob Aronowitz,the delegate from Piotrkow, also went to Warsaw. Emis-saries who looked “Aryan” came to Piotrkow from War-saw and smuggled illegal Shomer publications to them.^tfA secret code was fixed for the correspondence with War-saw and after'the war letters signed by Jacob Aronowitz,Meir Zarnowietski and others were found in the under-ground archive of the Warsaw ghetto.The two youth sections of Hashomer Hatsair wereled by Jacob Aronowitz, Hanka Ziegelman and RuzshkaGutterman. The main leaders of the organization duringthe war were Aronowitz, Ziegelman and Zarnowietski.At the beginning of 1942, an invitation was receivedto send a representative to Zarki. Ruzshka Gutterman,who had false identity documents, was sent to the Shomerfarm there, where she met with Mordechai Anilewitz andAryeh Wilner. They suggested to her that the organizationmembers in Piotrkow try to obtain weapons, penetrateGerman outposts and establish contact with other under-ground organizations. A few Shomrim managed to sneakinto German outposts and to obtain false identity papers.Contact was also established with the local Communists,who were, however, unable to take the Shomrim into theforests with them. The great extermination “Action”,during which most of the Shomrim were killed, put an endto their attempts at active resistance.The “Chanichei Beitar” (Revisionist youth move-ment) held “silent” meetings at which they frequentlydiscussed “the liberation of the ghetto”. Jacob and Eliezer(Lutek) Lieberman, the Goldberg brothers, AbrahamWeinrib, David Perlowitz and Chaim Samelson participatedin these discussions.^Because of the lack of source material, even less isknown about the activities of other groups and youth or-ganizations. What is known, however, is that before thegreat “Action”, secret consultations were initiated by theZionist youth organizations. These consultations dealt withquestions of defence of the ghetto, the use of catacombswithin the city and projects to create partisan groups or tofind ways to unite with existing groups. Loud exclamationswere heard : “I want to be killed, knowing that I havekilled at least one German !” “Give us weap>ons,” theyshouted, “we don’t want to wait until they come to us !We want to break out of the ghetto ! We want to attackthem and capture their arms. We shall fight them to thelast drop of blood ! ’ ’But the older functionaries, who felt responsible forthe youth, restrained these outbursts in the belief that suchviolence would endanger the lives of the few thousandJews who were officially allowed to remain in the block,the other thousands who were preparing to hide in cellarsand catacombs, and the young and healthy ones who weresent to work-camps. These functionaries insisted, “Anyresistance from us will be regarded as a provocation by theGermans to slaughter all the Jews in Piotrkow.” On theother hand, these older functionaries approved of unitingwith Polish partisan groups, “We should look for waysto approach them, because we ourselves have no arms andare unable to obtain them.”^Illegal newspapers were smuggled into the smallghetto, even after the great deportation. The Zionist youthleader, Feivel Steinberg, was one of these “smugglers” whooften risked his life. He was possessed of great optimismand often encouraged people who were despondent over thesituation.^In the winter of 1943, the Bund central committeeagain tried to establish contact with Piotrkow. A liaisonoffice (a contact from Tchenstochowa) arrived. He wasunfortunately betrayed to the Germans and shot,” TheBund central committee managed to get in touch with theBund group in the Kara glass works, however, by way ofan intermediary, a Polish socialist railway official whoseson, Watzlaw Barda, worked as a fireman in the factory.Yechiel Kotkowski received a letter from J. Samsonowitz,350the representative of the illegal Warsaw coordinating com-mittee (of the Bund and the Jewish National ZionistCommittee).The coordinating committee made efforts, at that time,to establish contact with the Jews in other camps and tosend help to them. Special couriers, Jewish and Christian,were sent out all over the land to gather as much informa-tion as possible about Jewish life, and to find ways tosmuggle help in to them.The letters from Warsaw greatly encouraged the Piot-rkow camp prisoners. In accordance with instructions fromWarsaw, a united committee, composed of all the politicaltrends and leanings was established in the Kara area. Illegalactivity now was broadened and became more effective.The young people active in the Bund (Yechiel Kotkowski,Nachum Weglishewski, Motel Appelowitz, Maria Migusand others) were joined by others including Shlomo Meis-ner, Pinek, Yumeh Kudesh, and Hersh Goldberg. Contactwas also established with the Bugaj work-camp, whereLeon Shitenberg was in charge of the activities. The campsin Skarzysko and Blizin were also contacted ; at the lattercamp, Lilka Nutkiewitz was the liaison.^Some time between July and November 1943, Barda,the fireman, brought 20,000 zloty to the Kara camp, fromthe coordinating committee. This money was distributedamong the members of the Bund youth groups. 5,000 zlotywere set aside for the Bugaj workers.^' About two monthslater, the courageous courier of the coordination committee,Wladka (Feigele Feltel-Miedzishetski) brought 50,000 zlotyand conspiratorial literature (among them a publicationabout Ausschwitz) from Warsaw. This was smuggled intothe camp by way of a Polish work-guard (Werkschutz).Another brave courier, Alia Margolis (daughter ofthe well-known Bund leader, Dr. Margolis of Lodz) cameto Piotrkow on a German passport, bringing 50,000 zlotyfor the conspiracy group in the work-camp. She managedto get into the factory and to give the money over. How-ever, some Germans who were passing by saw her anddetained her. Alia was arrested and accused of movingabout in a forbidden area, where Jews were working. Thepunishment for this crime was death. The Jews, who hadjust received the money, mobilized all the elemt ts in thecamp. By bribing the directors of Hortensia, they managedto get the “innocent Aryan girl” freed. Renia Zaks, whohad received 25,000 zloty from Alia Margolis, was alsoreleased.Unfortunately, some of these abortive attempts endedin death. The Jews at Hortensia had succeeded in establish-ing contact with those deported to Skarzysko throughSigmund Ganera, the Piotrkow fireman, who deliveredletters and money for a long time but was finally caught.The Germans tortured him until he revealed the names ofJews who worked with him in Hortensia. The Jews whohad been sending letters to Skarzysko were arrested by theGestapo and executed. Among those shot were Ber Hendeland his son, Leib ; Chaim Shmucl Marmor, Libe Sonik,Meir Rosenblum, Tuvya Perlowitz and Margalit. The wo^men in Skarzysko who had been corresponding with theirrelatives in the work-camp were also shot ; the Perlowitzsisters. Miss Itka Hendel, Mrs. Rosenblum, and Mrs Ma^galit. Two Polish firemen were arrested and sent toAusschwitz.After this fiasco, contact between camps or with theoutside world was very limited. The courier. Eva Sarnetski,who visited Piotrkow on a mission from the Warsawunderground Council to Help the Jews” encountereddifficulty in transferring letters to the camp and in receiv-ing letters from there. Despite this, some contacts weremaintained, even under the existing conditions. Forexample, Moshe Niechtzitski, a Poalei Zion member in-terned in Skarzysko, succeeded in contacting his brother,first in Piotrkow and later in Blizin. with the help of aPole named Shved who was the “brigadier” (leader) ofhis work group.The Jews of the Bugaj also kept in contact with theoutside world with the help of the local fireman throughwhom they received the subsidies designated for them bythe conspiracy group at the Kara glass factory.'*Several acts of sabotage were carried out in the glassfactory in the summer of 1944 by the Polish undergroundfighters of the “Armya Krajowa” (Land Army), with thecooperation of the camp workers. The Polish fighters, how-ever, categorically refused to take with them a numberof young Jews who longed to join the partisan units. Inany case, the sabotage created a feeling of dread in theVolksdeutsche (Polish German) directors of the plant.**The Jewish conspiracy group received the news of theforthcoming revolt in Warsaw in advance. The group hadbecame enlarged at that time (among those who joined itwere Gomberg, the head-Jew, and Yosscl Zamcl, theJewish chief-of-police, both of them former army officers)and it maintained close contact with the couriers of thePolish underground.In some unknown manner, “several people from thefactories got away and joined the partisans.” They fellupon a work-guard officer, Matchiewski, and t(X)k tworevolvers from him.” One partisan unit was hidden in thewoods behind Piotrkow. It consisted of 40 men, amongthem several Jews from the work-camp.The attempt at active resistance of the Bcitar youthgroup, the Goldberg brothers and their friends, unfortun-nately ended in failure. The Goldberg brothers got in touchwith a foreman at their place of work who promised tobuy revolvers for them at a high price and to put themin touch with the “Armja Krajowa” (A.K.). This manactually sold them four revolvers at a high price, but theguns were equipped with blank cartridges. On his instruc-tions, the Goldberg brothers and the Licberman brothersdisguised themselves as firemen. The Christian who intro-duced himself as a member of the A. K. led them into351the Paradise Forest by little-known side roads, and leftthem alone there. They were instantly surrounded by Ges-tapo men. The Jews tried to defend themselves, but thebullets were, of course, blanks. The next day, the Gestapobrought the four Jews, all of them wounded, to the Polishhospital. They were investigated under torture for severaldays and were finally brought to the Piotrkow cemetery,shot and buried in a common grave. Shmuel Katz, who hadsewed the firemen’s hats for them, and Shimek Niss, theJewish policeman who had brought them out of the ghetto,were also killed with them.^^It is worth mentioning, at this point, the highlydangerous but important sabotage acts carried out in theSkarzysko camp by Moshe Niechtzitski. He helped Stanis-law Shved, Polish brigadier of a camp unit (who after-wards turned out to be one of the chief commanders ofthe Polish underground movement in the Skarzysko dist-rict) to steal cases of bullets from the factory for thepartisans. On Shved’s instructions, Niechtzitski would takeout five cases of bullets every fortnight. Another Jew,Chaim Kopel of Stopnitz, later worked in Shved’s unitas well. Once, Niechtzitski and Kopel took 150 cases ofbullets out of the storage places. Such hauls were madeonly a few times, but from time to time they were ableto take away 5—10 boxes at a time, in cars and on carts.^As can be seen, no organized active resistance of thePiotrkow Jews ever materialized. There are a number ofobjective reasons which made any such attempts imprac-ticable at the time when most of the Jewish populationwas still concentrated in the ghetto. One factor was thecomplete isolation of the population which lived, from thebeginning, in a constant state of siege, in an atmosphere ofnervous strain, indescribable terror and helpless frustration.They had to put up with constant searches, plundering andthe taking of prisoners, which always ended in bloodshed.The tactics of the enemy, designed to gradually liquidatethe ghetto, confused all tries at resistance.Feelings of responsibility toward the population inthe certain knowledge that the Nazis applied the principleof collective responsibility in all cases of resistance, oftenrestrained the more active elements from any undertakingsagainst the enemy. Those in favor of active resistance werefaced with a tragic dilemma : did they have the right toexpose to certain death people who perhaps would other-wise survive ? Thus, those who strived towards resistancewere paralyzed by the possibility that they might be respon-sible for total extermination of the entire Jewish populationby the Nazis in revenge for any action against them.Another factor was the awareness that no help from outsidethe ghetto walls could be hoped for. It is for these reasonsthat the people let themselves be taken off to Treblinkawithout even a try at resistance.^’Finally, it should be stressed that any way of joiningthe partisans was practically closed for a Jew from Piot-rkow. This was stated by a delegate (“Stephan”) to themeeting of the “Council to Help the Jews” on November16, 1943. He declared that Jews could be rescued fromthe Piotrkow ghetto, but that temporary living space,weapons and food were lacking for those who wantedto escape to the forests.The Polish resistance movement was split into groups,most of them composed of Fascists and anti-Semites, whowould shoot at any Jew who came to join them. Therewere rare cases where they succeeded in joining the parti-sans, for instance, if the escapee succeeded in meeting witha democratic resistance group or if he didn’t look Jewish.All other such attempts, such as the previously mentionedcase of the Goldberg and Lieberman brothers, ended indeathIn summary, it can be said that the Jewish masses,downtrodden and broken by the years of cruel Germanoppression and surrounded by an atmosphere of wanton-ness, of horror and death, with no hope of help from any-where, passed out of existence without an attempt at armedopposition. However, the above-mentioned cases of passiveresistance and the few attempts at active resistance light upthe gloom of the martyrdom and destruction of PiotrkowJewry.SOURCES1 Kurtz, op. cit.; Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.; Blachman, op. cit.;Rosenblum-Blaustein, testimony, op. cit.; Report of the Con-gregation, op. cit.; N. Lau, Observations, op. cit.2 M. Niechtzitski, Testimony, op. cit. ; Kurtz, op. cit.3 Kurtz, op. cit.4 Kotkowski, op. cit.5 Kurtz, op. cit. ; Migus, op. cit. ; Arluck, op. cit.; M. Niech-tzitski, Testimony, op. cit.6 Ringelblum Archive, No., 1/340.7 Kurtz, op. cit.8 Ben-Giladi, op. cit.9 Kurtz, op. cit.10 Ibid.11 Ibid.12 Huberband, op. cit.13 Kurtz, op. cit.14 Ibid.15 Migus, “In the Underground,” op. cit.16 Kurtz, op. cit.; Eugenia Rozytzka, “Illegal Studies in thePiotrkow Ghetto” (Polish).17 Migus, op. cit. ; Kotkowski, op. cit.; Comp. Bernard Goldstein,“Five Years in the Warsaw Ghetto,” New York, “Unser Tseit”(“Our Time”), 1947, No. 128/129; also M. Migus, “UnserFon” (“Our Flag”), from the Piotrkow ghetto and “UnserShtimeh” (“Our Voice”), Paris, Jubilee edition, November,1955.18 Migus, “In the Underground”, op. cit.19 Migus, “Celebrations in the Ghetto” ; Migus, “Unzer Fon”,op. cit.20 Migus, “In the Underground”, op. cit.; Kotkowski, op. cit.21 Ibid.22 Migus, “The First Arrest”, op. cit.23p Migus, “In the Underground,” op. cit.24 Kotkowski, op. cit.; Goldstein, op. cit., p. 129.25 Migus, “The First Arrest”, op. cit.; M. Kushnir, “The Acti-vity of the Bund during the Hitler Occupation” ; excerpts352from the report of L. Brenner in the book, “In the Years ofthe Jewish Destruction. The Voice of the Underground Bund,”New York, “Unzer Tsteit”, 1948, pp. 295, 309-310.25a Letter from Meir Zamowietski to S. A. Ziegelman (undated),Manuscript 7.26 Samelson, op. cit.27 Kurtz, op. cit.28 Dr. Lubliner, op. cit.29 Migus, op. cit. ; Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.30 Migus, op. cit. ; Kotkowski, op. cit.31 Kotkowski, op. cit. Comp, report of the underground Bund tothe Bund leadership in London, on the period from July toNovember 1943. In the book, “In the Years of the JewishDestruction. The Voice of the Underground Bund” (op. cit.,p 79) it is reported that the Piotrkow Bundists wrote toWarsaw upon receiving the money, “This was the finest mo-ment of our Uves.” They included names of people with whomit would be worth while to communicate and also reported onpassing the money to Skarzysko.32 Kotkowski, op. cit. ; Migus, op. cit. Comp. Wladka (FeigeleFeltel Micdzinsetski), “Frcwn Both Sides of the Ghetto Wall”,New York, Educational CtMoroittee of the Arbeter Ring (Work-men’s Grclc), 1948. Comp. Goldstein, op. cit., p. 402.33 Blachman, op. cit.; Dr. Tenenbaum, op. cit.; Niechmiski, op,cit. Report No. 4 by Thaddeus Sametski in a lecture on mattersin the provinces of the “Council to Help Jews”, August 25,1943 (Files of "Zegata”, Yad Vashem Arrftive).34 Migus, op. cit.; Kotkowski, op. cit.35 Winter, op. cit. ; Pudlou'ski, op. cit.36 Rutlowski (based on the testimony of Thaddeus Sametski of“Zegata”), op. cit., p. 134.37 Samelson, op. cit. ; Migus, op. cit. ; Joseph Goldberg. tlK thirdand surviving son of Abraham Goldberg, is at present in Israel.He escaped to the Aryan side from the Skantysko camp, butthe Poles delivered him to the Gestapo.39 Migus, “The First Arrest”, op. cit, ; Migus, “In the Unde^ground”, op. cit.; Dr Lubliner, op. cit. Comp. "In the Yearsof the Jewish Destruction. The Voice of the UndergroundBund,” op. cit.40 Migus, “The First Arrest,” op. cit.353REGISTEROFJEWISHSURVIVORSLISTS OF JEWS RESCUED IN DIFFERENTEUROPEAN COUNTRIES(60000 NAMES)JERUSALEM 1945PUBLISHED BY THE JEM'ISH AGENCY FOR.PALESTINEi SEARCH BUREAUFOR MISSING RELATIVESDt?3Sninss D’^’^rnnsT.-'s hx: msiu60.000)•'‘'S'? n'Tin'in n’Dair* ’"c vidtiS nTton nwms■„ —mJewish Survivors in East-European Towns {•nsiTK mta nvn omn’-The “Survivor’s Register Book” was published by the Jewish Agency for Palestinein Jerusalem in 1945. This list represents only people registered in the first month or sojust after liberation.The BeginningPiotrkow was liberated on January 16, 1945 by the Soviet Army. People whosurvived in Auschwitz, Czestochowa, on the Aryan side, etc., came back home. Theyregistered in the Gmina. Most of them left Piotrkow shortly afterward. On the next pageis the list of these people taken from the “Survivor’s Register Book.”(Our thanks to Rafi Weiser and Rivka Staszewska-Plesser of the Jerusalem University Libraryfor this important historical material.)The Committee—Dr. Zygmunt Tenenbaum, President and Ewa Bor-zykowska, Secretary. The others are: attorney Esterka Rattau and Szer.354The Beginning / 355PIOTRKOWTRYBUNALSKlAdelberg SabinaAnic JuraAdler DawidAibui CeniaBank ManiaBeczkowska I laBrawman DanielButkowaka DlutnaButkowaka jRyuJaaBirenbaum BolaBurak HerszBrandwejn MajerBrandwajn AbramBrandwajn JoickBerger SzmulBorzykowska EvoaBlumtztejn MoizekBlumsztein RachelaBram (Listanowaka)Bialowaa IcekBtalowas MajerBorman HenrykBorman CelaBryl KalmanBerger DankaBern EmiljaBuiwa HankaBendct AronBogdanski MoszekClchy SzmulCymbcrknopf IcekDzialowski IcekDessau SzulimDessau RachmilDessau MorJkaDziaiowski MoizekDzialowski SrulDubiecki >lron WolfDubiecka TaniaDubiecka RachelaDubiecka SzulamitDubiecka WandaDzialowska RajzlaDzialowski IdelDzjalowska ' HindaDessau BerekEnglard CiliaEdelman ReginaEdelman PolaEngiard AlaEnglard liaFisz SalaFolman AronFolman RoziaFolman SzajaFajngoid-Leszinan & dauglfrom NiechciceFajwlowicz CuciaFajwiowicz MichalFrenkiel Hinda'itJFrenkiel Chit Lnngfut A tram, BfJzinFr«kKl Srul Icek (Lichtenetem) f.n I Langfus SylwiaL Lewkovricz DudekFub Nrchuma Lewkoveicz /«*Fuk. firpernnen Lewin DawiJLeber JankielGleiwicer Moszek Libeskind MendelGoldfreid Mumek Libeskind CenidGotdfreid Lodzia Libeskind SalomonGoldstein Dawid Libeskind MoszekGoldstein Dina Libeskind AbramGoldszmidt Cenia Libeskind JesekGoldszmidt Sala Libeskind CelaGrinberg Miecyszlaxe dr. Libeskind FraniaGrinberg Henia, wife Lipszyc ChajaGrinberg Henryk, son Lipszyc PolaGoldstein Abram Liberman Symcha~TanchtmGoldberg A bramGrinbaum Henoch MekJer RoziaGrosberg (GomolinskaRacAe/a Milioner PolaiGoldhersz Saba Milioner jozefGutman Frania Majzner FelaGutman Henia Milsztein JakobGomolinski Abram Mortkowicz HeniekGrosberg Hela Mortenfeld JakobGomolinski Idel Male RachmilGomolinska Sala Mortkowicz SalomonGomolinski Abram ChilGrinbaum Berek Nieckcicki MoszekGoldstein Fajga Nutkowicz MoszekGoldbliun Leon Nyss AlaGrabowski Lajbus, Nlyss PrywaGrabowska Fa/ga (Koenigstein) FraniaGrinberg (RoUztein) Masza^.^^^^^^ MendelGrinberg Iraia Nis.w»«nKnMajzner FelaMilsztein JakobMortkowicz HeniekMortenfeld JakobMale RachmilMortkowicz SalomonNiechcicki MoszekI Nutkowicz MoszekNyss AlaNyss PrywaGlogowska MariaGoldbreg LudwikGlajch AbramGoldberg ZosiaGoldstein HelaHorowicz MajerHenig KajlaHenochowicz BlumaHerszlikowicz FeliksHelfgot liaJolowicz MajerIColf AbramKuszer BinemKlajer SuraKnobel FajgaICneman RoziaKojfczyk RutaKrajtman Cyrla■3 ^ ^Nissensohn MendelNissensohn (Ritterband)CelaPerl MariaPlachcinska ZofiaPoznanski SewekPoznanski JanekPoznanski IcekPinezewski JakowPacanowska Cucia[Plucer ChanaPacanowski HerszPinkuszewicz MoszekParzenezewski JakobParzeckaPrzybylska RoziaRozenblum HeniaRozenstein AbramI Rozenbaum LulkaRozental ReniaRozenwald BlumaRozenwald IzraelKozlowski Abram Moszek Rozenwald PinkusKuszynski LajbKalinska TamarKimmelman MichalKorman FraniaKirszbaum FiszelKirszbaum ChaimKirszbaum MoszekLitmanowiezowa HelaL^zyeka TamaraLewental Afotek Rozenblum BerekRafalowicz RoziaRokman CuciaRozeneweig DawidRajcKman LajbRozenberg EsleraRozenberg JudaRzechtowa AnnaSzwarcberg EsleraSatowna EsleraSztroweis MorycSptelbaum Irena from WarsxtSteinberg AlterSzytenberg AbramSzmaragd IzraelSpiro WolfSzydiowski ChaimSandowski JakobSandoMfski MoszekSzjdloMTski ChaskielStaszewska HelaSzwarc MoiekSzmuiewicz FiszelSzmulewicz SzajaSzmuiewicz JosekSzmulewicz DawidSteinberg KlaraSteinberg Nuia dr.Szmulewicz ManiaSieradzki Chaskiel'Sieradzki Lajzer MordkaSandowska CiliaSzmulewicz SalaSzmulewicz RachelaSztem RachelaSzeroszewska Edwarda fit 2children SzeroszewskiSpiel fogel Markus dr. & wSpielfogel MaciekSpiel fogel Tuska jSpiel fogel HenrykowaTenenbaum Ezriel dr.Tygierowna TubaTygierowna ChanaTenenbaum MariaTorenberg Jakob JozefUszerowicz SalaUfner (Glogowska) CustawcjWajshof CelaWajser Maniawendel NutaWurcel SymehaZylberminc ManiaZimnowoda RachelaZyskind Sonia2Uks ReniaZammel FraniaZylber CesiaZucker EwaZucker IrenaZ3rskind PinkusZyskind Szymon dr.Wechslcr(?) IdaZammel JosekFajwlowicz PinkusApfelrgin BernardApfelgrin l(Freitag) Maria,BelchaloutApfelgrin Ryszard, sonPytowski IzraelPytowski (Margulies), LozdPytowska Frania, daughterMuszynski Mojzesz, LodzHampel Ila & child, LodzHampel Iska, LodzThe register of survivors in Piotrkow just after liberation—beginning of 1945.356 / A TALE OF ONE CITYCENTRALA ZIOMKOWSTW PIOTRKOWSKICHTEL 1249C » n t r Q1 gPrzewodniczqcydr. Tenenbaum ZTOmuntWiceprzewodniczqcyWqiser IzraelSekretarzHorowicz AronOddziol L6diPrzewodniczqcydr. Rozenberg ZygmunlWiceprzewodniczqcyKornfeld IzraelSekretarzWaiser IzraelSkarbnikRozenszlajn SzymonDddzial Dolny SlqskPrzewodniczqcySztern SzymonSekretarzRozencwajg ArturSkarbnikErlich IanOddzial Piotrk6wPrzewodniczqcydr. Tenenbaum ZygmuntCzlonkowie ZarzqduHipezer PinkusHorowicz AronIMIENIA RAYMONDA FRACKMANAw PIOTRKOWIE. UL. PILSUDSKIEGO 23TEL. 1249L.Dz,i:07/47Piotrkow,diiii 24 lipci 1947 r.A letter from theDrodzj Brae la.Podaj^ do «aszej wiadomo^oi,iainstrunenty lekfrskie do operacyj usznych otrzy-aaliiny.za ktore serdeeznie dzi^kujf.Otrzymalid-rowniei odzie4,zapowiedziaii|i przaz ilfas jaszczaw jasiani ubia^ago roka,o ezaa jui pisa^an i 080>bidcia p.rfolraicjowi dzifkowaiaa/widooznie list za-gin|J7.Obszarzw sprawozdania z podziaXu odzia^ zostanie przaG^anaiaa w przyszl^ tygodniu, jasta&iy bowiaa im ukonezaniu rozdaw-nictwa. ,DzipkujaoQi jaszcza raz za nasz# hojn^ poaoo^ktdrfofiarniz i stala nan okazujacia»Zfezyay sardaeziB pozdro-wiania dla wszystkich Zioiakow./Dr.^enenbaum Zygmunt/Sekr^'torz ■ korespondenl Ewa Borrykowska. A1 3-go MaiaJewish Committee in Piotrkow to the Relief Association inNew York—1947 (translation follows).r\iDear Brothers:I just like to let you know that we’ve received the medicalinstruments and we thank you very much.We’ve also received the clothing parcels that you previouslymentioned. I wrote to Mr. Wolreich a “thank you” letter—ap-parently the letter got lost in the mail.A detailed report regarding the apportionment of the clothingwill be sent to you next week; we are just finishing the distribution.We thank you again for your abundant help that you sogenerously and steadily bestow upon us. We extend our heartfeltregards to all our landsmen.Dr. Zygmunt Tenenbaum(signature)Corresponding secretary, Ewa BorzykowskaAL. 3-GO Maja 23Here and Now—Far and WideThe Piotrkow Trybunalski Relief AssociationA CentennialIn their search for a safe and decent place to live, free from repression andpersecution, some Jews from Piotrkow emigrated to the United States as early as themid-1800’s. In 1858, Michael Heilprin, a linguist, scholar, encyclopedist and author,came with his family to America and settled in Brooklyn.The First SocietyA group of new immigrants from our home town organized the first PiotrkowerSociety in New York in 1881. The first President was A. Davis and the Secretary,Berlinski. There were 35 members initially. However, more and more Piotrkowerimmigrants joined the ranks. Due to harsh economic conditions, the Society establishedan assistance fund in order to help our Landsleit in time of need. This Relief Committeewas actually the beginning of a noble tradition. During the next century, the PiotrkowRelief Society served an important role in helping their brethren in the U.S. and abroad.The first recorded charitable activity was the purchase of a large piece of land at the oldWashington Cemetery in Brooklyn, called the “Piotrkower Beit 01am.” There, over theyears, more than 600 of our “landsmen” were laid to rest. A“Hevra Kadisha” was formedunder the leadership of Shmuel Zainvel Davis, who organized the Second Generationof Piotrkower immigrants in America and served as their secretary general starting in1909. At the turn of the 20th century, most of the working class among the Jewishimmigrants arriving in the U.S. was socialistically oriented. However, among the Jewishpeople of those times, the idea of Zionism had started to sprout everywhere. Thus, inAmerica, a large group of Landsleit broke away from the mainstream and organized amovement following the visions of Dr. Theodor Herzl.Ahavath ZionIn 1901, the Zionist-Socialist movement, called “Ahavath Zion,” was establishedand some Piotrkower promptly Joined the new organization. During the turbulent,revolutionary period of 1904-1907, a new wave of immigrants arrived at New YorkHarbor. Various political associations came into existence. In 1906, a group of new-comers from Piotrkow, members of the Bund, founded the “Piotrkower Young Men’sQub” and the “Piotrkower Young Ladies Club.” These clubs conducted lively cultural357358 / A TALE OF ONE CITY(1945) rx nyiixFittrssThe Piotrkow Trybunalski Relief Association Committee—New York, 1945.and political activities among the working class Piotrkower. Shortly after, however, in1904, the important “Workmen’s Circle” came into existence; both clubs formed theprestigious “Piotrkower 368 Arbeiter Ring Branch.”Branch 368This long-lasting, vital society served as an important role in the lives of manyPiotrkower in the United States. This group also emerged as the main pillar of consola-tion and support for the struggling and suffering Jewish community in our hometown,Piotrkow. The first task of the 368 Branch was to establish a Relief Committee, which,from 1910 to 1918, the years of the first Jewish boycotts in Poland, and throughout WorldWar I, helped enormously in easing the hunger and poverty among XheirLandsleithackin Piotrkow.During World War I, quite a number of Piotrkower immigrants served in he U.S.Army. Some received medals and commendations, among them Chaim Prais, HymanSolomon, Schlomo Berger, Itzie Oizerowitz, H. Rabinowitz, and others. Especiallyhonored was our “landsman” George Wald, who achieved the rank of Major and wasthe subject of many articles in the American press praising his heroism.Our people were also active in forming the famous “Jewish Legion.” Some of them.Here and Now--Far and Wide / 359under the leadership of Abraham Grabowski, went to the battlefields of Egypt in 1917and were among the first to reach Eretz Israel with the vanguard of the Jewish Legion.The war didn’t deter the activities and vitality of the Piotrkower in New York. In 1917,the Piotrkower self-educational club was formed.In November of 1918, when the war ended and the tragic situation of our brethrenin Piotrkow, who were plagued by poverty and anti-Semitism became apparent, ourpeople in America started their energetic crusade again. They formed their own“Piotrkower Relief Organization,” sending thousands of food packages and the so-much-needed proper emigration papers to relatives and friends in Piotrkow. When thepost-war immigrants arrived in New York, the Relief helped to find shelter and jobs.During the 1920’s, scores of newcomers came from the old country and, after a periodof adjustment, became productive and thriving citizens who, in turn, helped others comeover and settle in the New World. In the early 1930’s the Piotrkower in New Yorkcontinued to consolidate and coordinate their noble activities. Important developmentsin Europe after Hitler came to power; the resurgence of rabid anti-Semitism in Germanyand other European countries, placed the objectives of the Piotrkower Relief in a newperspective. Joel Wolreich came from Piotrkow to New York. He presently resides inSilver Springs, MD, with his wife Helen. He is the only living witness who participatedin the assistance campaigns and actions just before, during and after the war. Here arehis recollections about these turbulent times.I arrived in the United States of America in October 1936. It tookme some time to adjust to the new life. My wife Helen (Tolep),who was also born in Piotrkow, made my adjustment to the newlife a lot easier. She had come to the U.S.A. with her mother,brother, and sister to meet their father who had come earlier,before World War I. Helen knew the Piotrkow and theiractivities. Together we attended their functions. This gave me theopportunity to get to know the Society and the Ladies Auxiliary.In 1937, we received alarming letters about outbursts of anti-Semitism. During the years 1937-1945, Mrs. Frackman and Mrs.Lang of the Ladies Auxiliary raised funds to help by organizingdoor-to-door campaigns and various benefits. When the war brokeout in September, 1939, Piotrkow was one of the first citiesoccupied by the Nazis. During the war, we had no contact, but wewere able to send some aid through underground channels beforethe United States entered the war. By 1941, an enlarged reliefcommittee was organized, consisting of landsleit belonging toseveral organizations. TTiese included the Ladies Circle consistingof Beatrice Charmatz (president), Helen Frackman, GosiFreeman, Feli Lang, Hena Berliner, Celia Berger, GoldaBorenstein, and Helen Shulman; the Branch W.C. 368 consistingof Sam Ozer, Max Frackman, Harry L. Berman, Ben Weinberg,Pincus, Barney Freeman, Morris Berliner, Max Grossman, and360 / A TALE OF ONE CITYLouis Grossman; the Benevolent Society consisting of SamBleiwas, Issac Rosenblum, David Kingstein, Sol Berger, G.Schwartz (treasurer), Jacob Fish, Sara Zisholtz, and Joel Wolraich(corresponding secretary).After the war ended in 1945, some survivors began returning toPiotrkow. I was the first to receive mail from them. I read aboutthe horror they lived through to survive and the finding out thefull extent of the Holocaust. They described their pain and agonyat finding out that they were the only surviving members of theirfamilies. I felt some of the pain with them because I was the onlysurvivor in my family. As more members returned, they formeda committee with Dr. Zygmunt Tenenbaum as the chairman, andEva Borzykowska as the secretary.The Relief Committee from here immediately sent clothing,food, money and other things. Dr. Zygmunt Tenenbaum who wasan ear, nose, and throat specialist, requested instruments so hecould begin to practice again. We immediately sent him a medicalcatalog so that he could indicate the instruments he needed. TheRelief Organization sent him those instruments so that he couldbegin his practice. The survivors set up a system of signing for theaid they received to make sure that everyone received his or hershare.Later some of the survivors came to the United States. Some ofthese were helped in their immigration by the Relief Committee.Upon their arrival, they were also helped by the Relief Committeewith finding housing and employment. Some of these survivorsremained in the D.P. camps. The Relief Committee sent help tothem. More survivors immigrated to the United States in 1946 and1947. As they arrived, we received them with open arms, warmth,and understanding. From 1946 to 1959, many more survivorscame to the United States and established themselves. They arenow a part of the Piotrkower Relief Association and doing a finejob.Our People in the SpotlightIt is important to mention our gifted and talented writers and actors of this era.Among them were Samuel Torenberg, a prolific linguist and dramaturgist, and therenowned actor Gold-Geladi, who performed with the Adlers and other famous en-sembles. The names of Jack Rechtzeit, the president of the Jewish Actors’ Alliance, andof his brother’s Seymour Rexite who is the husband of the famous Miriam Kressyn,were and are known to every Jewish theatergoer.The poems and short stories of Moshe Korman, based mostly on his young, leanyears in Piotrkow, were read by many. Hershel Novak, the talented author, was widelyHere and Now—Far and Wide / 361Annual Hazkara of the Association in the early sixties.heard of among Jewish readers. His book, My Young Years, were warmly praised by thecritics.The Beginning of a New EraOn February 11, 1960, a new committee, consisting mostly of survivors, was elected.Max Frackman was the chairman, Ben James was co-chairman, together with Sol Bergerand David Strick. The financial secretary was Isadore Pincus, the recording secretary HenryRosenstein, and foreign secretary Moshe Israel Sochachevsky. H. Windman became thecorresponding secretary and the trustees were Morris Berliner, Sam Weltman, A1Rosenstein, Vitek Blachman and Barney Freeman. On October 30, 1960, the first fullycoordinated Hazkarah was organized by the association. A few months later, on May 7,1961, the Piotrkower in New York celebrated the 13th anniversary of Israel’s Independencewith an elaborate gathering arranged by the Committee and the Ladies Auxiliary.A lively Purim party held on March 24, 1962 at the Adelphi Hall started a joyoustradition and brought together most of our “landsmen” in the tri-state area.In the early sixties, the Association expanded its relief activities, sending help toPoland, Israel and South America. Several substantial donations were sent to the IsraeliCommittee toward the publication of the Izkor Book.On May 16, 1965, an important general meeting was held at the Atran CulturalHouse. Under a modified charter, a Fraternal Society was created and a proposal wasset forth to acquire a substantial number of cemetery plots. Most of the present membersimmediately contributed generously to the project. A new cemetery committee waselected; Max Frackman, Henry Rosenstein, Jack Ajzenberg, Alex Koslowsky, and BenJames. In 1966, the Association bought 60 cemetery plots at the Beth Israel Cemeteryin Woodbridge, New Jersey and then decided to erect a monument at the site in honorof the 28,000 Martyrs of Piotrkow who perished in the Holocaust.In 1967, a new committee was elected, consisting of Max Fay wlowicz (chairman),Alex Koslovsky (cashier), Henry Rosenstein (secretary), Ben James (financialsecretary), Pinchas Seidenberg (vice chairman), along with other members—Mike364 / A TALE OF ONE CITYFaywlowicz, Max Frackman, Abram Jolinger, Juda Rosenblum, Joe Freiman and A1Rosenstein.On May 25, 1967, all Association members participated in the Emergency Rallyheld at 72 Street and Riverside Drive in Manhattan on the Eve of the Israel’s Six DayWar.In 1969 the Association gathered to dedicate the newly erected memorial at the BethIsrael cemetery in tribute to the 28,000 Martyrs of Piotrkow. The efforts of theAssociation were crowned by this impressive achievement.During the early seventies, the Association was quite active, periodically organizingtraditional events such as the Purim and Hannukah Parties and frequent benefits andmeetings. Israel Bonds were bought in larger and larger quantities. Packages and moneywere generously dispensed to needy landsleitin Poland, Israel and elsewhere. Donationsto various charities were made on a steady basis. In 1975, a surgical room at the TelHashomer Hospital in Israel was dedicated in the name of the Piotrkow TrybunalskiRelief Association.In 1976, the new chairman, Abram Jolinger, proposed a drive to include the SecondGeneration in the activities of the Association. This was really the beginning of a newera, one of getting the children involved—a move so successfully implemented in lateryears with the advent of the New Bulletin. In 1977, the noble tradition of “Kever Avoth,”the annual visit to the cemetery during “Yamin Noraim,” was initiated.During the late seventies, the Association in New York sensed a stagnation in itsdevelopment. Some of the senior Landsleithad passed away during the years. In addition,a considerable number of active members had moved away to Florida. Despite thesedifficulties, the Society continued to carry on its important work and tradition.The fieyv Bulletin EraAfter the death of Roman Mogilanski in 1981, the old Bulletin, published since 1965,first by the Piotrkow and Vicinity Society and then by the Nazi Victims of Piotrkow,ceased to exist. Calls and letters from our Landsleit everywhere were pouring in. Theyall expressed concern and asked that the Bulletin should continue. In order to fulfill thewish of the people, the Association asked Ben Giladi, the former associate editor of theThe Executive Committee of our Second GenerationHere and Now—^ar and Wide / 365old Bulletin, to resume his work under the sponsorship of the Association. In June 1982,the New Bulletin was bom.From the beginning, this publication was a great success. Unity had finally set in.More and more readers embraced the new magazine, sharing the common goal ofremembrance and identity. At present there are over 600 subscribers, which means over1,000 readers, considering spouses and other family members. The Second Generationrepresents approximately one-third of the readership. The achievement of the Associa-tion, unknown to wider circles till now, finally started to surface. The cover of the firstNew Bulletin issue proudly displayed the impressive monument erected by the Associa-tion in memory of our Martyrs. The various Israel achievement awards, frequentlypresented to the Association, the Committee members, or to such extraordinary con-tributors as the Freimans, the Lustigs, and other members, were duly recorded—all fortheir outstanding participation in the Israeli Bond Program. It became a tradition that theannual Purim party would generate an intense Bond drive that showed the awareness,pride and compassion of the Association members toward our beloved homeland,Israel.Pictures and reports of such Purim and other parties, events and gatherings,printed in the New Bulletin, reflected the true active life and vitality of the Associa-tion. In 1983, the wonderful Second Generation movement initiated by AlexRosenblum started and grew. A group of devoted young people like Toby Schafer,Suzanne Ajzenberg, and others put toward their best efforts to organize and maintaincontact with the children of Piotrkow survivors and other children as well. In 1983,at the Washington, D.C. Gathering, there were many Piotrkower parents andchildren. Our Second Generation was amply represented at the First Internationalconference of Children of Jewish Holocaust Survivors held in New York in 1984.The pages of the Bulletin proudly displayed reports on the professional, intellectualand artistic achievements not only of our survivors but also of their children. Theannual Hazkarah, now widely attended by our people from the entire northeast regionof the U.S. became a traditional symbol of remembrance. The representatives of thepresent committee are Jack Ajzenberg (president), Abram Jolinger (chairman), MikeFaywlowicz (vice president), Joe Gold (secretary), Henry Rosenstein (correspondingsecretary), Mendel Kozlowski (Hevra Kadisha), and Paul Nash (treasurer). BenGiladi is the editor of the New Bulletin. Several committee members passed awayduring recent years, namely Max Faywlowicz, A1 Rosenstein and Max Milioner. Thepresent Social Committee of the Ladies Auxiliary consists of Vera Ajzenberg, FraniaFaywlowicz, Guta Giladi, Regina Gold, Jadzia Jolinger, Esther Nash, Hannah Koz-lowski, Ruth Rosenstein and Anita Waksman. The ladies are very active and doinga remarkable job at the various events and functions of the Association. In general,during the last decade, the New York Association became, next to the Irgun YotzeiPiotrkow in Israel, the center for the entire world Piotrkower community. The mostimportant achievement, however, is the wonderful relationship between both genera-tions. There is a solemn legacy embraced by the children and their spouses, who arewilling to continue the tradition which started more than a century ago. Even the thirdgeneration becomes more involved by writing moving poems and essays for the366 / A TALE OF ONE CITYBulletin, visiting our city, Piotrkow, with their parents and attending our events. In 1989,the monumental Book Project became a reality. The Association assumed the sponsor-ship of this so-important enterprise without hesitation. Now the pages of this Book, aprofound legacy for future generations, are a jewel in the crown of achievements of thePiotrkow Trybunalski Relief Association in New York.Compiled by B, G.Annual Hazkara in New York—1987.Ben Giladi,the editor of theNew Bulletin.The Second GenerationList of Active ParticipantsAlex Rosenblum, Esq., NYToby Schafer-Faywlowicz, NJSuzanne Ajzenberg, NYMichelle Rosmarin-Rosenberg, NJDr. Rhonda Aizenberg, CAIris Bush-Giladi, NYTamar Bat Zion-Hess, JerusalemBrenda Epstein-Rosenstein, NYDr. Jenny Freiman, NYDr. Terry Gotthelf, NYMark Gold, NYSammy Gold, NYFelicia Gipsman-Hershey, CAJames Jolinger, NJAdele Kadet<Jolinger, NJHarry Krakowski, NYMina Lippman-Faywlowicz, MDRoberta Meisels-Koslovsky, FLSheine Mankowsky-Goldstein, CanadaPola Rosenstein, NYCelia Rosenblatt-Freiman, NYRochelle Socken-Ash, CanadaBarbara Schwartz-Ajzenberg, FLThe Second GenerationHarvey Ash, TorontoRenee Bauchner-Wendel, NYJerry Baum, TorontoRuth Bowman-Weltman, NYJames Bright, MOZohara Boyd-Mushinski, NCEdward Belz, MADr. Nathan Bimbaum, MADr. Georges Bimbaum, KYEileen Berger-Neiberg, CADr. Henry Brem, MDMiriam Cohen-Katz, NYHoward Dessau, NJJoseph Falowitz, FLAhuva Erez-Bar On, RechovotBluma Fiscus-Jakubowicz, ILJoe Faywlowicz, CanadaLili Floyd-Wolkowicz, NJHindy Friedman, CanadaNanci Feerst-Steinberg, NYMaurice Frenkel, AustraliaFreda Greenbaum-Faywlowicz, FLShirl Halpem-Tarko, ILNancy Hersh, NYSol Henechowicz, TorontoDoris Hefler-Small, CAJanet Jakubowicz, KYIda Jones-Henig, NYEsther Itzkovitz, NYMiriam Jacobs-Frankel, NYMike Jackson, TorontoMenachem Katz, MDSamuel Jurkiewicz, FLEsther Krisman, CAEsther Kamenetzky-Reichman, NJHelen Katz, TorontoHannah Kliger, MASidney Koslovsky, FLLarry Kramer, ILPaul Kramer, IL367368 / A TALE OF ONE CITYNathan Kryss, COSusan Klein-Henechowicz, CanadaDr. Steven Koslowski, Wash., DCRita Koslowski, NYMonis Grunzweig, CanadaMark Geliebter, NYDr. Joseph Geliebter, NYRivka Gershowitz, WIJerry Greenbaum, TXMichael Lipszyc, BelgiumMark Lewkowicz, ILIrving Miljoner, NYSherry Miljoner, NYAviva Osri-Fuks, IsraelSteve Pudlowski, NYSonia Pilcer, NYIda Prince-Wierzhowski, CanadaJoanne Preston-Maslawski, NYJoseph Rosenblum, NYDr. Saul Rosenblum, NYSonia Rubin-Moss, NJRachel Rudman-Garfinkel, WIAnn Reinglass, TXSara Rapaport, IsraelDebora Rudman, FLMorley Rosenbloom, CanadaSam Rosenwald, CAMarsha Reines-Gersh, NYRosalie Rochman, AustraliaSelma Rubinstein-Weltman, NYLiz Samelson, NYJoseph Lipnicki, CASy Lipnicki, CAAbby Lemer-Henig, Esq., NYMiriam Leber, ParisSelena Leneman-Rosenstein, NYRose Stem-Dessau, FLMina Stark—Faywlowicz, CanadaArik Shevach, CADaniel Sosnowski, CTLilli Stawski-Krakowski, NYMorton Stein, CanadaJudy Searle-Rosenbloom, CanadaMiriajm Teichner-Rosenzweig, FLJeffrey Tribich, LondonDr. Mark Wolreich, TNLinda Wroblowski, Esq., NYLarry Waksman, MAMellisa Waksman, NYSarah Wertheim-Ezer, FLJoseph Wolkowicz, MNNathan Wolkowicz, TXMillie Wolkowicz, CODr. Henry Wolkowicz, CanadaBruce Wendel, INDoris Weinstock, PAEllen Windheim, CanadaLucy Wolkove-Weinberg, CanadaVivian Zammel, MARita Silverstein-Wolreich, MDPearl Szajkiewicz-Smulevitz, CAGloria Sugar-Ash, CanadaAllan Silberstein, NJMartin S. Solomon, C.P.A., NYMary Sheydwasser-Rozprza, NJAnnie Schaffer-Rozprza, CanadaEta Siretzki-Rosenstein, NYJohn Zlotnick, CAThe Voice of the Third GenerationThe Children Who Express Their FeelingsIan Schafer, NJMarissa Schafer, NJStacy Greenbaum, FLSarah Zamel, MALisa Miljoner, NYJoshua Meisels, FLJonathan Meisels, FLMarissa Rosenblum, NYJessica Schwartz, FLAndrea Kamenetzky, NJOur People in the Land of IsraelElazar Prashker—JerusalemThe yearning for the land of Israel was deeply rooted in the hearts of the Jews ofPiotrkow as it was since time immemorial in the hearts of all Jews everywhere, whowould daily recite before their Maker with great fervor and devotion: “Blow the greatshofar for our deliverance, and raise the banner for the ingathering of our exiles, andbring us speedily from the four comers of the earth to our land.’’This yearning of the Jews of Piotrkow was first given a practical expression duringthe spread of the Hibat Zion (love of Zion) movement. Rabbi Haim Elazar Wax, theauthor of X\i&NefeshHaya, the rabbi of Piotrkow during 1884—1889, was the presidentof the Warsaw Kolel in the land of Israel, and in this capacity did a great deal for theJewish community in the holy land. In 1886 he traveled to Eretz Israel to exhort themembers of the Warsaw Kolel to dedicate themselves to agriculture. He planted an etrogorchard and conducted intensive propaganda among the Jews of Europe to use etrogsfrom the land of Israel instead of the Korfu etrogs. He considered it the first blossomingof the revival of Jewish settlement in the land of Israel. On his journey he wasaccompanied by the well-known leader of the Piotrkow community, Pinhas Horowicz,and X\ie shamashoithe Piotrkow rabbinical court, Moshe Wald. When Rabbi Wax passedaway, Motl Tzvi Halevi Horowicz, also of Piotrkow, known for his learning and wealth,was chosen president of the Warsaw-Poland Kolel. He continued the life’s work of theauthor of the by settling in the land of Israel. In 1891 he sent his confidant,Moshe Yaakov Mortfeld to buy land and plant orchards. The latter was extremelysuccessful in his mission, and the idea that it was a great mitzvah to use etrogs from theland of Israel (at first rabbinical and conservative circles opposed the idea, since theywere used to etrogs from Korfu, which were considered of high quality), penetrated evergrowing circles in the Diaspora which gave a push to settlement of Jews in their land.Several natives of Piotrkow settled in the land of Israel at the beginning of thecentury, including Dov Berish Cohen, Yehoshua Korman, Berl Butkovsky, and Dov BerRato.Following the Balfour Declaration at the close of World War 1, the first five pioneersfrom Piotrkow settled in Eretz Israel, having joined the renowned 105 Group. They were:Two Blumstein brothers, Herman Yarost, Haim Elazar Korman, and Yaakov Witorz.The massive immigration of Piotrkow Jews to their land began after World War I.Between the warn, some 500 families of Piotrkow Jews settled there. Some arrivedlegally, carrying certificates, but most came with the illegal Aliyah Bet. Piotrkow Jewsbecame well integrated in all walks of the new Jewish community, in towns, inmoshavim, and kibbutzim, and made a significant contribution to the upbuilding anddefense of the country. Pioneers from Piotrkow took part in the founding of manymoshavim and kibbutzim. They paved roads, built housing projects, helped establish369370 / A TALE OF ONE CITYMembers of the first council in Israel.industrial and cultural enterprises, organized cooperatives, and played a major part inthe character of the new Jewish society. They also distinguished themselves in defendingthe Yishuv. Eliyahu Blumstein of the 105 Group fought at Tel Hai alongside YosefTrumpeldor. In the 1921 riots, Mordecai Finkelstein was killed by Arab marauders whiledefending the immigrant house in Jaffa. A Christian Pole from Piotrkow, StanislawSluga, was killed by the Arabs in the riots of 1937. He was a member of the Histadrutand urged his Jewish friends to organize a defense against the Arab rioters. In the 1939riots, during an Arab attack, a guard named Yaakov Yosef Milioner, of the religiousKibbutz of Tirat Tzvi, was killed.During World War II, many Piotrkow Jews in Palestine joined the British Army’sJewish Brigade. This brigade distinguished itself in the battles against the Germans andthe Italians, and its first members were decorated for their bravery on the battlefield. InMay 1945 the members of the Jewish Brigade met for the first time the Holocaustsurvivors in Italy. Now the Brigade became a magnet for concentration camp and ghettosurvivors. In addition to their military missions, the members of the Brigade startedhelping survivors throughout Europe, providing clothing, teaching children, and smug-gling people across borders to the land of Israel. Members of our town who took part inthose activities were Aryeh and Natan Sandowski, Efraim Klein, and Yosef Katz.In the Israeli War of Independence and during the following wars—the SinaiCampaign, the Six Day War, the Yom Kippur War, and the Lebanon War, the children,grandchildren and great-grandchildren of Piotrkow Jewry wrote some glorious pages.More than half of Piotrkow’s Jewish survivors arrived in Israel after the war byunimaginable routes, and their number is now estimated in over one thousand families.This constitutes close to a third of the Jews who lived in Piotrkow before the Catastrophe.At first, when the number of Piotrkow immigrants in Israel was still small, they wereall close to one another, having known one another from the old country, and they helpedone another during the period of absorption in the new land. They would take care of afriend who was sick or out of work. The togetherness of our town’s people was natural,without any organizational structure. Ties were close. On Sabbaths and holidays peoplewould gather in the home of one of the families. Passover Seders brought us together.Yet in wishing to become integrated in the new Jewish society, people refused almostinstinctively to form the familiar organizational group known as Landsmanschaft.But as immigration increased, new problems rose which could only be solvedOur Peopk in the Land of Israel / 371^maro sipiBi'B 'wn' p’'*’ w nayiBirt npn 'nanOur People in the Land of Israel / 373through an organization. Thus in 1924 a mutual fund was started to help new immigrantsfrom our town, headed by Haim Elazar Korman and Levi Hertzkowicz, But the attemptsat that time to form an organization of Piotrkow Jews in Eretz Israel did not succeed. Itappears that the idea of a Landsmanschaft raised the specter of ghettoization, of whichpeople were deeply afraid. During that time Michael Szydlowski was the “institution”of our compatriots in the land of Israel. He was the address for both the old-timers andthe newcomers. He kept in touch with Piotrkow before the war, as well as Piotrkowersaround the world. Every new immigrant from Piotrkow first turned to him, to beregistered, to receive advice, guidance and help as needed. Our town's people referredto him fondly as the “consul.”Only in late 1942, when Yaakov Kurtz was able miraculously to return to Palestinefrom Piotrkow (he went there for a visit right before the war started and was stuck), andgave first-hand reports about the systematic massacres of Polish Jewry, a meeting of ourpeople took place, during which Kurtz gave a report about the annihilation of PiotrkowIn the hills of Jerusalem, April 1953, A group of Piotrkower participatein the dedication of the “ Yar Kedoshei Polania,” the Forest of theJewish Martyrs of Poland.374 / A TALE OF ONE CITYn^W)^p r\m to^hnmmrt umpnn on^ntw1939-194S n'WTl-Vi'^^Ti jTIlim’ n ' :a' SI * 3 • js■■^-':acr!^ •’ks*'!'-■■''''~“o‘, .n’^-rmn.rt'y?3r>The Matzeva at YadVashem, unveiled byIrgun Yotzei Piotrkowin 1963.Jews, and a committee to rescue the remaining Jews of Piotrkow was organized on thespot. The first activity of the committee was to publish Kurtz's Sefer Edut (Book ofTestimony), which was the first book to be published about the slaughter of Polish Jews.The book was published by Am Oved and shocked the Yishuv in the land of Israel.The first committee of Piotrkow Jews in Israel was headed, of course, by YaakovMaltz. The committee collected over 800 pounds (a huge sum in those days) to buy food,clothes, medicine, etc. When the word arrived at the end of the war that hundreds ofsurvivors had returned to Piotrkow from the death camps, the bunkers and the “Aryan”side, large crates were sent via Teheran with provisions. Food packages were also sentby air to Piotrkow. The committee kept in touch through mail and messengers with thesurvivors in Piotrkow and in the UNNRAand Joint camps in Europe. Hundreds of replieswere sent to inquiries about relatives, immigration, etc. Immigrants from our town whoarrived in Israel were received warmly and were given help. The organization arrangedloans for settlement and housing, and helped find work. (It should be mentioned that allthe loans were repaid, which shows that our town's people were successfully settled.)Piotrkow Jews in Israel did not forget their town or their loved ones who perishedin Europe. Each year, on the second of the month of Heshvan, the date of the finalliquidation of the Piotrkow community, a memorial service is held for the Martyrs ofPiotrkow, attended by a large crowd of our people.Our People in the Land of Israel f 375The organi2^tion of Piotrkow Jews in Israel has established a number of com-memorative enterprises to perpetuate the memory of the victims.• As part of the Jewish National Fund forestration campaign in memory of the lostJewish communities, in 1953, on Holocaust Memorial Day, 1,500 trees in memoryof Piotrkow Jews were planted in the Martyrs Forest in Jerusalem, to which 200members of our organization contributed.• On Tisha BeAv 1%3, at the Holocaust Cellar on Mount Zion in Jerusalem, amemorial was erected for the Piotrkow community which perished between 1939and 1945.• In February 1952 the committee of the Piotrkow Jews in Israel decided to publisha memorial book for Piotrkow and nearby villages. It took over 13 years to preparethe book. Yaakov Maltz, the driving force behind the book, along with his assistantsheaded by Naftali Lau-Lavie, issued the book as a living memorial to a majorJewish community. After years of strenuous work, they were able to collectinvaluable historical material about Piotrkow and the Jewish communities aroundit, which resulted in a volume of both quantity and quality, which, in the opinionof experts, is one of the best if not the best Yiskor book of its kind. The book hadprompted hundreds of our people to contribute of their knowledge, memories andexperience, to enrich the contents of the book. The result is truly a collectivemasterpiece of a surviving generation of Piotrkowers.The Piotrkow Book is the most reliable source for any information about thetown. It is the result of years of research which offers us and all future generationsa living picture of Piotrkow Jewry in all its glory. On each page one can feel theOur people in Jerusalem at the unveiling.376 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe monument erected inmemory of the Martyrs ofPiotrkow at the Holon,Israel cemetery in 1980.loving hand that took care of every detail. It is the love of Yaakov Maltz for histown, Piotrkow, having invested his entire soul in it, along with his vast knowledgeof Jewish Piotrkow, and the meticulous editing of Naftali Lau-Lavie, which gavebirth to this monumental book. The book was published in 1965 and was warmlyreceived by the press.• Three years after the Piotrkow Book was published, the first issue of the PiotrkowBulletin came out. For years it was edited by Yosef Goldberg, who felt that thebook was not the last word, since there was so much to tell about Piotrkow beforethe Catastrophe, nor was the story of the Catastrophe fully told. (Is it within humanpower to even exhaust the subject of the Catastrophe?) The bulletin created a livingbond between Piotrkow compatriots everywhere, and was enthusiasticallyreceived by our people, as can be seen in the letters to the editor.• Before the memorial service on November 1974, the 11th edition of the bulletinwas issued in a new format, edited by Elazar Prashker. The new creation was namedHeidim (echoes), and was printed (its predecessor was stenciled). Heidim con-tinued the bulletin tradition. It became a forum to all those who had something toOur People in the Land of Israel / 377nnn^Henia Grinberg, theHonorary President ofthe Irgun YotzeiPiotrkow. She headedthe organization forthe past 15 yearsuntil 1989 when shewas succeeded byYechezkel Gideoni.Elazar Prashker, the Editor-in-Chief of the periodical Heidim.tell about the Piotrkow community, its rich past, culture, folks, customs and thestory of the destruction. Each issue of Heidim added a building block to thememorialization project of our community as a whole and of every individualmember. Heidim is a source of information for the Piotrkower regarding all thatmight interest them about the common origin. The 14 issues olHeidim which havethus far apf)eared contain a great deal of interesting material about the Piotrkowcommunity—descriptions, memories, and anecdotes which, like pieces of a puzzle,add up to a picture of the unique Jewish culture that existed in that Polish town.• Our compatriots in Israel had a special experience during April 5th to the 15th,1980. During that time the second world convention of Piotrkow Jewry took placein Israel, and was attended by hundreds of our compatriots from around the world.The main event of the convention was the unveiling of the monument in memoryof the Jews of Piotrkow and environs, erected at the cemetery in Holon. Themonument, created by the Piotrkow-born painter and sculptor, Moshe Bromberg-Baram, is a scale model of the main synagogue of Piotrkow going up in flames.Inside the monument, the ashes of Piotrkow Martyrs especially brought back fromthe valley of death were deposited. The unveiling took place on the Day of theShoah and the Heroism, and was attended by a large crowd of Piotrkower fromIsrael and abroad. Rabbi Israel Lau sp)oke. The cantor chanted El Maleh Rahamim,and the assemblage said Kaddish. For a long time all stood silent, heads bent, beforethe small sanctuary of the Jews of Piotrkow, a monument to their world which wasdestroyed.The memorial—the synagogue of the Jews of Piotrkow going up in flames, nowstands in the holy land on the sacred soil of the cemetery in the holy community378 / A TALE OF ONE CITYof Holon, and for generations to come it will serve as a center for the Jews ofPiotrkow and their descendants to come and commune with the memory of theholy Martyrs. Here one must mention Henia Grinberg, who for the past 15 yearsheaded the organization of the Piotrkow Jews in Israel and who, through herenergy, faith and enthusiasm was able to motivate others and make the monumenta reality. Henia Grinberg is also responsible for two other memorialization under-takings of great importance—the Piotrkow archives and the scroll of the Martyrsof Piotrkow at Yad Vashem, in Heichal Hashemoth.• Yaakov Maltz collected during his entire life every shred of document and everyphotograph which remained from rich heritage of Jewish Piotrkow. All thismaterial which was preserved under adverse conditions, was handed to the directorof the archives of the Institute for the Study of the Diaspora at Tel Aviv University,Professor Yoel Raba, who, along with his assistants, have sorted out the materialand catalogued it. The Institute’s report for 1982-1983 mentions the historicalcollection of the Piotrkow community in the list of archival collections of Tel AvivUniversity, recognized by historical archives throughout the world. The archive iskept for the moment at Tel Aviv University, but according to an agreement betweenthe University and the organization of Piotrkow Jews in Israel, the archive can betransferred to the Piotrkow House when it is completed. Part of the archive hadbeen exhibited in the building for the research of the Catastrophe of the universityunder the title “The Community that Was and Is No More.”• The second thing—perhaps the most important one—which was brought to frui-tion, was the enterprise of memorializing the victims of our community at YadVashem in Jerusalem . On November 17, 1985 the annual memorial service forthe Martyrs took place at the Yizkor Tent in Yad Vashem in Jerusalem, and theunveiling of the parchment scroll containing the names of our Martyrs took place.An enlarged photograph of the scroll was hanging on the wall of the Sanctuary ofNames at Yad Vashem, and a multitude of people from our town crowded at thewall to look for names of their loved ones. Order was perfect. Catalogues had beenprepared with alphabetized names of each victim, with a number referencing thescroll, so that each person could easily find the names of his relatives recorded inthe scroll.The scroll itself, made of specially prepared parchment, was fashioned by anartist to look like a Torah scroll, and a Torah scribe entered the names of theMartyrs. It was placed at the Sanctuary of Names at a special place planned by anarchitect in coordination with Yad Vashem. Thus we eternalized at Yad Vashemthe memory of those most dear to us who were lost in the Catastrophe. It shouldbe mentioned that the Piotrkow community is the only one that was memorializedin this manner at Yad Vashem. The event was widely echoed among the public inIsrael, and on June 5, 1985, Israeli television presented the traditional speech ofour rabbi. Rabbi Israel Lau, dedicated to the Day of Remembrance of theCatastrophe and the Heroism, against the backdrop of the parchment scroll of thePiotrkow Martyrs at Sanctuary of Names of Yad Vashem, and the main topic ofthe speech was the scroll.Our People in the Land of Israel I 379• In 1987, the 45th anniversary of the final liquidation of the Piotrkow communitywas observed. The Organization of Piotrkow Jews in Israel proclaimed it the yearof the memorial scroll of the people of Piotrkow, and a world convention wasorganized (the third). It took place in Israel during the first week of May, 1987,between the Day of Memory and Israel’s Independence Day. At the convention itwas decided in the name of all the survivors of our community to take the scrollunder our patronage and to make a commitment to locate the thousands of namesof those who perished and were yet to be found, and exhort our town’s people tofill the pages with the names of their relatives, friends, and neighbors who werelost, so that not a single name would be missing from the scroti. A particularlymoving moment occurred during the convention when, after the ceremony at theYad Vashem auditorium ended, the large crowd moved to the Sanctuary of Nameswhere, in the presence of all. Rabbi Israel Lau handed the scroll to Henia Grinbergwho, in the name of all the Jews of Piotrkow gave the scroll with the names of ourMartyrs to the director of Yad Vashem, Dr. Yitzhak Arad, for perpetual safekeep-ing at the Sanctuary of Names on the Memorial Mountain in Jerusalem . ^This is not the place to mention all those who stood by Henia Grinberg’s side inaccomplishing all those tasks, but one should at least mention the contribution ofYitzchak Goldfried, Shaya Pudlowsky, and Moshe Ish-Horowicz. Goldfried—inhelping to erect the monument in Holon. Pudlowsky—in establishing the archiveand preparing the memorial pages for the scroll, and Moshe Ish-Horowicz, whotogether with Naftali Lau-Lavie, Rabbi Israel Lau, and Elazar Prashker helpedHenia Grinberg persuade Yad Vashem to agree to place the scroll of the PiotrkowMartyrs at the Sanctuary of Names at Yad Vashem, and labored hard and long tomake the idea a reality.This, then, is a brief summary of the link between the community of Piotrkow andits sons and daughters in Israel.Jerusalem—April 1991Across the ContinentsThe Piotrkower in the United StatesAfter World War II, wherever a Piotrkower settled, his Landsleit followed andproceeded to create their own Landsmamchaften. In locations where there were only afew of them, they would maintain close contact with their compatriots in the vicinityand elsewhere.The largest Piotrkower community in the United States settled in New York, wherea strongly organized association functions to this day. TheLawtfa/e/t who live dispersedthroughout the Northeast, in New Jersey, Massachusetts and Pennsylvania, remain inconstant touch with their counterparts in New York, attend their events and generallycontribute to the social and cultural well-being of their respective communities not onlylocally, but also in the great cities of Boston and Philadelphia.Another branch of the Society of Piotrkow and Vicinity was established in Californiain the early 1950’s by about 70 survivors of Piotrkow, Belchatow, Sulejow, Wolborz,etc. A group of Piotrkower still resides in Los Angeles. They are a close-knit communitybut socialize throughout the world.In the Southeast Region of the U.S., a relatively large group of Piotrkower and theirThe Los Angeles Society in the fifties.380Across the Continents / 381compatriots lives in Florida, predominantly in the Miami Beach area. Needless to say,many Landsleit converge on the sunny beaches to relax and bask in the warm climate,coming from as far away as Canada and other distant areas. It is surprising, therefore,that the natives of Miami, despite many opportunities and doubtlessly good intentions,have been unsuccessful in forming their own organization and association. Albeit veryactive socially, the residents of Miami and their visitors are consequently forced to jointhe activities of other LatidsmatischafterL Nevertheless, there is still hope that thePiotrkower of Florida will establish a vibrant and thriving Society.Some Piotrkower live in the state of Georgia, others still further north in the area ofWashington, DC, mainly in Silver Springs, Maryland. Several groups reside in theChicago region, others south from there in St. Louis. Our compatriots in that area remainin lively contact with one another and with us; we hear from them and from our Landsleitin neighboring states such as Indiana, Ohio, Tennessee, Kentucky, and Kansas, SeveralPiotrkower can be found further north, in Wisconsin, Michigan, and Minnesota, whileothers reside in the Southwest, in Texas and Arizona. With the exclusion of metropolitanNew York City, approximately two hundred subscribers to {he New Bulletin are scatteredthroughout the United States.Piotrkower in CanadaThe period of mass emigration to the shores of America began early in the twentiethcentury. Several Piotrkower who were unable to gain entry to the United Statestemporarily settled in Canada.No accurate records are available concerning those early emigrants who settled butleft Canada as quickly as they were able to immigrate to the United States. The permanentand thriving communities of Piotrkower were established in Canada after World WarII, when the survivors of the Nazi Holocaust escaped from Europe. Mindful of their pastin Piotrkow, concerned for their future and with the preservation of their dignity, theyreconstructed their lives on the foundations of their forefathers. The first post-warLandsleit in Canada formed their own Landsmanschaflen in Canada’s major cities inthe East, Montreal and Toronto.The Piotrkow Trybunalski Landsmanschaft in MontrealThe Piotrkower of Montreal play an important role in the Jewish community there.They are a close-knit group, well established and very active in all cultural and socialevents of Jewish life. One of their most important achievements in Montreal is thenurturing and maintenance of the Holocaust Memorial Centre and the Jewish PublicLibrary. Their annual Hazkarah, in memory of the Holocaust Martyrs, is a solemn anddignified affair. This meaningful tradition was founded years ago and throughout thoseyears Hazkarah participants would bring old photographs, documents, arts, crafts, another mementos of the past to the proceedings.382 / A TALE OF ONE CITYPiotrkower in Toronto some 35 years ago.The Piotrkow, Tomaszow, Belchatow and Vicinity in TorontoAs the consequence of a unique event, the survivors of our home town region whohad settled in Toronto joined forces there some years ago and established the Piotrkow,Tomaszow, Belchatow and Vicinity Society. This organization also figures prominentlyin the life of the Jewish community in Ontario. Of their important achievements, specialmention must be made of their erecting an impressive monument to the memory of ourKedoshim, All members actively participate in the activities of the HolocaustRemembrance Committee, the Memorial Centre of Toronto and in Holocaust Education.The second generation of Piotrkower in Canada carries the torch of their parents’legacies. The relationship between parents and children is remarkably close. It is alsoimportant to mention that the few Piotrkower who live in Winnipeg maintain truly closeties with other Landsleit throughout Canada, as well as with those in the United Statesand Israel.Across the Continents / 383The very first Hazkarah after the war in Landsberg, Germany—1946.Piotrkower in EuropeFollowing World War II, the once vibrant Piotrkower communities practicallyceased to exist in Europe.As soon as the liberated survivors from concentration camps had regained some oftheir strength, they began their search for survivors and remnants of their families. Mostof them settled, temporarily, with repatriates from Russia in Displaced Persons’ Campsin Germany, Austria, and Italy. Very few remained in Piotrkow; all soon made plans fortheir future. A great number decided to end the Diaspora and emigrated to Israel. Othersset their hopes on the Western hemisphere, on such countries as the United States,Canada, Australia, and all of South America. A smaller number resettled in the variouscountries of Europe.Regardless of where fate had tossed the Piotrkower, they proved themselves to beassets to their adoptive countries, never, however, forgetting that their hearts belongedto Piotrkow while becoming avid, loyal supporters of Israel.A group of girls from Piotrkow in Sweden after the war.384 / A TALE OF ONE CITYThe Piotrkower in SwedenThe first Piotrkower to set foot on Swedish soil were female survivors of theRavensbruck Concentration Camp in Germany. They had been saved and transportedto Sweden by the Red Cross under the auspices of Count Folke-Bemadotte just prior tothe end of World War II. After the general liberation of survivors from concentrationcamps such as Bergen-Belsen and others, they were sent to Sweden for rehabilitation.Some emigrated to other countries over the years. The majority, however, settled inSweden, where they were absorbed in the mainstream of Swedish life.Regrettably, one must note that during the 1950’s and 1960’s, anti-Semitism anddiscrimination against Jews ran rampant in Poland, whereupon a number of o\xrLandsleitleft the country to seek refuge and a safe haven in Sweden and in Denmark. To this day,the Piotrkower in Sweden have remained in close contact with their compatriots in Israelas well as in other parts of the world.The Piotrkower in FranceThe emigrants from Piotrkow who had left for France during the years betweenWorld Wars I and II were for the most part working people who had left in search of abetter life. Most settled in Paris. The pre-war, sluggish economy there made life difficultfor the immigrants, who had little time for socializing. The struggle for existenceabsorbed them completely. Consequently, the first Piotrkower Landsmatischaft wasfounded in France only after World War 11, when the small remnants of our Landsleithad returned to their homes. Many had fought with the French Resistance. ThesePiotrkower in France gather at the “Les Enfants de Piotrkow”(The Children of Piotrkow) monument in Paris.Across the Continents / 385The Piotrkower Committee in England.Piotrkower extended their hands and aided their surviving countrymen as they arrivedin Paris in search of a new life. Soon they began to meet frequently, at first for the annualCommemorative Gatherings, and then for mutually productive cultural events.One of the great achievements of this particular branch of Piotrkower was thebuildingof a monument to honor “Les Enfants de Piotrkow” (The Children of Piolrkow).It was built to commemorate their demise as the hands of the Nazi persecutors. To thisday, a small community of Piotrkower continues its activities and remains in contactwith their Landsleit in Israel and in other parts of the world.The Piotrkower of EnglandThe emigration of Jews from Piotrkow to England began early in the nineteenthcentury, when Ernestine Rose-Potovsky, the famous feminist and co-founder of theWomen’s Suffrage Society, departed Piotrkow to live in London in 1832. Her worldwideactivities are well documented in the annals of the women’s emancipation movement.She left England for the United States in 1836 but returned to London in 1869.The first really significant emigration from Piotrkow to England started at the endof the nineteenth century. For most of the new arrivals, the ultimate dream was toeventually reach the “Golden Land,” the United States of America. Those for whom thisdream remained unobtainable remained in England and founded the first PiotrkowerCircle in the city of London.It is imjxDrtant to note that the London Landsleit remained in touch with their lessfortunate brethren in Piotrkow and generously supported their efforts at rehabilitationand survival there, or, conversely, aided them in emigrating and establishing themselves386 / A TALE OF ONE CITYin England as refugees. The first Landsmanschaftwas founded by Moshe Gelade, BunimBromberg, and Nathan Glogowski in London in 1924.After the end of World War II, the Piotrkow Society of London resumed closecontact with their Landsleit in Israel. Their representatives frequently visited the JewishState, where they were always welcomed warmly by the Irgun Yotzei Piotrkow.One momentous event must be related and remembered. It is the story of forty-oneyoungsters from Piotrkow who survived the Holocaust and were liberated from theconcentration camp of Theresienstadt in 1945. They were rescued and sent to Englandin August 1945, together with the first group of three hundred children who weresimilarly fortunate. Nearly all were orphaned. Only four of the Piotrkow group had atleast one parent who had survived.The devotion and compassion of England’s Jews accelerated the healing process forthese children; it was a difficult and arduous one. After a few years they wererehabilitated and absorbed into the mainstream of English life. Their integration intoBritish community events was complete.These children, now adults, have grown to become respected members of the Jewishcommunity in England. Their successes, economically and socially, are remarkable.They represent an important part of the prestigious “Forty-Five Aid Society.” Thelongtime chairman of that Society is the versatile and devoted Ben Helfgott, a genuineand true Piotrkower. He also chairs the Yad Vashem Society in the United Kingdom.Not only is Chairman Helfgott a leading member of the community, he is also anessayist. One of his essays, entitled, “From Piotrkow to London,” is being published inthis book. In it, he unravels, with penetrating insight, the saga of the children fromPiotrkow and how they managed to return unscathed to life with renewed confidenceand dignity, in their new land and home of England.The Piotrkower in BelgiumThe Piotrkower who emigrated to Belgium were motivated, much like those whodeparted for France, to achieve a higher standard of living, and by their desire for freedom.Prior to World War II, there were several families from Piotrkow who had settledin Bruxelles, Belgium. Most of them were tailors. Only a handful escaped Nazioppression and persecution there. After the war, some survivors from Piotrkow joinedthem to begin a new life.A rather small community of Piotrkower remains in Bruxelles at this time; it is aclosely-knit, friendly group who avidly participates in Jewish community life. Needlessto say, their eminent concern is for the continuance of activities to aid the survivor groupof the Holocaust in their newly adopted country, Belgium, and its Holocaust Organiza-tion. They also maintain close ties with compatriots all over the world.The Piotrkower in GermanyQuite a number of Piotrkower lived in Germany prior to Hitler’s coming to power.All had been well-established there without, however, having any connection with theirAcross the Continents f 387countrymen, who were scattered all over, in contrast to communities founded in othercountries. During the late 1930’s, all Piotrkower in Germany were deported back toPoland by the Nazis via Zbaszyn. Most returned to Piotrkow. After World War II,Piotrkower were to be found in nearly every Displaced Persons’ Camp, primarily inthose concentrated in Bergen-Belsen, Landsberg, Feldafing, and Salsheim. Later, somemade their homes in Berlin, Munich, Hanover, and Frankfurt. At this time there are stilla few families from Piotrkow living in Munich and Frankfurt. Most, however, maintainsecond residences in Israel.The Piotrkower in PolandOnly a very few Piotrkower still live in Warsaw and Lodz, although completelyassinqiilated. Only one last Jew remains in Piotrkow itself.The Piotrkower in South AmericaThe Trisker-Gruszkowski families were the first from Piotrkow to arrive in SouthAmerica and live in Argentina in the early 1920’s.In 1928, Motl-Mordechai Lenczycki, the gifted amateur actor and director, and oneof the founders of the “Hazomir,” left Piotrkow for Buenos Aires.Upon his arrival there, together with the Triskers, he organized a Drama Circle whichremained active for many years. The Landsleit of Piotrkow in Argentina kept contactwith one another, and also with their families in Piotrkow and Israel. A PiotrkowerPiotrkower in Argentina—early 1950’s.388 / A TALE OF ONE CITYLandsmanschaftw2is officially established in the early 1950’s. AilLandsleitin Argentinacontributed generously to the publication of the Piotrkower Izkor Book, which wasbrought to life in Israel.Sadly, during the following years, the pioneer, senior generation gradually fadedfrom view; less and less was heard from our compatriots. Thus, at present there is nocontact whatsoever with the younger generation or the children of the original emigrantsto Argentina.Nevertheless, we shall continue our search. We have asked our Landsman, SaulDessau, a prominent businessman and industrialist in Buenos Aires, to endeavor to locateour Landsleit2inA to see if new ties could be forged. We hope to hear from our compatriotsin Argentina in the near future.Several Piotrkower are located in Brazil and Uruguay. Unfortunately, the seniormembers of this group have passed away in recent years. We do maintain contact witha few of our people in Brazil and lately have obtained addresses of several Piotrkowerwho live in Montevideo, Uruguay.The Piotrkower in AustraliaAlthough minimal in membership, the Piotrkower community in Australia neverthelesshas made, and is still making, impressive contributions to Jewish life in that country.It all started with the Jacobs family in 1858, when they arrived in Melbourne fromPiotrkow via Plymouth, England. According to Sir Asher Joel of Sydney, a Knight ofthe British Empire and a highly respected and distinguished personality, his maternalgreat-grandparents had the foresight to leave Europe long ago to start a new, wonderfullife of service in the Victorian Jewish community with his grandfather, the Rev. JosephJacobs, as a spiritual leader.During the ensuing century, the Jacobs, Israelewicz and Joel families remainedprominent in the life of Jewish congregations in Australia.Very few families from Piotrkow reached the Australian continent before WorldWar II. After hostilities had ended, however, a large group of survivors from Piotrkowsettled there, mostly in the Melbourne area with only a few traveling to Sydney.Our people in Australia remain the guardians of tradition, remembrance and Yid-dishkeit. They are ardent supporters of the Holocaust Centre in Melbourne and ferventlyparticipate in every phase of Jewish life. A significant factor is the drive to preserve theYiddish language. Our Landsleit cheerfully participate in the activities of Jewishinstitutions such usKadimah, a center of Yiddish culture, literature, and Yiddish theater.The children of Piotrkow survivors in Melbourne attended the thriving YiddishSunday Schools; their grandchildren now follow in their parents’ footsteps. Theycontinue with their ambitious efforts to preserve their proud heritage, the Remembrance,and the growth and security of the State of Israel. The Piotrkower of Australia continuetheir life there in the noble tradition of their parents, their grandparents, and theirforefathers.Compiled by B.G.From Piotrkow to London—Genesis of the ’45 Aid SocietyBen Helfgott—LondonAs the momentum of the Nazi defeat was gathering pace, the final denouement ofthe tragedy of the Jewish people was being played out in the concentration camps anddeath marches taking place in Germany and Czechoslovakia. In retrospect, it is difficultto comprehend how anyone could have survived such inhuman and unbearable condi-tions. For over five years we had experienced the most unimaginable suffering, crueltyand atrocities. We had survived the bombings; the random killings; the periodic roun-dups; the filthy conditions in the ghetto; the hunger; the constant fear; the typhoidepidemics; the selections and deportations to the gas chambers; the harsh regimen in thelabor camps. We thought we had reached the limits of our endurance. However, theevents of the last few months of the war surpassed the combined total of all theseexcesses. The little that was left over of our civilized life was completely stripped fromus. We were literally reduced to the level of animals, without, however, the care thathuman beings usually bestow on their pets. We were subjected to long hours of hard andtedious work; lacking warm and protective clothing, we were freezing to death; we wereinfested and eaten up by bugs and lice; and, worst of all, we were steadily becomingdemented as a result of the starvation rations. The acquisition of a piece of bread or anextra plate of soup was our main preoccupation. The war was coming to an end, yet ourpersecutors, even in defeat, had not had their fill and were relentlessly and pitilesslyextracting a great toll on us, shooting those who collapsed along the way from hunger,cold, thirst or exhaustion. It was not surprising that the few who had, so far, evaded deaththrough sheer luck or by dint of perseverance were rapidly dwindling away.Liberation found us in a stupor, in a state of utter exhaustion and emaciation. It tooka while to awaken from our five and half year nightmare. As long as we had beenstruggling for survival and had lived from hour to hour, we had not entertained anythoughts about the enormity of our loss or about our future. Now, it gradually began todawn upon us that we were, at last, free and that freedom necessitated a completereadjustment. But how does one readjust without either family support or a home? Wesuddenly realized that we were alone. Those who had reason to believe that somemembers of their family may have survived attempted to return to their respective hometowns, and some emotional reunions took place. However, for the majority this was adisappointing and painless experience. To confound their agony, they were met by ahostile population. Indeed, having been fortunate enough to survive the Nazis bes-tialities, many met their deaths at the hands of their Polish compatriots.The exp)erience of denudation and anguish was felt even more acutely by therelatively few youngsters who had survived. Of the six million Jews who had been killed,one and a half million were under the age of sixteen. Children were, as a rule,automatically selected for the gas chambers, as the Nazis had no use for them. Ironically,the chances of survival for those children who were saved from the selections were better390 / A TALE OF ONE CITYthan for their elders. Once snatched from the burning, they were, in the main, protected,and some were not even sent out to work in either labor or concentration camps. Thiswas particularly true in the case of the Piotrkow children. It would appear that,miraculously, relatively more children survived from the Piotrkow Ghetto than from anyother ghetto in Poland. How did this happen? To begin with, toward the end of 1941 theglass factory, “Huta Hortensia,” was set up to employ boys 12 years old and up. Thedeportations had not yet started and there was no urgency to find a job unless it wasnecessary for one’s immediate needs. The factory offered a meal and a modest payment,and this was a strong incentive for a considerable number of boys who had been livingbelow the subsistence level. Later on, a number of boys were also employed in BugaJ,at the Dietrich-Fisher Holzwerke. Most of them were subsequently saved from thedeportation, as were a number of children whose parents worked in the Jewish ad-ministration. There were also those who were hidden and were fortunate enough to evadethe nightmarish round-ups that followed the deportation. When the small ghetto wasfinally liquidated, they were all sent to the Huta Hortensia-Kara or to BugaJ, where thevery young ones were not ordered to go out to work. This was also the case when theboys were later sent to Buchenwald and the girls to Ravensbruck. We were also luckyto escape the dreaded selection for the gas chambers of Auschwitz, since by the time ofour deportation from Piotrkow, the SS was already preparing to destroy all traces of theirheinous crimes.Among those who were liberated from Buchenwald, Bergen-Belsen and There-sienstadt were many children and youngsters from Piotrkow. Those liberated fromBergen-Belsen were sent to Sweden. Those from Buchenwald were sent to France andthose from Theresienstadt to England. At the beginning of 1945, a Committee for theJust after the liberation—Freedom at last! It is assumed that there are some of our boys inthis picture taken from the Forty-Five Aid Society Journal of 1975.From Piotrkow to London—Genesis of the *45 Aid Society / 391Care of Children from the concentration Camps was set up under the auspices of theCentral British Fund, an organization that had been responsible for bringing tens ofthousands of Jewish refugees to England before the war. They obtained permission fromthe Home Office to bring a thousand orphaned children to England for recuperation. Thefirst group of three hundred came from Theresienstadt and, later on, many were collectedfrom different camps; eventually, seven hundred and thirty-two youngsters arrived inEngland, among whom were forty-one from Piotrkow; thirty-seven boys and fourgirls.ltseems that there were not enough teenagers to fill the full quota of one thousand.The large majority of youngsters had lost their parents—only four from the Piotrkowgroup were left with a surviving parent. Quite a large number had no family or relativesanywhere in the world; there had been a complete and utter loss of family.Under the circumstances, the organizers were faced with a formidable and mammothtask. They expected to receive children, but, instead, they were confronted with “matureadults” whose stabilizing framework, the family pattern, had long been lost. The twinpillars of independence and security which play such an important part in the mentaldevelopment of young people were deplorably absent. We were no ordinary orphans:we were in great need of guidance and care, and the process of rehabilitation seemeddaunting to the organizers. The late Leonard G. Montefiore, a great humanitarian,philanthropist, and Chairman of C.C.C.C., described us as follows:They have been in close contact with every kind of vice andwickedness that the mind can conceive. Each of them representsa human tragedy, nonetheless a tragedy, because it was commonand suffered by millions. Their lives have been twisted andabnormal. So the acceptance of what we in this country regard asnormal standards of behavior, the usual codes of honesty and fairdealing, represent a very considerable individual effort. For themduring the whole of their childhood honesty was the very worstpolicy. It led immediately to destruction. How then can they beexp)ected to learn in a short while the reverse of the maxim taughtthem by bitter experience?In another context he wrote, “An immensely difficult educational problem waspresented. One must imagine a very large school, with an age range from 3 to 23, wherepupils speak a variety of foreign languages and on entering the school are uniformlyignorant of English. Of the 600 boys and girls, 80% are probably post-typhus cases, thereare many tuberculosis suspects and some active cases; no toothbrush has been seen forthe past five years and there are general symptoms of severe malnutrition. Scabies,impetigo, and other skin diseases are frequent. Again, the pupils in this strange schoolare all orphans, some of whom, at least, have seen their parents brutally murdered, andwho have themselves been beaten time and again. Thus the school authorities have tominister not merely to bodies but to minds diseased. Authority is in itself suspect, to becajoled or threatened as seems most likely to produce results.“Again, account has to be taken of all shades of religious and non-religious opinion.A large number feel at home in Orthodox and ultra-Orthodox surroundings, but there392 / A TALE OF ONE CITYare others who are resentful of an attempt to impost religious rules or restrictions. Thereare some eager for advanced education, others want industrial training, while somedisplay no desire for any kind of work.”This may have been an exaggerated view; it may even have applied to a number ofthe boys, but nevertheless, this is how we were generally regarded.As it turned out, our rehabilitation proceeded at a fast pace. The perceived wisdomof Dr. Oscar Friedman, a psychologist and the director of the C.C.C.C., was that the goalwas to make us independent as quickly as possible; on the whole, his policy proved tobe successful. After an initial screening, we were dispersed to hostels in various partsof Great Britain. We were offered a choice between hostels which catered to our religiousor Zionist inclinations. Here we began to retrieve our lost years of education. We learnedEnglish in a furious hurry, studied mathematics, Jewish history, general history, as wellas Hebrew and Zionism. We played football and volleyball, went cycling and swimming,and visited the cinemas as often as possible. Here we cemented the friendships that wereto develop into an extended family. We served as props for each other and were nurturedby the security which derived from our deep friendship. It was the therapy that we neededand it was a happy and carefree time for us.When the time came, the hostels were disbanded and we moved into apartments.Oscar Friedman felt that it was necessary to form a club which would serve as a centerwhere we could meet and participate in social, cultural and athletic activities. Member-ship of the “Primrose” Club was open to the local youth. We were soon competingagainst other Jewish and non-Jewish youth organizations and became one of the leadingJewish youth clubs in London. All this helped to accelerate our rehabilitation andintegration into the community.As we grew older, the Primrose Club was dissolved and we formed ourselves intoa society—the 45 Aid Society—which, over the years, has grown stronger and stronger.Not only do we help members who are in need, we also play an important part in thework of the community. From being yesterday’s recipients we have become today’sdonors. Those who feared the worst from us have been pleasantly rewarded. We havenot only been integrated into normal society, we have surpassed all expectations. Wehave achieved success in most areas of economic and social endeavor; our occupationsinclude shopkeepers, manufacturers, property developers, architects, engineers, ac-countants, lawyers, doctors, dentists, lecturers, rabbis—the list is almost endless; wecould almost be a self-sufficient community!In spite of the fact that nearly five hundred of us emigrated from England, we keepin close touch with each other and remain probably the most cohesive survivor group.We meet often, attend each other’s “simchas,” laugh and cry together, take a keen interestin the fortunes and well-being of our extended families. In addition to our many activities,we hold a reunion once a year, when we focus our thoughts on the six million of ourbrethren who were murdered. We share the memory of those whom we loved and knewso well so many years ago and permit our personal traumas to merge with those of thecollective. We are, in fact, like a large family united by a common bond that springsfrom our backgrounds and similar experiences, forged in the concentration camps. Theseexperiences have always been fresh and vivid in our minds. The shadows of theFrom Piotrkow to London—Genesis of the *45 Aid Society / 393Holocaust which have darkened our consciousness and the consciousness of the JewishPeople have never left us.Like most survivors, we have not allowed Hitler to enjoy a posthumous triumphover us. We have shown that the misery, cruelty, despair and injustice that were inflictedon us did not break our indomitable spirit. We did not become consumed with hatred tothe point of destroying our own and other people’s lives. We did not become terrorists;we did not kill innocent people; we did not even pursue or kill our persecutors.However, with the passage of time, most of us are inexorably coming to therealization that it is not enough to have harnessed all our energies for, and concentratedall our efforts on, rebuilding and revitalizing our lifeline and spiritual revival. In recentyears, like most survivors worldwide, we have become increasingly aware of ourresponsibility for transmitting to the present and future generations the tragedy and thelessons of the Holocaust. In order to prevent the Holocaust from happening again toanyone ever, its memory must be kept alive by reminding the world of the atrocities thatwere committed and by deterring future evil-doers, who must be made to see that murderdoes not pay. It is a task that our members are addressing very seriously; they are adriving force in the community.London—February 1991New York’s Society of Piotrkow and VicinityIn 1965, the Society of Piotrkow and Vicinity was founded in New York by a groupof Piotrkower. Their cultural and social activities during the sixteen years of theirexistence were intense and their achievements quite impressive.Possibly, the most important of the many accomplishment of this Society was thepublication of a bulletin which played a vital role in the lives of a segment of its Landsleitin New York and elsewhere.The creators of the Bulletin were Moshe Mushinski, Roman Mogilanski (AbramMogilaner), Marian Maslawski (Motl Szwarc), and Vitek Blachman. Ben Giladi joinedits editorial board in 1967. Another notable act of this Society was the donation to Israelof a “Magen David Adorn” ambulance for the municipality of the town of Holon.Through a strange twist of fate, General Moshe Dayan was rescued by this ambulanceand its staff when he was almost buried alive in an accidental cave-in at the site of anarchaeological excavation near Holon.The fruitful existence of the Bulletin came to an end when the last of the originalfounders, Roman Mogilanski, met an untimely death in 1981. Shortly thereafter, theSociety of Piotrkow and Vicinity, later known as the Nazi Victims of PiotrkowTrybunalski, also ceased to exist.In 1982, a quarterly magazine, the New Bulletin, under the sponsorship of thePiotrkow Trybunalski Relief Association and with Ben Giladi as editor, began publica-tion. It now reaches well over one thousand readers around the world, including thesecond generation of Piotrkower.With reverence and deep affection, we remember the former members of the Societyof Piotrkow and Vicinity, as well as all the activists who have passed away over theyears.Piotrkow and Vicinity Society in New York donates an ambulance for theRed Magen David in Israel—late sixties.394The Jewish Nazi Victims Organization ofAmericaFounded and Led by Two PiotrkowerIn 1957, two dynamic Piotrkower survivors founded the crucially important or-ganization of Jewish Nazi Victims. The late Moshe Israel Sochachevski became its firstPresident and Felix Lasky was its Secretary-General. The three main objectives of theOrganization were:1. To always remember the Nazi crimes.Moshe Israel Sochachevski and Felix Lasky holding the pen with whichPresident John Fitzgerald Kennedy signed the historical Yom Hashoa—The Holocaust Memorial Day Proclamation in 1962.395396 / A TALE OF ONE CITY2. To offer help and guidance to Jewish Survivors.3. To strengthen the ties between the Sherit Hapleita and the State of Israel.Sochachevski and Lasky emerged immediately as untiring champions of Jewishrights and leaders of the Survivors. We, the Piotrkower, were so proud to hear them onthe radio, to see them on television or to read about their work in the newspapers. Theywere the first to intervene against discrimination against the Jewish People in countriessuch as Iraq, Syria, Russia, Argentina or Uruguay.Among their most remarkable achievements were these important acts: In 1962,they led a delegation of Nazi Victims and important, political New York personalities(Dr. James B. Donovan, Rep. Emanuel Celler and U.S. Attorney Robert Morse) to seePresident John F. Kennedy. As a result, the President issued the historical proclamationof Yom Hashoa—the Holocaust Memorial Day, to be observed on Khav-2^in of themonth of Nissan. On May 9,1965, on the 20th anniversary of the end of World War II,Moshe and Felix organized the first major commemoration held in New York.Thousands of survivors assembled at Hunter College to pay tribute to our martyrs. Thiscommemoration started a noble tradition for years to come.In March of 1960, Moshe and Felix met with German Chancellor Konrad Adenauerfor the first time when he came to meet President Eisenhower in Washington. Thismeeting was arranged by Senator Kenneth Keating and by then Vice-President RichardM. Nixon. Thanks to their efforts, the Bonn Government adopted a more serious andurgent attitude toward the forthcoming reparation claims by the Nazi Victims. MosheIsrael Sochachevski and Felix Lasky made numerous trips to Germany, where Moshespoke in the Bundestag. They fought successfully for the extension of the Statute ofLimitations defining the period within which the Nazi criminals could be prosecuted.Over the years, these men were always helping people—former Nazi Victimsoffering guidance, advice and intervention, and never accepting a fee for their services.In 1969, on Yom Hashoa, they organized a giant memorial service held in MadisonSquare Garden.A few months later, Moshe Israel Sochachevski passed away suddenly. His untimelydeath shocked the entire Jewish Community. He was laid to rest in Jerusalem, HayirHakodesh.Felix Lasky continues till today his gallant activities as the Organization’s Secretary.Notable personalities, such as Dr. Hilel Seidman, Rabbi Yechezkel Besser, the AttorneyMilton Kestenberg and others were and remain active in the noble endeavors of theOrganization. We all look back with great appreciation and fondness at the importantachievements of our compatriots in their faithful work on behalf of the Nazi Victims.FolkloreElazar Prashker—JerusalemThe Last of the Eglonim (Coachmen)**Three old-time coachmen can still be seen on the streets of Rishon Le Zion **I happened to glance at the above quotation under a picture in an article describinga vanished world. The article in question appeared in Kol Rishon Le Zion in 1983. Oneof the “old-world characters” in the picture was Shlomo (Hapush) Pinkusewicz with hishorse, Aliza.As you who lived in Piotrkow have, no doubt, guessed by now, the image showsnone other than our own townsman of the well-known Hapuchis tribe, who inherited theprofession from his father and grandfather. All of us remember Shlomo perched atophis wagon in the fashion of his father, Hershel Hapush, and his grandfather. WolfHapush. Shlomo immigrated to Israel in the 1950’s and has since then carried on hishonorable profession on the highways and byways of Rishon.Seeing the article in Kol Rishon Le Zion reminded me of an old picture publishedby The New Piotrkow Bulletin of Sept.-Oct. 1982. In that photograph, a fine group ofold-time coachmen—the droshka drivers we all so well remember—assume a formalpose for the camera. The photograph had been sent to The Bulletin by Jack Bulwa ofCalifornia, who himself was the son of a droshka driver; his father is pictured in thegroup. Ben Giladi, editor of The Bulletin, added a sorrowful sentence to accompany thepicture: “A scene from what was and is no more.” How right you were, Ben, my friend.This is indeed a world that has vanished, a tragic void and loss for which we will nevercease mourning. The sudden and brutal cruelty of our tragedy is an everlasting pain inthe lives of those of us who survived.It is important for us survivors to hold onto memories, not only in order to sootheour sorrow, but also for a sense of roots and belonging. I find myself looking at this“graduation picture” of the droshka drivers and suddenly I am transported back to achildhood of which these colorful figures were an inseparable part. Although JackBulwa didn’t mention who took the picture or when it was taken, I can assume almostwith certainty that it must have been taken at the studio of Ben Zrion Kogan, originallylocated on Narutowicza Street and later on the Avenue of the Third of May. My guessis based on studying the fashions worn in the photo as well as on the quality of thephotography. As I study this photograph, I am most impressed by the well-pressedand elegant holiday attire worn on this important occasion by the hardy crew that ispictured. These folks were hardly ever seen out of their work clothes. Their attirespeaks of a sense of self-respect and declares, “This is what we were really like!”—and, truly, they were.397398 / A TALE OF ONE CITYShlomo “Hapush” Pinkusewicz with his horse Aliza on the streets of Rishon Le Zion in 1983.The society of these coachmen indeed formed a closed social circle within the Jewishworld of Piotrkow. The profession stayed within certain families and was passed on fromfather to son.Although the somewhat snobbish society of middle-class Jews may have lookeddown on these fellows, the “droshkazes” took pride in their work and simply ignoredthe opinion of elitist society.It is certainly true that the coachmen were a rough crew, permeated as they were bythe perfumes of horseflesh and leather. They were, however, never rude or vulgar. Theywere certain of their appointed place in the scheme of things and they also knew how toshow as well as how to command respect.The coachmen socialized mostly among themselves. Each of their families had aspecial coded nickname. In town they were known mostly by these. They were as proudof these code names as any nobleman might be of his crest and title. Few people in townknew their original family names. They lived mostly in Wielka Wies and Chazir Market.Their wagons took up position in the Chazir Market and on the Platz Zamkowy, whiletheir carriages waited for customers at the railroad station and in Piotrkow’s central spot.Folklore / 399Images of the Past. The above photo was sent by Jack Bulwa of Turlock, California. Here arethe coachmen of Piotrkow (dorozkarze). Top row standing, left to right: Moishe Szwarc, ItzikSandowski, Itzik Kepele, Yosel Mishkitz, Chuno “Mizelik” Belzacki, Jack’s father Bulwa,and Chuno “Bendlmacher” Gutman. Sitting, bottom row, left to right: Michuel “Mencennik”Huberman, Hershel “Bendlmacher” Gutman, David “Sheygec” Fisz, Meyer Rozpszer, andYosel Pitzer. The “droshkes” played an important role in the dreams of our youthful minds. Itwas a big thrill for us kids to hitch a ride or, better yet, to be given the “leitzn” and be able tolead the horse. Let’s stop for a moment and ponder when looking at this photo of these strong,honest men. A photo which is only an image of the past and nothing more...Rynek Trybunalski. On workdays, and only then, the carriages were parked along oneside of Rynek Trybunalski, patiently waiting for customers.Behind the droshkas, I can still quite clearly see in my mind’s eye, the row ofshops—Grabowskis’s pharmacy, Tennenbaum’s pub. Rabbi Schlomo Fuch’s leathergoods store, Weishoff’s shoe shop, Shmaragd’s paint store. 1 see the tired horses dozewith their heads down, while the drivers, in their uniforms with shiny brass buttons andspecial f)eaked caps, rest p)eacefully atop their elevated seats. The restful pose does notprevent their ever-watchful eyes from keeping a lookout for the approaching “kurs,” andwhen such a potential passenger appears, every slumbering muscle springs into action.Whips flick, ears perk up, and the horses step impatiently in their place as if they werethe horses of shining knights readying themselves for a joust. Like arrows from a bow,the carriages fly out to “catch the ‘kurs.’ ” First come, first served!Making a living was never easy. The coachmen worked hard from dawn to dusk, inthe heat of summer as well as in the snow and sleet of winter. Each day had its own400 / A TALE OF ONE CITYuncompromising workload. The horses had to be fed and tended. The carriages andwagons had to be repaired and made presentable. But on the Sabbath and on holidays,the coachmen would dress in their very finest and promenade at their ease to thesynagogue.I grew up in the house of Berl Scenick Zygmuntowicz, my grandfather; it was locatedin the vicinity of Wielka Wies, close to the quarters of the coachmen. From earlychildhood I learned to like and respect them and their trade. In the old photograph, Irecognize Yosef Moskowitz of the Myshkis family. He and his brother Moshe, togetherwith their parents and an unmarried sister, were our neighbors. Their large yard hadenough room for their entire business inventory, both animate and inanimate. There wasa stable for the horses and a shelter for the carriages and sleds. And a wooden shed forstorage of discarded harnesses, wheels and other lovely junk—what a heavenlyplayground for us kids!My younger brother Hershelle (known as “the mazik-menace”) and I had the yardall to ourselves. We explored every nook and cranny of it. We “helped” the wagonersto repair carriages and take care of the horses. We also learned how to turn the hay cutter.This was indeed our favorite game.Surely such small rascals must have disturbed these rough-and-ready fellows in theirwork; they certainly had to keep an eye out for any mischief we might get into. But thebachelor brothers treated us gently and patiently. Never once do I recall them scoldingus. As a reward for our “help,” they allowed us to sit next to them on the drivers’ seatsand hold onto the reins and whip as they drove out past the large gate on their way toanother day’s toil.Winter, with its snowfalls, provided our greatest pleasures. This was the time forsleds to emerge. We were permitted to glide on the snow, accompanied by the jolly soundof the jingle bells which had been attached to the harness.Here in the old photograph I also recognize the full figure of Michael Mentzenik. Isthere anyone from our town who still recalls that this fellow’s real family name wasactually Huberman? Michael owned a gigantic lumber wagon and a heavy Belgian workhorse with an impressive posterior. Man, horse and wagon appeared eminently wellsuited to each other. When Michael took his place on the driver’s seat, his own immenseshape filled two places and competed with the girth of his horse.My father used to tell the story of a coachman who seemed to have taken out a leaseon transporting the young brides of our town to the wedding hall on the day of theirnuptials. If ever the unfortunate bride dared to be a few seconds late for the occasion,the whole street would reverberate with the voice of the wagoner: “Pisherin, vi langvelech varten oyf dir?” (“You little squirt of a bride! How long do you expect me to hangaround waiting for you?”)My memory fails me. Was Michael Mentzenik the hero of my father’s story or wasit someone else? After all, I was only a youngster when I first heard my father tell thisstory. Many years have gone by and, when I heard it, I never dreamed that one day Iwould want to write about it. Still, the description of the shouting wagoner does seemto fit the heavy-set Michael perfectly.In the center of the old photograph sits a fellow who appears to own the world—Folklore / 401David Fish, alias David Sheigitz, the P.R. person for the wagoners. In Yiddish, Davidwas known as a “gantzer Kochlefl.” Because education was not exactly the strong pointof this crew and because they were neither great scholars nor strong on rhetoric, DavidSheigitz was useful to them. He possessed both temerity and charisma. He could thinkon his feet and knew how to get things done. David was a frequent guest in our yardbecause some of his relatives lived at my grandfather’s. I clearly remember one of thefamily, a wizened, cheerful tailor, Meir’l Schneider, and his wife, a large, clumsy andconfused woman who went by the strange nickname of “Meir, Meir-Copenhagen.” Idoubt that anyone knew her real name.David usually was cheerful. He joked with us children, told funny stories, chattedwith my grandfather and my uncles, and whispered business secrets to Moshe and Yosef.As a rule, he had something pleasant to say to everyone. That’s why the story I am aboutto tell surprised us.It happened about ten years later, just as our community was in the throes of arabbinical election. After the death of Rabbi David Temkin, Piotrkow was without arabbi for a whole year. Rabbi Yankele Dayan was temporarily in charge of synagoguebusiness. No Jewish community can last long without a rabbi, and eventually the townelders decided that our community would have to elect a new rabbi. The Piotrkowrabbinate was considered a serious position. The town was known for its Talmudscholarship, as well as for its successful business activity. We had been blessed with“gaonim” and learned Torah scholars. Small wonder, then, that some of Poland’s moslspromising rabbinical talents competed for the job. The position in the past had been heldby such luminaries as “Brit Avraham,” ’’Nefesh Chaya and Ora V Simeha.One of the contenders for the position was Rabbi Schmuel Brott, the leader of“Mizrachi.’’ He was later elected rabbi of Tomashow, our neighboring town, and lateron became a rabbi in Antwerp.Agudat Israel, as well as most “Chassidim,’’ including the “Gur Chassidim in ourtown were backing Rabbi Meir Shapira, an upcoming star among the ultra-orthodox.Young as he was. Rabbi Shapira had already been one of the leaders of Agudat Israeland the representative of this group at the Polish “Sejm” (parliament).The “Chassidim” of Sochachew preferred their own leader—the Admor Rabbi DavidBomstein. Yankele Dayan was also a candidate. He was strongly supported by the AlexanderChassidim and by the men in the street. Needless to say, the Gur Chassidim were the mostinfluential. In 1924, all Jewish males of age voted for a rabbi. Women, or course, did notvot^what does a woman know about selecting a rabbi?! Electing a rabbi was no siinplematter. As a matter of fact, it turned into a serious struggle. There were assemblies and therewas burning eloquence. The Aguda brought in Itzik Ber Ackerman, editor of the WarsawAguda newspaper, Der Yid. Ackerman was invited in order to help organize the camjwip^Rabbi Shapira. Does anyone still recall Avremelle Ixventhal? He caused quite a stir bymarrying Baruch Cimbler’s daughter. Baruch was a well-known horse trader. Dui^g theelections for Rabbi of Piotrkow, Avremelle served as chief P.R. man for Rav Yankele Dayan.He appeared at all the rallies and spoke with intense enthusiasm. People went to electionrallies the way one goes to the theater. It was amusing to hear the fiery debates betweenAvremelle and Itzik Ber Ackerman. In short, everyone enjoyed himself!402 / A TALE OF ONE CITYRabbi Shapira’s personality captured the heart of my father, who soon became oneof his most avid followers. My father joined the Shapira forces and the “electionheadquarters” run by Itzik Ber Ackerman found their way to our house. By this time wewere no longer living at my grandfather’s, but on Pilsudski Street, opposite the prison.At this time Yerubal, in Unzer Zeitung, published a parody which poked fun at theentire campaign and especially its chief protagonists. Among those singled out forspecial ridicule were my father and Ber Ackerman.(I quote from by best recollection as unfortunately I have not been able to lay myhands on the relevant copy of UnzerZeitung. Sixty years have gone by, yet I still clearlyrecall the black-bearded Itzik Ber Ackerman. In my mind’s eye I see his fiery, penetratingeyes. I see him dressed—not as was the custom among the Chassidim—in a short jacketand soft hat. I see him chain-smoking and incessantly drinking strong tea. His glass hadto be constantly refilled up to the brim like a wine glass for “kiddush.”)Ber Ackerman sipped his tea, pulled on a cigarette, made lists, and received reportsfrom campaign workers who wandered in and out. He ordered people around and, finally,as evening set in, he departed for a lively political assembly, where he and his oppositenumber, Leventhal, would bash each other.Once, on a bright afternoon, when work at “headquarters” was going full steam, thedoor opened and David Sheigitz, in the company of two heavyweights from the tribe ofwagoners, appeared. My father was, at first, a bit taken aback. Nevertheless, he managedto greet David with his usual friendliness: “Hello David, what’s new?”David Sheigitz dispensed with preliminaries and went straight to the heart of thematter.“Listen here, Rav Yankel. I’ve got something serious to tell you. We the coachmenhave reached a decision. We are convinced that only Rabbi Yankele Dayan is worthyof the noble office of Rabbi of Piotrkow. Let me make myself perfectly clear. If youfellows don’t stop your support of a stranger, we’ll simply have to break your bones.”He was addressing my father in the plural since, even as he threatened violence, hedidn’t have it in him to be disrespectful. My poor father turned pale and started stuttering.“David, what is this? What is the matter? Have you gone out of your mind?”David, however, stuck to his original message. “Rav Yankele, that’s it. Rememberthat you have been warned!”Then the three musketeers turned on their heels and left without so much as a wordof farewell. For months and years later, David Sheigitz avoided both me and my father.(I had been present at the crucial explosion.) Perhaps he was embarrassed. Perhaps hefelt sorry or guilty. Perhaps he just could not look us in the eyes again. This was a JewishSheigitz, after all.Such are the echoes of recollection brought about by an old photograph—mymemories of the Piotrkow wagoners. 1 saw a picture of one of them plying his old-worldtrade inRishonLeZion and my thoughts wandered all the way to the election of a rabbiin Piotrkow. All in all, just a web of images from a long-gone childhood; threads offabric of reflection.HeidimChess—The Jewish Game in PiotrkowElazar Prashker—JerusalemGlancing through an old issue of Stern magazine {2311912)y 1 happened to comeacross the following chess problem (note drawing):Problem von Leon Korsky,Herzlia (Israel)Urdrucka b c d e t g hMatt in 3 ZiigenA chess problem published by the well-knownGerman magazine 5/ern in 1972. The author is noone else but Lxibl Komfeld of Piotrkow.The creator of this interesting chess arrangement was none other than Leon Korski,better known to residents of Piotrkow as Leibel Komfeld, an enthusiastic chess playerin our town. Many a time did I test my own chess ability against his, but not once did 1even dream of winning. The “discovery” \nSt£rn reminded me that the game of the kingswas certainly one of the favored cultural and recreational activities of Jewish Piotrkow.This surely was natural, since chess had always been a popular Jewish game. For somereason or other, this aspect of our lives in Piotrkow was totally overlooked in the originalvolume of our Izkor Book. This is particularly strange, considering that Jacob Mai tz, theinitiator and editor of the volume, was, in addition to his many social and politicalfunctions, an enthusiastic and dedicated chess player who took part in several competi-tions in our town. I well remember several of these contests.At the beginning of the 1920’s, the best Jewish chess players held a great, andperhaps the original, chess competition in town. The games were held in the Tarbutauditorium on 9 Bykowska Street. The top three places, my memory tells me, were wonby Mordechai Frankel, Yakow Maltz and Binem Oppenheim. The judge was LeviHertzkovitz. Even yours truly participated in the competition as the youngest player, andproudly reached the bottom of the charts.In the early 20’s, “Hashomer Hatzair” also organized the first public game tn our403404 / A TALE OF ONE CITYtown in the yard of the Dobroczynnosc. Yacov Maltz and Mordechai Frankel sat on highplatforms on the sides of the playing field, which had been arranged as a chessboard.Hashomer children, dressed in home-designed, colorful costumes, served as live pawns,and I was assigned the job of moving the chess pieces as needed. A large crowd enjoyedthe spectacle and the profits went to the summer camp organized by our “ken.”I will now divulge a secret which Yacow Maltz told me about this game. I neverpromised to keep his secret and thus I feel free to share it. After all, even state secretsare revealed after a 30-year period, and this particular game at the time of this writing,was played more than 55 years ago. And this is what happened.Mordechai Frankel and Yakow Maltz, of blessed memory, accepted with pleasurethe invitation of “Hashomer Hatzair” to join a chess game which would use live pieces.Everyone in town was extremely interested in the competition. However, it did createcertain problems. Who would be the winner? Mordechai Frankel, the best player in town,certainly could not afford to lose. Yakow Maltz, on the other hand, feared that a defeatwould wreck his political chances in the approaching elections (and elections, in ourtown, were always “approaching.”Diplomatic contacts were made between the competing factions and a compromisewas reached. The parties discovered a chess game played in the previous century. Thegame and its results had been written about in Niva, a Russian magazine from the periodof the Czar. This, it was decided, was the game to be played in the “live chess pieces”contest. The game would be pursued for about an hour and a half and terminated with atie. The deal was made! Everyone involved signed on it and promised to keep the secret.And that is how the chess players actually were turned into actors as they pursued thegame with straight faces, all the while following the plans laid out by the century-oldgame in Niva,As I consider Niva, I am reminded of how, in our old home in Piotrkow, I oncediscovered a whole treasury of old periodicals. They were among the first that had beenpublished in Hebrew: the yearly LuachHachiasaf; Hatsfira (Dawn), edited by Slonimskiand Nachum Sokolow; and many issues of Niva. Looking through Niva, I took aparticular interest in the many chess problems it featured and I attempted to solve them.As it turned out, the game of live chess pieces we had in Piotrkow was not the onlyone of its kind. In UnzerZeitung (34/August 28,1936), I discovered the following tidbit:The Live Chess MatchOn Sunday, at 3:30 PM, a live chess match sponsored by the sportclub “Shomria” drew a considerable audience. The match wasplayed at the Dobroczynnosc Platz between our very own, veryknown chess player, Mr. Opp)enheim and an out of town guest,Mr. Drozdow. The colorful costumes of the “live ” chess pieceswere quite impressive. The winner of the match, after an interest-ing exchange of wits, was Mr. Oppenheim.Who was Mr. Drozdow? Was he a Jew? Did Jews and Poles ever play chess togetherin Piotrkow? I don’t know the answer, but I am sure that the interest in chess was livelyChess—The Jewish Game in Piotrkow I 405among Jews. In issue No. 37 (Sept. 16,1936) of Unzer Zeitung, 1 discovered a columnnamed Chess, I only have a few issues, and I am therefore, not sure whether this wasthe only appearance of the column or whether there was a continuation of it. At any rate,I would like to return to Leon Korski’s chess problem, which triggered my memories.This sophisticated problem may be enjoyed by any chess fans.Shmulik in PiotrkowIn 1916, in the middle of World War I, Shmulik Reshevski (Der Kleiner Shmulik)arrived in Piotrkow. He was then six years old and he participated in simultaneous gameswith Piotrkow’s chess players. At the Hertz auditorium on 7 Garncarska Street, Shmulikfaced forty chess players, all of the Mosaic persuasion. He also participated in asimultaneous match in the Krakowianka coffee house on Platz Kosciuszki. Here, too,there existed total religious segregation. That is to say, everyone present was notJewish—^with the exception of the protagonist, little Shmulik.Shmulik became the sensation of both sides of our town. Jews told marvels abouttiim—he was their chief pleasure. This was almost as true among the Poles, who greweffusive about “Maly Shmulik” (Little Shmulik). Dr. Sobanski, a well-known doctor inPiotrkow and an enthusiastic chess player, published a lengthy article in the town’s daily,DziennikNarodowy, predicting a great chess career for “Maly Shmulik.” The prophecy,was, indeed realized; he became a famous grandmaster.HeidimFour young men in Piotrkowcirca 1915. Who are they? Thegame of chess was quitepopular in our hometown.(From the archives of the“Heker Hatefutzoth Institute,*’University of Tel Aviv.)> >v^ Wv\ -^ \ VH \\ 1'« iW*'- , ? \ ' ''>' "1“* * \ V. A> m. h «( 'H^ \ * w * ,1, w m \, >„#'- >' »' *'■ ,»' '' ,,w‘ kw *’PfOTRKOV TRYBUNAISK!Rl'LlEf ASSOCIATION INC.LEFT SIDE FRONTBETH ISRAEL CEMETERYThe monument in memory of our Martyrs erected in 1969 by the Piotrkow Trybunalskin:n®liiS^^illlliM* \»=,s WFITMAN I WFJNOi^PTENj.'brem : v.p-r-ni.r'.'.sKij View A ■. :■-•;/j'Vpf.lMAN => -'iEiVTu'-/K:LUiSTK, JWiSSMPUDEOWSKi tVr'^HERS ZIMEIM‘‘.’< A.'a\!vSMAN•!S-j>®siitijsif''5*»=■jir'C n-'.ty'iDT■Mft ^ W «« «« « ^ *'M'4, S. >»RK ■»>. \«E ^ «<<v. <Hts 4k »t. • f»i-.4l *-r. ^ . * - i. ^ --u » «■>-- S ’s^Sf, . V ^-. » .. i.-aback/ \ RIGHTSlOEWOODBRIDGE, NEW JERSEYRelief Association at the Beth Israel Cemetery in Woodbridge, New Jersey.407In Heichal HashemothIn the Hall of NamesBy Shayek PudlowskiWe see a sea of sacred namesIn Yad Vashem-when passing by,The only way to show regard;Their memory to sanctify.From early day to latest nightWe roam this Hall so fuU of souls.We see them all-when we recall,The holy names on holy scrolls.A loaf of bread -this was a dreamFor us martyrs, misbegotten.The blood and tears-the pain and screams.How could all this be forgotten?Death was waiting in the shadows,We were smoldering like an ember.Now we pledge on holy ashes.To recall and to remember.You are all inscribed foreverIn this sacred hall of names.We win not forget you!-ever!Kindling the eternal flames.Old and young, in chains and cagesLay in wait so taint and rotten.Hearing whispers of the sages:“How could all this be forgotten?”And in the night, when aU is still.When thoughts like hammers pound my mind.Remembrance friends, we shall instill.For earth, for heaven-for mankind.Heidim, no. 26,1986Translated from Yiddish by Ben Giladi•ninv^n V3»n. nyj»ND’vynp 113 1VOV3 v>>n d’,»>1*1N3 »J’D NT "DWI T>„ I'N,131 TVT 113 yp':i3»N PNT•>’1 iva UV11 10V1TN3 u\y>3 inUDN3 » VJ’Q NT IVliyi 3NU N.1VOV3 n 113 "t73>n„ I’N 1>1'D,T3>UN NT y^7N VI T’N•IVOVII lOVIINS NT iva 3V0 »11— DiPn N 1V11V3 UV1 in V)>1T3.1PV3V33>1N UtJNIVD V>iiN— 1”3 11N V3>in TN3 ,\3TNTV30'1N.1PV3TN3 ONT IVO IVP VWt >11,V3p1pV3t»»1N UND T>a fl>1N \3>1\3 TVT•icvivi’ I’N iv i’vnw l”>3 »n— lV3N\y TVV3>1^ I’l'y I’N I’l 1V11V3.1^V51N3 0\y’3 TV3’1 ^?V1V3 f NTll>T\yTN3 NT nniT n’lN on>N,''niD\yn i’n i’n1V)3N3 1”1 0>)3 VJITp TVtV’.ONil ivn UDNT3V3aiN ”1 111 11N13»\3\y I’N V3t3V13‘lN3 Ot7N 11N 331>.IJIVt^'IlVO Vn3N3 NT 13>!3 T>0:oT3n i”o T’o in ini Tvvinv!? tvt11PV31N3 13\y’3 I’Q VIOt’NI IT ,p3VTV3,13Nt)\y V!?N 1V11 ;V)DV3 ’T I’N 11N— nin I’N ODNt’p ptvonti o’Q ’ii— 13N 13>1N ’T V3’a I’N 3>t>.ni3 TVT 1’N’D 1PV3TN3 OIU’I 1131986408